City of Chicago
Office of the City Clerk

F2014-58

Document Tracking Sheet

Meeting Date:

7/30/2014

Sponsor(s):

Dept./Agency

Type:

Communication

Title:

General Obligation Revolving Line of Credit Closing
Certificate Amendment Agreement Closing Certificate

Committee(s) Assignment:

 $100,000,000
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION REVOLVING LINE OF CREDIT
AMENDMENT AGREEMENT
CLOSING CERTIFICATE
This Closing Certificate is being delivered pursuant to the authority contained in the
ordinance adopted by the City Council (the "City Council") of the City of Chicago (the "City") on
May, 1, 2002 (the "Initial Ordinance"), as amended by an ordinance adopted by the City Council
on March 14, 2012, authorizing the City to execute and deliver one or more line of credit
agreements with one or more commercial banks and other financial institutions to provide a
revolving line of credit to meet the City's need for working capital or interimfinancingfor capital
projects (the "2012 Ordinance"), and as further amended by an ordinance adopted by the City
Council on February 5, 2014 (the "2014 Ordinance" and collectively with the Original Ordinance
and the 2012 Ordinance, the "Ordinance"). The Ordinance, as modified by its terms, collectively,
remains in full force and effect. Pursuant to Section 18 of the Initial Ordinance, as amended by
the 2012 Ordinance, Barclays Bank PLC has been selected to serve as the bank providing a
revolving line of credit to the City in the amount of $100,000,000.
The City has executed that certain Revolving Credit Agreement dated as of May 16,2014
between the City and Barclays Bank PLC (the "Credit Agreement"; capitalized terms used without
definition in this Certificate having the means given them in the Credit Agreement) and that certain
Note dated May 16, 2014 (the "Note") to evidence the $100,000,000 line of credit. The City has
executed that certain Amendment Agreement dated as of July 14, 2014 between the City and
Barclays Bank PLC (the "Amendment Agreement") amending certain provisions of the Credit
Agreement.
Attached hereto as Exhibit A is an executed copy of the Amendment Agreement.
I, the undersigned, LOIS A. SCOTT, Chief Financial Officer of the City, hereby certify
that I have executed the Amendment Agreement, in the manner and capacity indicated by my
signature and title appended hereto.
I, the undersigned, SUSANA A MENDOZA, City Clerk of the City, do further certify that
LOIS A. SCOTT is the duly authorized Chief Financial Officer of the City, and that the signature
of said LOIS A. SCOTT as it appears below is in all respects the true and genuine signature of the
officer of the City authorized to execute the Amendment Agreement.
1, the undersigned SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk of the City, direct a copy ofrjji^
filing to the City Council.
^
o
-<<^'

—

o
V

Closing Certificate
Barclays Bank PLC
Revolving Credit Agreement

ri
^2.—!

^
1^
cn

o

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF-, we have-hereunto affixed our signatures and have caused
to be affixed hereto the Corporate Seal of the City this Jjj_uia.y ofJUZ^ 2014,
SIGNATURES

OFFICIAL TITLE

Chief Financial Officer,. City of Chicago.

Susdna A. Meiidbza

City Clerk, City of Chicago

[SEAL].

....

.uff'

-

/ . ..

Respectfully submitted this / / day of .-U<H^y , 2014

CITY OF CHICAGO-

.-OIS A^SCOtt

CBief Financial.Officer

Closing Certificate
Barclays Bank PLC
Revolving Credit Agreement

  

 

 

EXHIBIT A

AMENDMENT AGREEMENT

Execution Copy
AMENDMENT AGREEMENT
AMENDMENT AGREEMENT entered into on July 14, 2014 (the "Amendment Agreement")
between CITY OF CHICAGO (the "City") and BARCLAYS BANK PLC (the "Bank").
WITNESSETH
WHEREAS, the City and the Bank have entered into a Revolving Credit Agreement dated as of
May 16,2014 (the "Agreement"); and
WHEREAS, the City has requested certain amendments to the Agreement,
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and of the nuiiual agreements herein
contained, the parties hereto agree as follows
Ally capitalized term used herein and not defined shall have its respective meaning as set forth in
the Agreement
1,

Amendments to the Agreement

The Agreement is hereby amended as follows:

(a)
The table in the definition of "'Advance Rate" in Section 1.01 of the Agreement is hereby
amended in its entirely to read as follows
"Level
Level 1

Moodv's Rating
A l or above

S&P Rating
A+ or above

Fitch Rating
A+ or above

Level 2

A2

A

A

Level 3

A3

A-

A-

Level 4

Baal

BBB+

BBB+

Level 5

Baa2

BBB

BBB

Level 6

Baa3

BBB-

BBB-

Level 7

Bal or below or
not rated

BB+ or below or not
rated

BB+ or below or
not rated

Advance Rate

(b)
The table in the definition of "Facility Fee Rate" in Section 1 01 of the Agreement is
hereby amended in its entirety to read as follows.
"Level

Moodv's Ratine

S&P Ratine

Fitch Ratine

Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5

A1 or above
A2
A3
Baal
Baa2

A+ or above
A
ABBB+
BBB

A+ or above
A
ABBB+
BBB

DM US .S25I2137-2 071370 0615

Facility Fee
Rate

•i
•1

 Level 6
Level 7
(c)

Baa3
Bal or below or not
rated

BBBBB+ or below or not
rated

BBBBB+ or below
or not rated

Section 6.01 (j) of the Agreement is hereby amended in its entirety to read as follows:

"0) (0 At any time before the date the City delivers a Ratings Clause Notice (as defined below),
any Rating Agency shall have downgraded its rating of any long-term unenhanced Secured
General Obligation Debt or General Obligation Debt of the City to or below "Baa3" (or its
equivalent) or "BBB-" (or its equivalent), respectively, or suspended or withdrawn its rating of
the same; and (ii) at any time on or after the date the City delivers a Ratings Clause Notice, any
Rating Agency shall have downgraded its rating of any long-term unenhanced Secured General
Obligation Debt or General Obligation Debt of the City to or below "Bal" (or its equivalent) or
"BB+" (or its equivalent), respectively, or suspended or withdrawn its rating of the same, where a
"Ratings Clause Notice" shall mean a notice from the City to the Bank including the following
representation, which shall be incorporated into this Agreement: the City is not party to any Bank
Agreement under which an event of default may be triggered under such Bank Agreement if a
Rating Agency downgrades its rating of any long-term unenhanced Secured General Obligation
Debt or General Obligation Debt of the City to a rating level higher than the threshold set forth in
Section 6.01(j)(ii) of this Agreement, as amended,"
2.
Representations. In addition to the representations and warranties set forth in Article IV
of the Agreement which are hereby deemed repeated by the City as of the date hereof (provided that all
references therein to the "Agreement" shall be deemed to refer to the Agreement as amended by this
Amendment Agreement), the City hereby represents and warrants to the Bank that:
(a)
It has the power to execute and deliver this Amendment Agreement and to
perform its obligations under the Agreement, as amended by this Amendment Agreement, and
has taken all necessary action to authorize such execution, delivery and performance;
(b)

it is entering into this Amendment Agreement as principal,

(c)

the person signing this Amendment Agreement on its behalf is duly authorized to

do so;
(d)
it has obtained all governmental and other consents and authorizations that it is
required to obtain in connection with its execution and delivery of this Amendment Agreement,
all such consents and authorizations are in full force and effect and all conditions of any such
consents and authorizations have been complied with,
(e)
such execution, delivery and performance do not violate or conflict with any
existing law, rule, regulation, order, writ, judgment, injunction, decree or award binding on the
City or any of its assets, or result in a material breach of any of the terms of, or constitute a
material default under or result in the creation or imposition of any lien on, any indenture,
mortgage, deed of trust, lease or other agreement or instrument to which the City is a party or by
which it or any of its property is bound or its enabling statutes or any of the rules or regulations
applicable to it or its property or any decree or order of any court or other governmental body,
and
(f)
Its obligations under the Agreement, as amended by this Amendment Agreement,
constitute its legal, valid and binding obligations, enforceable in accordance with their respective

DM_US 52612137-2 071370 0615

 terms (subject to applicable bankruptcy, reorganization, insolvency, moratorium or similar laws
affecting creditors' rights generally and subject, as to enforceability, to equitable principles of
general application, regardless of whether enforcement is sought in a proceeding in equitj' or in
law).
3

Conditions Precedent to Effectiveness

The effectiveness of this Amendment Agreement is subject to the satisfaction of the following
conditions precedent.
(a)

The Bank and the City shall have executed and delivered this Amendment

(b)

Payment to the Bank on July 14, 2014 of an amendment fee in an amount equal

Agreement;

(c)
Payment to the Bank (or its legal counsel, McDermott Will & Emery LLP) on
July 14, 2014 of the legal fees and expenses of counsel to the Bank,
(d)

The following statements shall be true and correct as of the date hereof

(i)
the representations and warranties of the City contained in Article IV of the
Agreement are true and correct on and as of the date hereof as through made on and as of such
date (provided that all references therein to the "Agreement" shall be deemed to refer to the
Agreement as amended by this Amendment Agreement); and
(ii)
no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing or would result
from the execution of this Amendment Agreement, and
(e)
All proceedings taken in connection with the transactions contemplated by this
Amendment and all documents, instruments, and other legal matters incident thereto shall be satisfactory
to the Bank and its legal counsel.
Documents to be Delivered. On or prior to July 14, 2014, the City shall deliver to the
Bank.
(a)
evidence reasonably satisfactory to the Bank of (i) the authority of the City to
enter into this Amendment Agreement and (ii) the authority and genuine signature of the
individual signing this Amendment Agreement on behalf of the City to execute the same; and
(b)
an executed opinion of the Corporation Counsel of the City, in form and
substance satisfactory to the Bank, as to the due authorization, execution and delivery of this
Amendment Agreement and that the Agreement, as amended by the Amendment Agreement, is a
valid, binding, enforceable obligation of the City.
5.
Aereement Ratified and Confirmed. Except as expressly modified by this Amendment
Agreement, the Agreement is in all respects ratified and confirmed and the terms, provisions and
conditions thereof are and shall remain in full force and effect. From and after the date hereof all
references to the Agreement shall mean such agreement as amended by the terms hereof

DM us 52612137-2 071370 0615

 6.
Governing Law. This Amendment Agreement shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the governing law provision set forth the Agreement.
7.
Definitions. Capitalized terms used in this Amendment Agreement and not otherwise
defined herein shall have the meanings specified for such terms in the Agreement.

DM US.<Jftl2l37-2U7l.l7IHIftl.<

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this Amendment Agreement as of date first
written above.
BARCLAYS BANK PLC

CITY OF CHICAGO

DM_US 52612137-2.071370.0615

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this Amendment Agreement as of date first
written above.
BARCLAYS BANK PLC

CITY OF CHICAGO

DM u s 526I2I37-I 071370.0615

 