City of Chicago
Office of the City Clerk

F2014-19

Document Tracking Sheet

Meeting Date:

3/5/2014

Sponsor(s):

Dept./Agency

Type:

Communication

Title:

General Obligation Revolving Line of Credit Closing
Certificate

Committee(s) Assignment:

 .DECEIVED
CITY COUNCIL OIVl,

$100,000,000
CITY OF CHICAGO
7fl l,FEB2 l PM
GENERAL OBLIGATION REVOLVING LINE OF CREDIT
CLOSING CERTIFICATE
OFFICE OF THE

CITY CLERK
This Closing Certificate is being delivered pursuant to the authority contained in the
ordinance adopted by the City Council (the "City Council") of the City of Chicago (the "City") on
May, 1, 2002 (the "Initial Ordinance"), as amended by an ordinance adopted by the City Council
on March 14, 2012, authorizing the City to execute and deliver one or more line of credit
agreements with one or more commercial banks and other financial institutions to provide a
revolving line of credit to meet the City's need for working capital or interim financing for capital
projects (the "2012 Ordinance"), and as further amended by an ordinance adopted by the City
Council on February 5, 2014 (the "2014 Ordinance" and collectively with the Original Ordinance
and the 2012 Ordinance, the "Ordinance"). Certified copies of the Ordinance are attached hereto
as Exhibit A. Pursuant to Section 18 of the 2012 Ordinance, Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A. has been
selected to serve as the bank providing a revolving line of credit to the City in the amount of
$100,000,000.
The City has executed that certain Revolving Credit Agreement dated as of February 1,
2014 between the City and Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A. (the "Credit Agreement") and that certain
Note dated February 21, 2014 (the "Note") to evidence the $100,000,000 line of credit.
Attached hereto as Exhibits B and C are executed copies of the Credit Agreement and the
Note.
I, the undersigned, RAHM EMANUEL, Mayor of the City, hereby certify that, pursuant to
law and authorization vested in me, I have approved the Ordinance in the manner and capacity
indicated by my signature and title appended hereto.
I, the undersigned, LOIS A. SCOTT. Chief Financial Officer of the City, hereby certify
that I have executed the Credit Agreement and the Note, in the manner and capacity indicated by
my signature and title appended hereto.
1, the undersigned, LOIS A. SCOTT, Chief Financial Officer of the City, hereby certify
that: (i) the conditions specified in Sections 4.02(a) and (b) of the Credit Agreement have been
.satisfied; (ii) there has been no event or circumstance since December 31, 2013 that has had or
could be reasonably expected to have, either individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse
Effect (as defined in the Credit Agreement); and (iii) attached hereto as Exhibit D are copies of
the most recent rating reports from Standard & Poor's ("S&P"), Moody's Investor Service
("Moody's") and Fitch Ratings ("Fitch"), concerning the City's general obligation credit,
respectively. The City has not received notice from S&P, Moody's or Fitch that the current
ratings have been reduced, withdrawn or suspended.
L the undersigned, SUSANA A MENDOZA. City Clerk of the City, do further certify that
RAHM EMANUEL and LOIS A. SCOTT are, respectively, the duly authorized Mayor and Chief
Financial Officer of the City, and that the signatures i^f .said RAHM EMANUEL and LOIS A.

 SCOTT as they appear below are in all respects the true and genuine signatures of the officers of
the City authorized to approve the Ordinance, and to execute the Credit Agreement and the Note,
respectively.
I, the undersigned SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk of the City, direct a copy of this
filing to the City Council.
IN WITNESS WFIEREOF, we have hereunto affixec^^ur signatures and have caused
to be affixed hereto the Corporate Seal of the City this "^\^ day of February, 2014.
SIGNATURES

OFFICIAL TITLE
Mayor, City of Chicago
Chief Financial Officer, City of Chicago
^^CHerk, City of Chicago

[SEAL]

  

Respectfully submitted this ^^'^day of February, 2014.

CITY OF CHICAGO

Chief Financial Officer

Closing Certificate
Morfjan Stanley Bank, N.A.
Revolving Credii Agreement

  

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF FILING
The Closing Certificate of the City for its $100,000,000 Revolving Line of Credit
Program includingall exhibits thereto was filed in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of
Chicago, this %\^/ day of February, 2014.

Susana A. Mendoza
City Clerk
[SEAL]

 EXHIBIT A

THE ORDINANCE

STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS.
COUNTY OF COOK )

I, SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk of the City of Chicago in the County of Cook and State
of Illinois, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the annexed and foregoing is a true and correct copy of
that certain ordinance now on file in my office Authorizing for Issuance of Commercial Paper
Notes. Series A and B.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was passed by the City Council of the
said City of Chicago on the first (l") day of Mav. 2002.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the vote on the question of the passage of the said ordinance
by the said City Council was taken by yeas and nays and recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings
of the said City Council, and that the result of said vote so taken was as follows, to wit:
Yeas 47

Nays 0

I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was delivered to the Mayor of the said City
of Chicago after the passage thereof by the said City Council, without delay, by the City Clerk of
the said City of Chicago, and that the said Mayor failed to return the said ordinance to the said City
Council with his written objections thereto at the next regular meeting of the said City Council
occurring not less than five (5) days afler the passage of the said ordinance.
1 DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the original, of which the foregoing is a true copy, is entrusted
to my care for safekeeping, and that I am the lawful keeper of the same.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my
: hand and affixed the corporate seal of the City of
I Chicago aforesaid, at the said City, in the County and
1 State aforesaid, this twentieth (20"'') day of February,
i 2014.
[T.P.)

ZA, City Ciferk
SUSANA A. MENDOZA,

CJ

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83073

The following is said ordinance as passed:
WHEREAS, The City of Chicago (the "City") is a duly constituted and existing
municipality within the meaning of Section 1 of Article VII of the 1970 Constitution
of the State of Illinois (the "Constitution") having a population in excess of twentyfive thousand (25,000) and is a home rule unit of local government under
Section 6(a) of Article VII of the Constitution; and
WHEREAS, The City proposes to establish a Commercial Paper Program (the "CP.
Program") an Auction Rate Securities Program (the "Auction Rate Program") a
Variable Rate Securities Program (the "Variable Rate Program") and a Line of Credit
ProgTcun (the "Line of Credit Program") for the City to provide interim financing for
capital projects of the City and for the short-term financing of the working capital
needs of the City (the "Borrowing Plan"); and
WHEREAS, There have been prepared and presented to this meeting forms of the
following documents:

 83074

J O U R N A L - C I T Y COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(1) Commercial Paper Trust Indenture (the "CP. Indenture") between the City
and a hank or trust company to be designated as provided herein (the "CP:
Trustee") (Exhibit A); and
. .: (2) Commercial Paper Dealer Agreement (the "C;P. Dealer Agreement") between
the City and a commercial paper dealer designated as provided herein (the
"Dealer") (Exhibit B); and
(3) Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement (the "CP. Paying Agent Agreement")
between the City and an issuing and paying agent designated as provided herein
(Exhibit C); and
(4) Auction Rate Securities Trust Indenture (the "Auction Rate Indenture")
between the City and a bank or trust compeiny to be designated as provided herein
(the "Auction Rate Trustee") (Exhibit D); and
(5) Auction Agreement (the "Auction-Agreement") between the City and an
auction agent designated as provided herein (the "Auction Agent") (Exhibit E); and
(6) Variable Rate Securities Trust Indenture (the "Variable Rate Indenture")
between the City and a bank or trust company to be designated as provided herein
(the "Variable Rate Trustee") (Exhibit F); and
WHEREAS, It is necessary and advisable to implement the Borrowing Pleui; now,
therefore,
Be It Ordained by the City Caundl of the City of Chicago:
SECTION 1. Findings And Determinations.
determines as follows:

The City hereby finds and

(a) that from time to time interim financing of capital projects is needed prior to
the issuance of long-term bonds;
(b) that from time to time working capital needs of the City require the shortterm borrowing of funds;
(c) that the City's ability to borrow pursuant to the Borrowing Plan as herein
provided without further action by this City Council for such purposes will
enhance the City's opportunities to obtain financing upon the most favorable
terms available; and
(d) that the delegations of authority that are contained herein are necessary and
desirable because this City Council cannot itself as advantageously, expeditiously
or conveniently exercise such authority.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83075

Thus, authority is granted to the Chief Financial Officer of the City appointed by
the Mayor or, if there is no such officer then holding such office, the City
Comptroller (the "Chief Financial Officer") to implement the Borrowing Plan for the
purposes set forth herein, and from time to.time to cause to be issued Commercial
Paper Notes (the " C P . Notes") pursuant to the C P . Program, Auction Rate Bonds
or Notes (the "Auction Rate Securities") pursuant to the Auction Rate Program, Line
of Credit Notes (the "Line of Credit Notes") pursuant to the Line of Crcdit Program
and Variable Rate Demand Bonds or Notes (the "Variable Rate Securities") piu^suant
to the Variable Rate Program, as and to the extent determined to be desirable and
in the best financial interest of the City.
The C P . Notes, the Line of Credit Notes, the Auction I?ate Securities and the
Variable Rate Securities are herein sometimes collectively called the "Authorized
Debt" and the C P . Indenture, the Auction Rate Indenture and the Variable Rate
Indenture- (each an "Indenture") are herein sometimes collectively called the
"Indentures".
SECTION 2. Purposes. The Borrowing Plan authorizes the issuance of one (1)
or more series of Authorized Debt for any of the following purposes (or combination
thereof): (a) the payment, or the reimbursement of the City for the payment, of the
cost of all or any portion of any capital project heretofore or hereafter approved by
this City Council; (b) cash flow needs of the City; (c) the deposit of monies into funds
and accounts as are provided for in an Indenture; and (d) the pajnnent of costs of
issuance incurred in connection with each series of Authorized Debt. The proceeds
of the issuance of each series of Authorized Debt shall be applied for the purposes
set forth above in the manner and in the amounts specified in a certificate of the
Chief Financial Officer delivered in connection with such issuance pursuant to the
applicable Indenture securing such series or, in the case of the Line of Credit
Ftogram, each request for funds under each line of credit agreement (as defined in
Section 18 of this ordinance) entered into by the City pursuant to this ordinance.
In order to facilitate the sale of the Authorized Debt, the Chief Financial Officer is
authorized to purchase or obtain from commercial banks or other finemcial
institutions one (1) or more letters of credit, lines of credit, bond insurance policies,
standby bond purchase agreements or similar credit enhancement and liquidity
facilities (each a "Credit Facility").
In connection with the Borrowing Pl£m £ind the use of the proceeds of the
Authorized Debt, the Chief Financial Officer is authorized to establish one (1) or
more funds, accounts, sub-funds and sub-accounts of the City, one (1) or more of
which may be held in trust with a trustee pursuant to an Indenture.
SECTION 3. Maximum Amount And Term. Without further authorization of
this City Council, the maximum aggregate principal amount of all Authorized Debt
outstanding under this ordinance at any time shall not exceed Two Hundred Million
Dollars ($200,000,000) (exclusive of unpaid interest and fees). All Authorized Debt

 83076

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

shall mature on or prior to January 1, 2017.
SECTION 4. Limited Tax General Obligations. The obligation of the City to
make pajnments on the Authorized Debt (principal, interest and redemption
premium, if any, as appropriate) is a direct and general obligation of the City
payable from any funds legally available for such purpose. The City covenants and
agrees to take aU necesszuy action to annually appropriate funds in a timely maimer
so as to provide for the making of all payments of the Authorized Debt as described
in the Indentures and each Line of Credit Agreement; provided, however, that in no
event shall the City be obligated to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax in.
addition to other City taxes or any special ad valorem or other tax unlimited as to
rate or amount to pay such principal, interest or redemption premium.
SECTION 5. The C P . Program, (a) The C P . Notes are hereby authorized to be
issued from time to time. The C P . Notes shall be designated "Conunercial Paper
Notes' and may be issued in one (1) or more series. Each C P . Note shall mature
not later than two hundred seventy (270) days after its date of issuance, and shall
bear interestfromits date at a rate or rates not in excess of the lesser of (i) eighteen
percent (18%) per annum, computed in the manner set forth in the C P . Indenture,
or (ii) during such period as such C P . Note is secured by a Credit Facility (a ' C P .
Credit Facility^), the maximum interest rate provided for under such C P . Credit
Facility. The C.P. Notes may be issued as notes the interest on which' is not
includable in gross income for federal income tax purposes or, if so determined by
the Chief Financial Officer at the time of the sale thereof, as notes the interest on
which is includable in gross income for federal income tax purposes.
(b) The C.P. Notes shall be executed on behalf of the City with the manual or
facsimile signature of the Mayor of the City, and shall be attested with the manual
or facsimile signature of the City Clerk of the City, and shall have impressed or
imprinted thereon the official seal of the City (or a facsimile thereof). In case any
officer of the City whose signature or whose facsimile signature shall appear on the
C.P. Notes shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such C.P. Notes, such
signature or the facsimile signature thereof shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient
for all purposes the same, as if such officer had remained in office until delivery.
(c) Subject to the limitations contained in this ordinance, authority is hereby
delegated to the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer to determine the aggregate
principal amount of C.P. Notes to be issued, the date or dates thereof, the maturities
thereof, the rate or rates of interest payable thereon or the method for determining
such rate or rates, and to sell the C.P. Notes to or with the assistance of one (1) or
more Dealers to be designated by the Chief Financial Officer, pursuant to one (1) or
more C.P. Dealer Agreements.
(d) To evidence the exercise of the authority delegated to the Mayor or the Chief
Financial Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, as the
case may be, is hereby directed to execute and file with the City Clerk in connection

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83077

with the initial sale of C.P. Notes a certificate setting forth the determinations made
pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate shall constitute
conclusive evidence of the proper exercise by them of such authority. Upon the
filing of such certificate, the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shall also file with
the City Clerk one (1) copy of the C.P. Indenture. The City Clerk shall direct a copy
of such filing to this City Council.
SECTION 6. Form Of C.P. Indenture. The form of C.P. Indenture presented to
this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit A is hereby approved, in all respects.
The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deUver
one (1) or more C P . Indentures in substantially the form of the C.P. Indenture
presented to this meeting, with appropriate revisions in text as the Mayor or the
Chief Financial Officer shall determine are necessary or desirable, and the City
Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City
or a facsimile thereof, the execution and delivery thereof to constitute conclusive
evidence of this City Council's approval of any and all such changes or revisions.
The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate a bank or trust
company to serve as Trustee under the C.P. Indenture.
-•
SECTION 7. Form Of C P . Dealer Agreement. The form of C.P. Dealer
Agreement presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit B is hereby
approved in all respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial. Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more C.P. Dealer Agreements in
substanti£dly the form of the C.P. Dealer Agreement presented to this meeting, with
appropriate revisions in text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shall
determine are necessary or desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the
same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the
execution and delivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City
Council's approval of any and ail such changes or revisions. The Chief Financial
Officer is hereby authorized to designate one (1) or more banks or investment
banking firms to serve as "Dealer" under a C.P. Dealer Agreement.
SECTION 8. Form Of C.P. Paying Agent Agreement. The form of C.P. Paying
Agent Agreement presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit C is
hereby approved in all respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more C.P. Paying Agent Agreements in
substantially the form of the C P . Paying Agent Agreement presented to this
meeting, with appropriate revisions in text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer shall determine Eire necessary or desirable, eind the City Clerk is authorized
to attest the same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile
thereof, the execution and delivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this
City Council's approval of any and all such changes or revisions. The Chief
Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate the C.P. Paying Agent with
respect to each series of C.P. Notes.
SECTION

9.

C.P. Reimbursement Agreements. The Mayor or the Chief

 83078

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Financial Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver one (1) or more
reimbursement agreements (each, a "C.P. Reimbursement Agreement") in
substantially the form of reimbursement agreements executed and delivered by the
City in connection with previous vaiiable rate financings, with appropriate revisions
in text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shall determine are necessary or
desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the
corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and defivery thereof
to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval of any and all such
changes or revisions. Such revisionis in text may include (a) provisions permitting
the stated amount of a C.P. Credit Facility to be increased and decreased from time
to time to support the C.P. Notes then outstanding; and (b) such other provisions
as may be necessary or desirable to implement the C.P. Program as herein
contemplated. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby further authorized
to execute and defiver a promissory note pursuant to each C P . Reimbursement
Agreement (a "C.P. Reimbursement Note") to the extent required thereby, in
substantially the form used to support reimbursement agreements in previous
Vcuiable rate financings for the City, with appropriate revisions, to reflect the terms
and provisions of the related C.P. Reimbursement Agreement, and the City Clerk is
hereby authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City
or a facsimile thereof, the execution and delivery thereof to constitute conclusive
evidence of this City Council's approval of any changes or revisions therein. The
interest rate payable on any such C.P. Reimbursement Note shall not exceed
eighteen percent (18%) per annum (including the recovery by the financial
institution providing the related C.P. Credit Facifity of any amounts otherwise not '
payable to such financial institution solely as a result of the interest rate limit set
forth in the related C P : Reimbursement Note, any interest to be so'recovered to be •
determined at an interest rate not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) p>er annum),
and the maturity of any obfigation thereunder shall not be greater than ten (10)
years from the date of the related advance (subject to extension and renewal as
therein provided). The maximum annual fee payable to any financial institution
under a C.P. Reimbursement Agreement shall not exceed two percent (2%) of the
stated amount of the related C P . Credit Facility (and any unused capacity
thereunder).
The obfigations of the City under each C.P. Reimbursement Agreement and under
each C.P. Reimbursement Note shall constitute direct and general obfigations of the
City and may be payable from any funds legally available for such purpose. The
City hereby covenants and agrees to take all necessary action to annually
appropriate funds in a timely manner so as to provide for the making of all
payments due under any C.P. Reimbursement Agreement and under each C.P.
Reimbursement Note; provided however, that in no event shall the City be obUgated
to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax in addition to other City taxes or any
special ad valorem tax or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to pay any
amount due under any C.P Reimbursement Agreement or the principal of,
redemption premium on, or interest on any C.P. Reimbursement Note.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83079

The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate one (1) or more
financial institutions to provide a CP. Credit Facifity with respect to each series of
C.P. Notes. Nothing contained herein shall lizTiit or restrict the Chief Financial
Officer's abifity (i) to appoint separate fmancial institutions to issue separate C.P.
Credit Facifities; (ii) to appoint more than one (1) financicd institution to issue a
single C.P. Credit Facifity; or (iii) to replace or extend any C.P. Credit Facility.
SECTION 10. The Auction Rate Program, (a) The Auction Rate Securities are
hereby authorized to be issued from time to time. The Auction Rate Securities shall
be designated "Auction Rate Bonds" or "Auction Rate Notes", may be issued in one
(1) or more series and may bezir an additional designation to identify each series.
Each Auction Rate Security shall bear interest from its date at a rate or rates not
in excess of the lesser of (i) eighteen percent (18%) per annum, computed in the
manner set forth in the Auction Rate Indenture, or (ii) during such period as such
Auction Rate Security is secured by a Credit Facifity (ah "Auction Rate Credit
Facifity"), the maximum interest rate provided for under such Auction Rate Credit
Fadfity. The Auction Rate Securities may be issued as bonds or notes the interest
on which is not includable in gross income for federal income tax purposes or, if so
determined by the Chief Financied Officer at the time of the sale" thereof, as bonds
or notes the interest on which is includable in gross income for federal income tax
purposes.
(b) The Auction Rate Securities shall be executed on behalf of the City with the
manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor of the City, and shall be attested with
the manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk of the City, and shall have
impressed or imprinted thereon the official seal of the City (or a facsimile thereof).
In case any officer of the City whose signature or whose facsimile signature shaU
appear on the Auction Rate Securities shall cease to be such officer before' the
defivery of such Auction Rate Securities, such signature or the facsimile signature
thereof shaU nevertheless be vafid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if such
officer had remained in office until defivery.
(c) Subject to the limitations contained in this ordinance, authority is hereby
delegated to the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer to sell the Auction Rate
Securities to one (1) or more underwriters to be designated by the Chief Financial
Officer, pursuant to one (1) or more contracts of purchase with respect to the
Auction Rate Securities between the City and such underwriters; provided that the
aggregate purchase price of any series of Auction Rate Securities shaU not be less
than ninety-eight percent (98%) of the principal amount thereof to be issued (less
any original issue discount which may be used in the marketing thereof) plus any
accrued interest thereon from their date to the date of defivery thereof and payment
therefor.
(d) The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, with the concurrence of the
Chairman of the Committee on Finance of the City Council, is hereby authorized
and directed to execute and deliver one (1) or more contracts of purchase for

 83080

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Auction Rate Securities in substantially the form of the contracts of purchase used
in connection with the previous sales of variable rate debt by the City, together with
such changes and revisions consistent with the purposes and intent of this
ordinarice as shall be approved by the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, as the
case may be, subject to the limitations contained in this ordinance, the execution
and defivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval
of such chcmges and modifications.
(e) To evidence the exercise of the authority delegated to the Mayor or the Chief
Financial Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, as the
case may be, is hereby directed to execute and file with the City Clerk in coimection
with the initial auction of Auction Rate Securities a certificate setting forth the
determinations made pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate
shall constitute conclusive evidence of the. proper exercise by them of such
authority. Upon the filing- of such certfficate, the Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer shall also file with the City Clerk one (1) copy of the Auction Rate Indenture.
The City Clerk shall direct a copy of such filing to this City Council.
SECTION 11. Form Of Auction Rate Indenture. The form of Auction Rate
Indenture presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit D is hereby
approved in aU respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more Auction Rate Indentures in
substantiaUy the form of the Auction Rate Indenture presented to this meeting, with
appropriate revisions in text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shall
deterdiine are necessary or desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the
same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the
execution and delivery thereof to constitute coni:iusive evidence of this City
Council's approval of any and all such changes or revisions. The Chief Financial
Officer is hereby authorized to designate a bank or trust company to serve as
Trustee under the Auction Rate Indenture.
SECTION 12. Form Of Auction Agreement. The form of Auction Agreement
presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit E is hereby approved in
all respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to
execute and deUver one (1) or more Auction Agreements in substantially the form
of the Auction Agreement presented to this meeting, with appropriate revisions in
text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shall determine are necessary or
desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the
corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and defivery thereof
to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval of any and all such
changes or revisions. The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate
one (1) or more banks or investment banking firms to serve as "Auction Agent"
under an Auction Agreement.
SECTION 13. Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreements. The Mayor or the
Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to execute and debver one (1) or more

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83081

reimbursement agreements (each, an "Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement")
in substantiaUy the form of reimbursement agreements executed and defivered by
the City in connection with previous variable rate financings, with appropriate
revisions in text as the Mayor-or the Chief Financial Officer shall determine are
necessary or desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix
thereto the corporate seed of the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and
defivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval of
any and aU such changes or revisions. Such revisions in text may include (a)
provisions permitting the stated amount of an Auction Rate Credit Facifity to be
increased and decreased from time to time to support the Auction Rate Securities
then outstanding; and (b) such other provisions as may be necessary or desirable
to implement the Auction Rate Program as herein contemplated. The Mayor or the
Chief Financial Officer is hereby further authorized to execute and deUver a
promissory note pursuant to each Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement (an
"Auction Rate Reimbursement Note"), to the extent required thereby, in
substantially the form used to support reimbursement agreerrients in previous
variable ratefiinancingsfor the City, with appropriate revisions to reflect the terms
and provisions of the related Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement, and the City
Clerk is hereby authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the corporate seal of
the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution "and defivery thereof to constitute
conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval of any chemges or revisions
therein. The interest rate payable on any such Auction Rate Reimbursement Note
shall not exceed eighteen percent (18%) per annum (including the recovery by the
financial institution providing the related Auction Rate Credit Facifity of any
amounts otherwise not payable to such financial institution solely as a result of the
interest rate limit set forth in the related Auction Rate Reimbursement Note, any
interest to be so recovered to be determined at an interest rate not to exceed twentyfive percent (25%) per annum), and the maturity of any obfigation thereunder shall
not be greater than ten (10) years from the date of the related advance (subject to
extension and renewal as therein provided). The maximum annual fee payable to
any financial institution under an Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement shall
not exceed two percent (2%) of the stated amount of the related Auction Rate Credit
Facifity (and any unused capacity thereunder).
The obfigations of the City under each Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement
and under each Auction Rate Reimbursement Note shall constitute direct and
general obfigations of the City and may be payable from any funds legally available
for such purpose. The City hereby covenants and agrees to take all necessary
action to aimuaUy appropriate funds in a timely manner so as to provide for the
making of all payments due under any Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement and
under each Auction Rate Reimbursement Note; provided however, that in no event

 83082

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

shaU the City be obfigated to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax in addition
to other City taxes or any special ad valorem tax or other tax unlimited as to rate
or amount to pay any amount due under any Auction Rate Reimbursement
Agreement or the principal of, redemption premium, on, or interest on any Auction
Rate Reimbursement Note.
The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate one (l)'or morie
financicd institutions to provide an Auction Rate Credit Facifity with respect to each
series of Auction Rate Securities. Nothing contained herein shall limit or restrict
the Chief Financial Officer's abifity (i) to appoint separate financial institutions to
issue separate Auction Rate Credit Facifities; (ii) to appoint more than one (1)
financial institution to issue a single Auction Rate Credit Facifity; or (iu)- to replace
or extend any. Auction Rate Credit Facility.
SECTION 14. The Variable Rate. Program, (a) The Variable Rate Securities are
hereby authorized to be issued from time to time. The Variable Rate Securities shall
be designated "Variable Rate Bonds" or "Variable Rate Notes" may be issued in one
(1) or more series and may bear an additional designation to identify each series.
Each Variable Rate Security shall bear, interest from its date at a rate or rates not
in excess of the lesser of (i) eighteen percent (18%) per annum, computed in the
manner set forth in the Variable Rate Indenture, or (ii) during any period as such
Variable Rate Security is secured by a Credit Facility (a "Variable Rate Credit
Facifity"), the maximum interest rate provided for under such Variable Rate Credit
Facifify. At any time, the Chief Financial Officer may determine that a Variable Rate
Security shall bear interest at a fixed rate to its maturity. The Variable Rate
Securities may be issued as bonds or notes the interest on which is not includable
in gross income for federal income tax purposes or, if so determined by the Chief
Financial Officer at the time of the sale thereof, as bonds or notes the interest on
which is includable in gross income for federal income tax purposes.
(b) The Variable Rate Securities shaU be executed on behalf of the City with the
manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor of the City, and shall be attested with
the manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk of the City, and shall have
impressed or imprinted thereon the official seal of the City (or a facsimile thereof).
In case any officer of the City whose signature or whose facsimile signature shall
appear on the Variable Rate Securities shall cease to be such officer before the
defivery of such Variable Rate Securities, such signature or the facsimile signature
thereof shaU nevertheless be vafid and sufficient for aU purposes the same as if such
officer had remained in office until defivery.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83083

(c) Subject to the fimitations contained in this ordinzince, authority is hereby
delegated to the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer to sell the Variable Rate
Securities to one (1) or more underwriters to be designated by the Chief Financial
Officer, pursucmt to one (1) or more contracts of purchase with respect to the
Variable Rate Securities between the City and such underwriters; provided that the
aggregate purchase price of any series of Variable Rate Securities shall not be less
than ninety-eight percent (98%) of the principal amount thereof to be issued (less
any original issue discount which may be used in the marketing thereof) plus any
accrued interest thereon front their date to the date of defivery thereof and pajmient
therefor.
(d) The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, with the concurrence of the
Chairman of the Committee on Finance of this City Council, is hereby authorized
and directed to execute and deliver one (l)'or more contracts of purchase for
Variable Rate Securities in substantially the form of the contracts of purchase used
in connection with the previous sales of Variable Rate Securities by the City,
together with such changes and revisions consistent with the purposes and intent
of this ordinance as shall be approved by the Mayor or the Chief Finemcial Officer,
as the case may be, subject to the fimitations contained in this ordinance, the
execution and delivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City
Council's approval of such changes and modifications.
(e) To evidence the exercise of the authority delegated to the Mayor or the Chief
Financial Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, as the
case may be', is hereby directed to execute and file with the City Clerk in connection
with each sale of Variable Rate Securities a certificate setting forth the
determinations made pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate
shall constitute conclusive evidence of the proper exercise by them of such
authority. Upon the filing of such certificate, the Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer shaU also.file with the City Clerk one (1) copy of the Variable Rate Indenture.
The City Clerk shall dfrect a copy of such filing to this City Councdl.
SECTION 15. Form Of Variable Rate Indenture. The form of Variable Rate
Indenture presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit F is hereby
approved in all respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver one (1) or more Variable Rate Indentures in
substantially the form of the Variable Rate Indenture presented to this meeting,
with appropriate revisions in text as the Mayor or the Chief Financied Officer shall
determine are necessary or desfrable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the
same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the

 83084

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

execution and defivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City
Council's approved of any and.all such changes or revisions. The Chief Financial
Officer is hereby authorized to designate a bank or trust company to serve as
Trustee under the Variable Rate Indenture.
SECTION 16. Veuriable Rate Reimbursement Agreements. The Mayor or the
Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more
reimbursement agreements (each, a "Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement") in
substantially the form of reimbursement agreements executed and delivered by the
City in connection with previou s variable rate financings, with appropriate revisions'
in text as the Mayor or the Chief Finemcial Officer shall determine are necessary or
desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the
corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and defivery thereof
to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval of any and all such
changes or revisions. Such revisions in text.may include (a) provisions permitting
the stated amount of a Variable Rate Credit Facility to be increased and decreased
from time to time to support the Variable Rate Securities then outstemding; and (b)
such other provisions as may be necessary or desfrable to implement the Variable
Rate Program eis herein contemplated. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is
hereby further authorized to execute and deUver a promissory note pursuant to
each Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement (a "Veiriable Rate Reimbursement
Note"), to the extent requfred thereby, in substantially the form used to support
reimbursement agreements in previous variable rate financings for the City, with
appropriate revisions to reflect the terms and provisions of the related Variable Rate
Reimbursement Agreement, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized to attest the
same and aflix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the
execution and defivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City
Council's approval of einy changes or revisions therein. The interest rate payable on
any such Variable Rate Reimbursement Note shaU not exceed eighteen percent
(18%) per annum (including the recovery by the financial institution providing the
related Variable Rate Credit Facifity of any amounts otherwise not payable to such
financial institution solely as a result of the interest rate limit set forth in the related
Variable Rate Reimbursement Note, any interest to be so recovered to be determined
at an interest rate not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) per annum, and the
maturity of any obfigation thereunder shall not be greater than ten (10) years from
the date of the related advemce (subject to extension and renewal as thereinprovided). The maximum armual fee payable to any financial institution under a
Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement shall not exceed two percent (2%) of the
stated amount of the related Variable Rate Credit Facifity (and any unused capacity
thereunder).

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83085

The obfigations of the City under each Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement
and under each Variable Rate Reimbursement Note shall constitute direct and
general obligations of the City and may be payable from any funds legally available
and annuaUy appropriated for such purpose. The City hereby covenants and agrees
to take aU necessary action to annuaUy appropriate funds in a timely manner so as
to provide for the making of all payments due under any Variable Rate
Reimbursement Agreernent and.under each Variable Rate Reimbursement Note;
provided however, that in no event shall the City be obUgated tp levy any separate
ad valorem or other tax in addition to other City taxes or any special ad valorem tax
or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to pay any amount due under" any
Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement or the principal of, redemption premium
on, or interest on any Veuiable Rate Reimbursement Note.
The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate one (1) or more
financial institutions to provide a Variable Rate Credit Facifity with respect to each
series of Variable Rate Securities. Nothing contained herein shall. limit or restrict
the Chief Financial Officer's abifity (i) to appoint separate financial institutions to
issue separate Variable Rate Credit Facilities; [ii) to appoint more than one (1)
financial institution to issue a single Variable Rate Credit Facifity; or (ui) to replace
or extend any Variable Rate Credit Facifity.
SECTION 17. Remarketing Agreements. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer
is hereby authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more remarketing agreements
(each a "Remeirketing Agreement") relating to Auction Rate Securities and Variable
Rate Securities in substantially the form previously used for variable rate financings.
of the City with such appropriate revisions in text as the Chief Financial Officer
shaU determine as necessary and desfrable, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized
to attest the same and to affix thereto the corporate, seal of the City or a facsimile
thereof. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby delegated the authority
to appoint a Remarketing Agent with respect to each series of Auction Rate
Securities and each series of Variable Rate Securities in the manner provided in the
related Indenture.
SECTION 18. The Line Of Credit Program, (a) The Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver one (1) or more fine of credit
agreements (each, a "Line of Credit Agreement") with commercied banks and other
financial institutions and in the form customarily used to provide borrowers with
a revolving line of credit to meet thefr need for working capital and with such terrns
and provisions as the Chief Financisd Officer shall determine to be in the best
'interest of the City. The City Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto
the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and defivery
thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval of each
such Line of Credit Agreement.

 83086

JOURNAI^-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

(b) To evidence borrowings under each Line of Credit Agreement, the City is
authorized to issue from time to time one (1) or more Line of Credit Notes, each to
be designated "Line of Credit Note". Each Line of Credit Note shall bear interest
from its date at a rate or rates not in excess of eighteen percent (18%) per annum.
The Line of Credit Notes may be issued as notes the interest on which" is not
includable in gross income for federal income tax purposes or, if so determined by
the Chief Financial Officer at the time of issuance of the line of Credit Notes, as
notes the interest on which is includable in gross income for federal income tax
purposes.
(c) The Line of Credit Notes shall be executed on behalf of the City with the
manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor of the City, and shafi be attested with
the manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk, and shall have impressed or
imprinted thereon the official seal of the City (or a facsimile thereof). In case any
officer of the City whose signature or facsimile signature shall appear on" the Line
of Credit Notes shall cease to be such officer before the defivery of such Line of
Credit Notes, such signature or facsimfle signatiire thereof shaU nevertheless be
vafid and sufficient for aU purposes the same as if such officer had remained in
office until defivery .
(d) To evidence the exercise of the authority delegated to the Mayor or the Chief
Financial Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, as the •
case may be, is hereby dfrected to execute and file with the City Clerk in connection
with the initial borrowing under any Line of Credit Agreemerit, a copy of such Line
of Credit Agreement and a certfficate setting forth the determinations made
pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate shall constitute
conclusive evidence of the proper exercise by them of such authority. Upon the
filing of such Line of Credit Agreement and such, certificate, the City Clerk shedl
dfrect a copy of such filing to the Cify Council.
SECTION 19.
Continuing Appropriation. This ordinance constitutes a
continuing appropriationfromlegally available funds of the City of the monies that
may be requfredfromtime to time to provide for the punctual payment of (i) the
principal of, interest on and any redemption premium on, the Authorized Debt, (ii)
the principal of, interest on and redemption premium on, any C.P. Reimbursement
Note, any Auction Rate Reimbursement Note and any Variable Rate Reimbursement
Note, and (iii) the program expenses of the Borrowing Plan. Such continuing
appropriation shall be and remain in full force and effect without any further action
by the City Council. Nothing contained in this ordinance shaU obfigate the City to
le"vy any separate ad valorem or other tax in addition to other City taxes or any
special ad valorem or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to fund the
continuing appropriation provided for in this section.

 5/ 1 /2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83087

SECTION 20. Offering Documents. The Chief Financial Officer is hereby
authorized to cause to be prepared one (1) or more offering documents, (each an
"Offering Document") describing each issue of C.P. Notes, Auction Rate Securities
or Variable Rate Securities. Each Offering Document shaU be in customary form for
the applicable Program. The distribution of each such Offering Document to
prospective purchasers and the use thereof by the Dealer in cormection with the
offering of the C.P. Notes and by the underwriters in connection with the offering of
the Auction Rate Securities and the Variable Rate Securities is hereby authorized
and approved.
SECTION 21. Tax Compfiance Agreement. The Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver from time to time one (1) or more
Tax Compfiance Agreements in such form as is customeury for similar transactions
as determined by bond counsel, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the same
and affix thereto the corporate seal of the Cify or a facsimile thereof
SECTION 22. Forward Supply Contracts. If the Chief Financial Officer
determines it to be in the best financial interest of the City, the Chief Financial
Officer is authorized to execute and defiver from time to time in the name and on
behalf of the City one (1) or more forward supply contracts with one (1) or more
counterparties selected by the Chief Financial Officer under which contracts such
counterparties agree to sell to the Cify, and the City agrees to purchase from such
counterparties, specified securities on specified dates at purchase prices estabfished
at the time of the execution and defivery of the appficable contract. The sources of
funds to purchase such securities shafi be amounts on hand and available in the
funds and accounts created and estabfished under an Indenture or a Line of Credit
Agreement. Under no cfrcumstances shaU any amounts payable by the Cify under,
or with respect to, any such contract constitute an indebtedness of the City for
which its full faith and credit is pledged, but such etmounts shaU be payable solely
from legaUy available funds of the Cify.
SECTION 23. Interest Rate Swap And Cap Agreements. If determined by the
Chief Financial Officer to be in the best financial interest of the Cify, the Chief
Financial Officer is authorized to execute and defiver from time to time in the name
and on behalf of the City one (1) or more agreements or options to enter into
agreements with counterparties selected by the Chief Financicd Officer, the purpose
of which is to manage the Cify's interest rate exposure with respect to any
Authorized Debt or a particular scries of Authorized Debt; provided, however, that
(a) the stated aggregate notional amount under aU such agreements (net of
offsetting transactions) at any one (1) time shaU not exceed the aggregate principed
amount of such Authorized Debt at the time outstanding, (b) any such agreement
to the extent practicable s h a l l be in Bubstantially the form of either the L/acol

Currency — Single Jurisdiction version or the Multicurrency — Cross Border version
of the 1992 I.S.D.A. Master Agreement accompanied by the United States
Municipal Counterparty Schedule pubUshed by the International Swaps and

 83088

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Derivatives Association, Inc. ("I.S.D.A.") or any successor form to either pubfished
by the I.S.D.A., and in appropriate confirmations of transactions governed by that
agreement, with such insertions, completions and modifications thereof as shall be
approved by the Chief Financial Officer, his or her execution thereof to constitute
conclusive evidence of this City Council's apjjroval of such insertions, completions
and modffications, and (c). .under.no cfrcumstances shedl any amounts payable by
the Cify under, or with respect to, any such agreement constitute an indebtedness
of the Cify for which its full faith and credit is pledged, but such zmiounts shaU be
payable solely from legally available funds of the City.
SECTION 24. Performance Provisions. The Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer
and the City Clerk for ctnd on behalf of the City shall be, and each of them hereby
is, authorized and dfrected to do any and all things necessary to effect the
performance of all obfigations of the City, or to exercise any rights of the City, .under
and pursuant to this ordinance, any Indenture, any Line of Credit Agreementi any
C.P. Dealer Agreement, any C.P. Paying Agent Agreement, any C.P. Reimbursement
Agreement, any Auction Rate Reimbursement- Agreement, any Variable Rate
Reimbursement Agreement and any Remarketing Agreement, and the performance
of aU other acts of whatever nature necessary to effect and cany out the authority
conferred by this ordinance and any Indenture,' including, but not limited to, the
exercise foUowing the defivery date of any Authorized Debt of any power or authority
delegated to such official of the City under this ordinemce with resp>ect to the
Authorized Debt upon the initial defivery or issuance thereof, but subject to any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth. The
Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer, the City-Clerk and other officers, agents and
employees of the City are hereby further authorized, empowered and dfrected, for
and on behalf of the City, to execute and defiver aU papers, documents, certificates
and other instruments that may be requfred to carry out the authority conferred by
this ordinance and any Indenture, or to evidence said authority.
SECTION 25. fVoxies. The Mayor and the Chief Financial Officer may each
designate another to act as their respective projty and to affix thefr respective
signatures to, in the case of the Mayor, each Authorized Debt, whether in temporary
or definitive form, and to any other instrument, certificate or document requfred to
be signed by the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer pursuant to this ordinance,
any Line of Credit Agreement and any Indenture. In each case, each shall send to
the City Council "written notice of the person so designated by each, such notice
stating the name of the person so selected and identifying the instruments,
certificates and documents which such person shall be authorized to sign as proxy
for the Mayor and the Chief Financial Officer, respectively. A written signature of

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83089

the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, respectively, executed by the person so
designated underneath, shall be attached to each notice. Each notice, with
signatures attached, shall be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of the City
Council and filed with the City Clerk. 'When the signature of the Mayor is placed on
an instrument, certificate or document at the dfrection of the Mayor in the specified
manner, the same, in all respects, shsdl be as binding on the City as if signed by the
Mayor in person. When the signature of the Chief Financied Officer is so affixed to
an instrument, certificate or document at the dfrection of the Chief Financial
Officer, the seime, in all respects, shall be as binding on the City as if signed by the
Chief Financial Officer in p>erson.
SECTION 26. Severabifity. It is the intention of this City Council that, if any
section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shaU be ruled by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invafid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph,
clause or provision shaU not affect any of the remaining provisions hereof.
SECTION 27. Inconsistent Provisions. All ordinances, resolutions, motions or
orders in conffict "with this ordinemce are hereby repealed to the extent of such.
conffict. No pro-vision of the Municipal Code of Chicago (the "Municipal Code") or
violation of any provision of the Municipal Code shall be deemed to impafr the
validify of this ordinance or the instruments authorized by this ordinance, or. to
impair the securify for or payment of the instruments authorized by this ordinance;
provided further, however, that the foregoing shall not be deemed to affect the
availabifify of any other remedy or penaify for any "violation of any provision of the
Municiped Code.
SECTION 28. Effective Date. This ordinance shafi take effect immediately upon
its passage and approval.
SECTION 29. Reporting Requfrement. The Chief Financial Officer shaU report
to the City Council with respect to the expenditure of the proceeds of any
Authorized Debt issued hereunder. Such reports shafi be made no later than
April I and October 1 of each year, commencing October 1, 2002, with respect to
expenditures made during the six (6) month period ending on September 1.
April 1 reports shall cover expenditures made during the six (6) month period
ending on March 1.
Exhibits "A", "B", "C", "D", "E" and "F" referred to in this ordinance read as foUows:

 83090

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Exhibit "A".'
(To Ordinance)
Trust

Indenture

Between
City Of Chicago
And

As
Dated As Of

Trustee
1, 2002

Relating To
• City Of Chicago
Commercial Paper Notes
2002 Program
Series A (Tax Exempt) And Series B (Taxable).

THIS TRUST INDENTURE, dated as of
I . 2002 (this
"Indenture"), is by and between the City of Chicago (the "City"), a municipality and a home rule
unit of local government duly organized and validly existing under the Constitution and laws of
the State of Illinois, and
(the "Trustee"), a
duly organized, validly existing and authorized to accept the duties and
obligations set out by virtue of the laws of the
and having a corporate trust
office located in the City of Chicago, Illinois, as trustee.

 5 / 1 / 2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83091

WITNESSETH:
WHEREIAS, the Cify is a home nde unit of local govennnent, duly organized and
existing under the laws of the State of lUinois, and in accordance with the provisions of Section
6(a) of Article VU of the 1970 ConsUtution of the State of Illinois; and
WHEREAS, the City has previously authorized the issuance of an amount
outstanding at any one time of not to exceed $200,000,000 (the "Authorized Amount") of City
of Chicago Commercial Paper Notes pursuant to the "CP Note Ordinance" (as hereinafter
defined); and
WHEREAS; the City wishes to provide in this Indenture for the issuancefromtime
to time, in an aggregate amount outstanding at any one time not exceeding the Authorized
Amount, of its Commercial Paper Notes, as authorized by the CP Note Ordinance, designated as
"City of Chicago. Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program Series A (Tax Exempt)", and "City
of Chicago, Commercial P ^ r Notes, 2002 Program Series B (Taxable)"; and
WHEREAS, the City "wishes to provide in this Indenture that such Commercial
Paper Notes (as hereinafter defined) be issued as direct and geneial obligations of the City payable
from any funds of the City legally available and annually apprtjpriated for such purpose and the
Trustee is willing to accept the trvists provided in this Indenture;
NOW, THEREFORE, the City and the Trustee agree as follows each for the
benefit of the other and/or the benefit of .holders of the Commercial Paper Notes secured by this
Indeiiture:

ARTICLE I .
Definitions; General Authorization; Ratification.
Section 1.01. Definitions. The following defmiuons shall, for all purposes of this
Indenture and supplemental hereto, have the meanings herein specified unless the context clearly
requires otherwise:
"Advances" means payments made by the Bank as a result of draws made on the
Letter of Credit to pay principal of and/or interest on Commercial Paper Notes.

 83092

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

"Authenticating Agent" means, with respect to any Series, each person or entity,
if any, designated by the City herein or in any Supplemental Indenture to manually sign the
certificate of authentication on the Commercial Paper Notes, and its successors and assigns, and
any other person or entity which may at any time be substituted for it pursuant hereto. Inidally,
the Authenticating Agent shall be the Issuing and Paying Agent. .
"Authorized Amount" means $200,000,000; provided that such amount may be
issued in one or more Series; and provided, further, that the aggregate amount outstanding under
this Indenture at any one time among all Series may not exceed such amount reduced by the
outstanding principal amoiut of "Auction Rate Securities" and "Variable Rate Securities" issued
piirsuant to the CP Note Ordinance.
. "Authorized City Representative" means the Chief Financial Officer of the City
or such other officer or etnployee of the City or other person, which other officer, employee or
person has been designated by .die City as an Authorized City Representative by "written notice
defivered by the Chief Financial Officer to the Trustee and the Issuing and Paying AgenL
"Available Moneys" means moneys which are continuously on deposit "with the
Trustee or the Issuing and Paying Agent in trust for the benefit of the holders of the Commercial
Paper Notes in a separate and segregated aiccount in which only Available Moneys are held, which
moneys constimte proceeds of (i) the Commercial Paper Notes received contemporaneously with
the initial issuance and sale of the Commercial Paper Notes, (ii) a drawing tmder the Letter of
Credit or payments otherwise made under a substimte Letter of Credit, Qii) refimding obligations
or other funds for which the Trustee has received a written opinion of nationaUy recognized
coimsel experienced in bankruptcy matters and acceptable to aii Authorized City Representative
and the Rating Agencies to the effect that payment of such moneys to the holders of the
Commercial Paper Notes would not consfiute an avoidable preference under Section 547 of the
United States Bankruptcy Code if the City were to become a debtor imder the United States
Bankruptcy Code, or (iv) the investcnent of fimds qualifying as Available Motreys under the
foregoing clauses.
"Bank" means the issuer of the Letter of Credit then outstanding and effective
hereimder. Initially, the Bank shall be
.
"Bank Note" means a note or notes issued by the City pursuant to Section 5.01.
hereof and evidencing all or any portion of any unreimbursed Advances made by the Bank and
designated as "City of Chicago Bank Notes (2002 Commercial Paper Program) (insert name of
Bank)."
"Bank Note Account" means the Bank Note Debt Service Account estabfished
pursuant to Section 4.01(b)(3) hereof.

I
j

"Bank Note Payment Date" means a date on which principal of or interest on a
Bank Note is due and payable, including both scheduled principal and interest and principal and
interest payable upon prepayment of a Bank Note.

i

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83093

"Bank Oblipadons" means obligations payable to" the Bank under the
Reimbursement Agreement.
"Bank Rate" shaU have the meaning assigned to such term in the Reimbiusement
Agreement pursuant to which a Bank Note is delivered by the City to the Bank.
"Bond Counsel" means an attorney or firm or firms of attorneys of national
recognidon selected or employed by the City with knowledge and experience' in the field of
municipal finance.
"Business Day" means any day other than (i) a Saturday, Simday or other day on
which commercial banks in New York, New York. Chicago, Illinois, or the city in which is
located the office of the Bank at which demands for a draw on the Letter of Credit will be made,
are authorized or required by law to dose, or (ii) a day on which the New York Stock Exchange
is closed..
"City" means the City of Chicago, a municipality and a home rule unit of local
government duly organized and validly existing under the Constimtion and laws of the State of
niinois.
"Closing Date" means the date on which the Letter of Credit is issued by the Bank.
"Code" means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the applicable
United States Treasury Regulations proposed or in effect with respect thereto.
"Commercial Paper Bank Payment Account" or "Bank Payment Account" means
the accoimt by that name established pursuant to Section 4.01(b)(2) hereof.
"Commerciial Paper Debt Service Account" or "Debt Service Account" means the
account by that name established pursuant to Section 4.01(b)(1) hereof.
"Commercial Paper Notes" or "Notes" means notes of the City with a maturity of
not more than 270 daysfromthe date of issuance, and which are authorized to be issued and.
reissuedfromtime to time under Article n of this Indenture (in the case of the Series A Notes and
the Series B Notes).
"Costs of Issuance" means all reasonable costs incurred by the City in coimection
with the issuance of a Series, including, but not limited to:
(a)
counsel fees related to the issuance of such Series (including, but not limited
to, bond counsel and the Trustee's counsel);
(b)
Series;

financial advisor fees incurred in connecuon with the issuance of such

 83094

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

(c)

rating agency fees;

(d)

the initial fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Issuing and Paying

(e)

accoimtant feesrelatedto the issuance of such Series;

(f)

printing and pubUcation costs; and

Agent;

(g)
any other fee or cost incurred in coimecdoQ with the issuance of such Series
that constimtes an "issuance cost" within the meaning of Section 147(g) of the Code.

on
Notes.

"CP Note Ordinance" Tn^ant the ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City
. 2002 authorizing this Indenture and the issuance of the Commercial Paper

"Dealer" means
.
for as long as it is acting as
a dealer for the City withrespectto the Notes, or any successor Dealer appointed pursuant to the
Dealer Agreement, as approved by the City.
"Dealer Agreement" means the Commercial Paper Dealer Agreement, dated as of
, 2002, between the City and the Dealer, as amended and supplemented from
time to dme, and any such agreement with any successor Dealer.
"Debt Service Fund" means the fund by that name established pursuant to Secdon
4.01(b) hereof.
"Designated Representative" means the Chief Financial Officer of the City and if
the Chief Financial Officer is not available, the City Comptroller of the City, and any additional
individuals designated to complete and deliver Issuance Requests and who have been identified
and whose signatures have been certified in a certificate of an Authorized City Representative
defivered to the Issuing and Paying Agent.
"DTC" means The Depository Trust Company, as Note Depositoty for one or
more Series of Commercial Paper Notes, and its successors and assigns.
"Event of Default" means any one or more of those events set forth in Section 9.01
hereof, which Event of Defaidt has not been.cured.
"Expiration Date" means the date of expiration of the Letter of Credit then in effect
(as such date may be extendedfromtime to time).
"Fiscal Year" shall mean the period of lime beginning on January 1 and ending on
December 31 of each year, or such other similar pericxl as the City designates as thefiscalyear
of the City.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

. 83095

"Fitch" means Fitch Ratings, Inc., a corporation organized and existing under the
laws of the State of Delaware, and its successors and assigns, and, if such corporation shall no
longer perform the fimctions of a securities rating agency, any other rating agency designated by
the City.
"Government Obfipations" means (1) United States Obligations (including
obligations issued or held in book-entiy form), and (2) prerefimded municipal obfigations meeting
the following conditions: (a) the municipal obfigations are not subject to redemption prior to
maturity, or the trustee therefor has been given irrevocable instmctions concerning thefr calliiig
and reden^tion and the issuer thereof has covenanted not to redeem such obligations other than
as set forth in such instructions; (b) the immicipal obfigations are secured by cash and/or United
States Obligations, which United States Obfigations may be applied only to interest, principal and
premiimi payments of such municipal obfigations; (c) the principal of and interest on the United
States Obfigations (plus any cash ia the-escrow fund) are sufficient to meet the liabilities of the
nunicipal obfigations; (d) the United States Obligations serving as security for the municipal
obfigations are held by an escrow agent or trxistee; (e) the United States Obfigations are not
available to satisfy any other claims, including those against the trustee or escrow agent; and (f)
the municipal obfigations are rated in thefr highest rating caiegoty by Moody's and by S&P if
S&P then rT»ainfain«; a rating on such obligations.
"Indenture" means this Trust Indenture, dated as of
between the City and the Trustee, as supplemented and amendedfromtime to time.

1, 2002,

"Insolvent" shall be used to describe the Trustee, the Issuing and Paying Agent or
any other agent, appointed hereunder or the Bank if (a) such person shaU have institiited
proceedings to be adjudicated a bankrupt or insolvent, shaU have consented to the instimtion of
bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings against it, shaU havefileda petition or answer or consent
seeking reorganization orreliefuixler the United States Bankruptcy Code or any other similar
appficable Federal or state law, or shall have consented to the filing of any such petition or to the
appointmcQt of a receiver, liquidator, assignee, trustee or sequestrator or other similar official of
itself, or of any substantial part of its property, or shall fail to timely controvert an involimtary
petition filed against it under the United States Bankruptcy Code, or shaU consent to the enfry of
an order for relief under the United States Bankruptcy Code or shall make an assigimicni for the
benefit of creditors or shafi admit in writing its inability to pay its debts generally as they become
due; or (b) a decree or order by a court having jurisdiction in the premises adjudging such person
as bankrupt or insolvent, or approving as properly filed a petition seeking reorganization,
arrangement, adjustment or composition of or in respect of such person under the United States
Bankruptcy Code or any other similar applicable Federal or state law or for relief under the
United States Bankruptcy Code after an involimiaty petition has been filed against such person,
or appointing areceiver.liquidator, assignee, trustee or sequestrator or other similar official of
such person or of any substantial part of its property, or ordering the "winding up or liquidation
of its affairs, shall have been entered and shall have continued luiabated and in effect for a period
of 90 consecutive days.

 83096

JOURNAI^-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

"Investment Apreement" means an investment agreement or guaranteed investment
contract with entities which maintain the foUowing credit and collateral requiremeius: (a) if a
corporation, Uiey are initiaUy rated "Aaa" by Moody's and "AAA" by S&P. if a domestic bank,
they are initiaUy rated Thomson "B/C" or better, and if a foreign bank, they are iiutiaUy rated
Thomson "B" or better, (b) if credit quality reaches Moody's "Aa3" or S&P "AA" for
corporations. Thomson "B/C" for domestic banks, and Thomson "B" for foreign banks, the
provider thereof (1) will respond with adequate coUateralization within ten (10) business days, (2)
will value assets weekly, and (3) wiU present collateral at 102% on Government Obfigations and
105% on obligations described in item (2) of the definition of Permitted Investments; (c) the
provider thereof must maintain minimum credit quality of Moody's "A2" or S&P "A" for
corporations, Thomson "C" for domestic banks, or Thomson "B/C" for foreign banks; and (d)'
the investment agreement will be terminated if credit ratings reach Moody's "AS" or S&P "A-"
for corporations, Thomson "C/D" for domestic banks and Thomson "C" for foreign banks.
"Issuance Request" means a request made by the City, acting through a Designated
Representative, to'the Issuing and Paying Agent for the delivety of a Commercial Paper Note or
Commercial Paper Notes.
"Issuing and Paving Agent" means
, Chicago,
niinois, or any successor or assigns permitted under the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement or
any other Issuing and Paying Agent which is appointed by the City and has entered into an Issuing
and Paying Agent Agreement.
"Issuing and Paving Agent Apreement" means the Issuing and Paying Agent
Agreement, dated as of
1,2002, between die City and the Issuing and Paying
Agent, and any and all modifications, alterations, amendments and supplements thereto, or any
other Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement entered into by the City and the Issuing and Paying
Agent withrespectto the Commercial Paper Notes.
"Letter of Credit" means the irrevocable, transferrable, direct-pay letter of credit
issued by the Bank for the benefit of the Issuing and Paying Agent on or prior to the date of
issuance of the first Commercial Paper Note, together with any substimte irrevocable,
transferrable, direct-pay letter of credit accepted by the Issuing and Paying Agent as provided in
Section 10.01 hereof; provided that at no time shall more than one letter of credit secure the
Outstanding Commercial Paper Notes.
"Maximum Rate" means

percent (

7o) per annum.

"Moodv's" means Moody's Investors Service, a corporation existing imder the laws
of the State of Delaware, its successors and assigns, and, if such corporation shall no longer
perform the functions of a securities rating agency, any other nationally recognized rating agency
designated by the City.
"No-Issuance Notice" shall have the meaning assigned thereto in a Reimbursement
Agreement.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83097

"Nominee" means the nominee of the Note Depositoty as determined from time
to time in accordance with this Iixlenture or any Supplemental Indenture for any one or more
Series of Commercial Paper Notes.
j
"Note Depository" means the securities depositoty for a Series of Commercial
Paper Notes appointed as such pursuant to Section 2.05 hereof, and its successors and assigns.
"Noteholder." "holder."owner" or "registered owner" means the person in
whose name any Note or Notes are registered on the books maintained by the Registrar, or
Trustee.
"Note Proceeds" means proceeds of the sale of the Commercial Paper Notes or any
moneys, securities or other obligations; that may be deemed to be proceeds of the Commercial
Paper Notes within the meaning of the Code.
i
"Outstanding" when used with respea to Notes sbaU mean all Notes which have
been authenticated and delivered under ithis Indenture, except:
(a)
Notes cancelled jor purchased by the Issuing and Paying Agent for
cancellation or delivered to or acquired by the Issuing and Paying Agent for cancellation
and, in all cases, with the intent- to extinguish the debt represented thereby;
I

(b)
Notes in lieu of which other Notes have been authenticated under Section
2.07, 2.08 or 2.09 hereof;

• - ••

i

(c)
Notes that have become due (at matunty or on redemption, acceleration or
otherwise) and for the payment of which sufficient moneys, including interest accrued to
the due date, are held by the Issiung and Paying Agem or Trustee;

i
I

(d)
Notes which, undier the terms of this Indenture, are deemed to be no longer
Outstanding; and
(e)
for purposes of any consent or other action to be taken by the holders, of a
specified percentage of Notes under this Indenture, Notes held by or for the account of the
City or by any person controlling, comroUed by or under common control with the City.
"Permined Investments" shall mean any of the following:

i

(1)

Government Obligations;

(2)
obligations, debentures, notes or other evidences of indebtedness issued or
guaranteed by any of the following instrumentalities or agencies of the United States of America:
Federal Home Loan Bank System; Export-Import Bank of the United States; Federal Financing
Bank; Government National Mortgage Association; Faimie Mae, Smdent Loan Marketing

 83098

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Association; Federal Farm Credit Bureau; Farmers Home Administration; Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation; and Federal Housing Administration;
(3)
direct and general long-term obligations of any state, which obligations are
rated in either of the two highest rating categories by Moody's and by S&P, if S&P then maintains
a rating on such obfigations;
(4)
direct and general short-term obfigations of any state which obfigations are
rated in the highest rating categoty by Moody's and by S&P, if S&P then maintains a rating on
such obfigations;
(5)
interest-bearing demand or time deposits (including certificates of deposit)
or interests in money market portfolios issued by state banks or tmst companies or national
banking associations that are members of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"),
which deposits or interests must either be (a) continuously and fiiUy insured by FDIC and with
banks diai are rated at least " P-1" or "Aa" by Moody's and at least "A-l" or "AA" by S&P, if
such banks are then rated by S&P. or (b) fiiUy secured by United States Obligations (i) which are
"valued not lessfiequentiythan monthly aiid have a fafr market value, exclusive of accrued
interest, at least equal to the principal amount of the deposits or interests, (ja) Iield by the Trustee
(who shafi not be the provider of the collateral) or by any Federal Reserve Bank or depositary
acceptable to the Trustee, (in) subject to a perfected first lien in the Trustee, and (iv)freeand
clearfromall third-party liens;
(6)
long-term or medium-term corporate debt guaranteed by any corporation
that is rated by both Moody's and S&P in either of thefr two highest rating categories;
(7)
repurchase agreements which are (a) entered into "with banks or trust
companies organized under state law, national banking associations, insurance companies or
government bond dealers reporting to, trading with and recognized as a primaty dealer by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and which either are members of the Security Investors
Protection Corporation or with a dealer or parent holding company that has an investment grade
ratingfromMoody's and S&P, if S&P then maintains; a rating of such institution, and (b) fiiUy
secured by investments specified in Section (1) or (2) of this definition of Permitted Investments
(i) which are valued not lessfrequendythan monthly and have a fafr market "value, exclusive of
accrued interest, at least equal to the amount invested in the repurchase agreements, (ii) held by
the Trustee (who shall not be die provider of the collateral) or by any Federal Reserve Bank or
a depository acceptable to the Trustee, (iu) subject to a perfectedfirstlien in the Trustee, and (iv)
free and clearfromall tlurd-party liens;
(8)
prime commercial paper of a United States corporation, finance company
or banking instimtion rated at least "P-1" by Moody's and at least "A-1" by S&P, if S&P then
maintains a rating on such paper;
(9)
shares of a diversified open-end management investment company (as
defmed in the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended) or shares in arcgidatedinvestment

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83099

company (as defined in Section 851(a) of the Code) that is (a) a money market fimd that has been
rated in one of the two highest rating categories by Moody's or S&P, or (b) a money market fimd
or accoimt of the Trustee or any state or Federal bank that is rated at least "P-1" or "Aa" by
Moody's, if Moody's then majptain^; a rating on such bank, and at least "A-l" or "AA" by S&P,
if S&P then maihtaim a rating on such bank, or whose one bank holding company parent is rated
at least "P-l" or "Aa" by Moody's, if Moody's then maintains a rating on such holding company,
and "A-I" or " AA" by S&P, if S&Pflienmaintain*: a rating on such holding company, or Uiat has
a combined capital and surplus of not less than $50,000,000;
(10)

Investment Agreements; and

(11) any other type of invescment in which the City directs the Trustee to invest,
provided that there is delivered to the Trastee a certificate of an Authorized City Representative
' stating that each of the'Rating Agencies then maintaining a rating on the Series has been informed
of the proposal to invest in such investment and each of such Rating Agencies has confiimed that
such investment wiU not adversely affect the rating then assigned by such Rating Agency to any
Series.
"Person" means an individual, a corporation (including a limited liabiUty
company), a partnership (including a limited partnership), an association, a trust or any other
entity or organization, including a government or political subdivision or an agency or
instrumentafity thereof. "Principal Office" means the principal office of the Issuing and Paying Agent for
purposes of performing its duties under this Indenture, "which principal office has been designated
in writing by the Issuing and Paying Agent to an Authorized City Representative.
"Proceeds Fund" means the fiind by that name established pursuant to Section
4.01(a) hereof.
"Project or Purpose" means any imdertaking or purpose listed or otherwise
• described in a Tax Certificate of the City, as firom time to time amended, as being financed or
refinanced in whole or in part with the proceeds of the Notes, including working capital and
capital projects.
"Rating Agency" means, as long as it is rating a Scries, (i) Standard & Poor's, (ii)
Fitch, (iii) Moody's, or (iv) any other nationallyrecognizedcredit rating agency specified in a
Supplemental Indenture.
"Rebate Fund" means any fimd required to be maintained by the City pursuant to
a Tax Certificate in connection with the issuance of the Notes or any Series of Notes for the
purpose of complying with the Code, and providing for the collection and holding for and
payment of amounts to the United States of America.

 83100

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Regisnar" means, with respect to any Series, each person or entity, if any,
designated by the City herein or in a Supplemental Indenture to keep a register of any Series and
of the transfer and exchange of the Notes comprising such Series, and its successors and assigns,
and any other person or entity which may at any time be substituted for it pursuant hereto.
"Reimbursement Agreement" means the Reimbursement Agreement, dated as of
1, 2002, pursuant to which the Letter of Credit is issued and any and all
modifications, alterations, amendments and supplements thereto, and any similar document
entered into with respect to the delivety of a substimte Letter of Credit.
"Representation Letter" means the Blanket Issuer Letter of Representations from
the City to DTC with respea to a Series.
"Responsible Officer" means an officer or assistam officer of the Trustee assigned
by the Trustee to administer this Indenture.
' "Series" means a series of Commercial Paper Notes "bsued pursuant to this
Indenture (e.g.. Series A Notes or Series B Notes); each series of Commercial Paper Notes, when
aggregated with aU Outstanding Commercial Paper Notes of other series, may be in an aggregate'
aiix>unt up to the fiiU Authorized Amountregardlessof when or whether issued.
"Series A Notes" means the City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002
Program Series A (Tax Exempt), issued imder this Indenture.
"Series A Project or Punx)se" means any undertaking or purpose listed or
otherwise described in a Tax Certificate of the City as being financed or refinanced in whole or
in part with the proceeds of Series A Notes, including working capital and capital projects.
"Series B Notes" means the City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002
Program Series B (Taxable), issued under and secured by this Indenture.
"Series B Projeg or Purpose" means any undertaking or purpose listed or
otherwise described in a certificate of the City, being financed orrefinancedin whole or in part
with the proceeds of the Series B Notes, including working capital and capital projects.
"Standard & Poor's" or "S & P" means Standard & Poor's, A Division of The
McGraw-Hifi Companies, Inc., a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State
of New York, and its successors and assigns, and, if such corporation shafi no longer perform the
functions of a securities rating agency, any other nationally recognized securities rating agency
designated by the City.
"State" means the State of Dlinois.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83101

"Stated Amount" means, with respect to a Letter of Credit, the amount a'vailable
to be drawn under the Letter of Credit for payment of principal of and interest on Commercial
Paper Notes issued hereunder.
"Supplemental Indenmre" rnMng any documem supplementing or amending this
Indenture and entered into as provided in Article XI of this Indenture.
"Tax Certificate" means a certificate, as amended from time to time, executed and
defivered on behalf of the City by a Designated Representative on the date upon which Series A
Notes are initially issued and delivered, or any functionally equivalent certincate subsequently
executed and defivered on behalf of die City by a Designated Representative widi respect to the
requfrements of Section 148 (or any successor section) of the Coderelatingto the Series A Notes.
"Termination Date" means the sixteenth (16*)" day prior to the Ejqjuation Date.
"Trustee" shall mean the entity named as such in the heading of this Indenmre until
a successor replaces it and, thereafter, means such successor.
"United States Obligations" means direct and general obligations of the United
States of America, or obfigations- that are unconditionally guaranteed as to principal and interest
by the United States of America, including, with respect only to direct and general obligations and
not to guaranteed obligations, evidences of ownership of proportionate interests in future interest
and/or principal payments of such obligations, provided that investments in such proportionate
interests must be limited to circumstances wherein (1) a bank or trust conq>any acts as custodian
and holds the underlying United States Obligations;-(2) the owner of the investment is'the real
party in interest and has the right to proceed direcUy and individually against the obligor of the
underlying United States Obligations; and (3) the underlying United States Obligations are held
in a special account separate from the custodian's general assets and are not available to satisfy
any claim of the custodian, any person claiming through the custodian or any person to whom the
custodian may be obligated.
Section 1.02. General Authorization. The appropriate officers, agents and
employees of the City are each hereby authorized and directed, for and in the name and on behalf
of the City, to take all actions and to make and execute any and aU certificates, requisitions;
agreements, notices, consents, warrants and other documents, which they, or any of them, deem
necessary or appropriate in order to consimomate the lawfid issuance, sale and defivery of one or
ihore Series of Commercial Paper Notes or Bank Notes in accordance with the provisions hereof.
Section 1.03. Interpretation. All references herein to "Articles," "Sections" and
other subdivisions are to the corresponding Articles, Sections or subdivisions of this Indenmre,
and the words "herein," "hereof," "hereunder" and other words of similar import refer to this
Indenture as a whole and not to any particular Article, Section or subdivision hereof.

 83102

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

ARTICLE n The Commercial Paper Notes^
Section '2.01. Authorized Amount of Commercial Paper Notes;. Terms and
Description of Commercial Paper Notes. No Commercial Paper Notes may be issued under the
provisions of this Indenture except in accordance with this Article.
(a)
The City hereby authorizes the issuance of its Notes to be designated (i)
"City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program Series A (Tax Exempt)", and
(ii) "City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program Series B (Taxable)",
subject to the provisions of this Section and as hereinafter provided.. The. Series A Notes
sbaU be issuedfromtime to time as provided herein tofinanceand refinance the cost of
Series A Projects or Purposes; and the Series B Notes shall be issuedfromtime to time
as provided herein to finance andrefinancethe cost of Series B Projects or Purposes. .
Proceeds of Commercial Paper Notes issued torefinanceother Commercial Paper Notes
may be used to pay or to reimburse the Bank for Advances used to pay principal or
interest due on such maturing Commercial Paper Notes; provided, however, that proceeds
of Scries A Notes may only be used to pay or toreimbursethe Bank for Advances used
to pay principal or interest due on Series A Notes, and proceeds of Series B Notes may
only be used to pay or toreimbursethe Bank for Advances used to pay principal or
interest due on Series B Notes. Such authorization specifically includes the audiorization
to issue andreissueCommercial Paper Notes for such purposes. The aggregate principal
amount of Commercial Paper Notes that may be Outstanding at any one time hereunder
shall not exceed the Authorized Amoimt. The aggregate amount of principal and interest
payable on the Outstanding Commercial Paper Notes shall not exceed the amount available
to be dra-wn under the Letter of Credit.
(b)
The Commercial Paper Notes shafi be dated the date of thefr respective
authentication and issuance; shafi be issued in bearer or registered form, as shall be
determined by the Designated Representative, sbaU be issued in denominations of
$100,000 and integral multiples of $1,000 in excess thereof. Commercial Paper Notes
shaU bear interestfromthefr respective dated dates, payable on thefr respective maturity
dales.
(c)
Series A Notes (i) shall bear interest payable at maturity at an annual rate
(calculated on the basis of a year consisting of 365/366 days and actual number of days
elapsed), which shall not in any event exceed die Maximum Rate, (ii) shall mature on a
Business Day not more than 270 days after thefr respective dated dates, but in no event
later than the related Termination Date, and (iii) shall be sold by the Dealer pursuant to
a Dealer Agreement at a price of not less than 100% of the principal amount thereof.
Series B Notes (i) shall bear interest payable at maturity at an annual rate (calculated on
the basis of a year consisting of 360 days and acmal number of days elapsed), which shall
not in any event exceed the Maximum Rate, (ii) shall mature on a Business Day not more
than 270 days after their dated dates, but in no event later than therelatedTermination

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83103

Date, and (iu) shall be sold by the Dealer pursuant to a Dealer-Agreement at a price of not
less than 100 % of the principal amount thereof. The stated interest rate or yield, maturity
date and other terms of the Commercial Paper Notes, as long as not inconsistent with the
. terms of this Indenture, shall be as set forth in the Issuance Requestrequiredby Section
2.06 hereof directing the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes.
(d)
maturity.

The Commercial Paper Notes shafi not be subject to redemption prior to

(e)
The Series A Notes and the Series B Notes shafi be numbered in such
manner as the Issuing and Paying Agent may deem appropriate.
(f)
Commercial Paper Notes which are issued tofinanceorrefinanceSeries A
Projects or Purposes shaU be designated as Series A Notes. Commercial Paper Notes
which are issued to finance orrefinanceSeries B Projects or Purposes shall be designated
as Series B Notes.
Section 2.02. Payment. The City .covenants to duly and punctually pay or cause
to be paid, the principal of and interest on each and evefy Commercial Paper Note when due. To
the extent Advances made by the Bank for the purpose of paying principal of and interest on
maturing Commercial Paper Notes, together with Note ProceedsfromCommercial Paper Notes
issued on such date, are insufficiem to pay principal of and interest on mamring Commercial
Paper Notes, the City wiU make aU payments of principal and interest directiy to the Issuing and
Paying Agent in immediately available funds on or prior to 1:15 p.m., Chicago, Ilfinois time, on
the date payinent is due on any Commercial Paper Note. To the extent principal of and/or interest
on Commercial Paper Notes is paid with an Advance, the Issuing and Paying Agent is authorized
and directed to use amounts paid by the City to reimburse the Bank. The principal of and the
interest on the Commercial Paper Notes shall be paid in Federal or.other immediately available
funds in such coin or currency of the United States of America as, at the respective times of
payment, is legal tender for the payment of public and private debts.
- The principal of and the interest on the Commercial Paper Notes shall be payable
at the Principal Office of the Issuing and Paying Agent on or before the close of business on any
Business Day upon which such Commercial Paper Notes have become due and payable, provided
that such Commercial Paper Notes are presented and surrendered on a timely basis. Upon
presentation of such a Commercial Paper Note to the Issuing and Paying Agent no later than 2:00
p.m. (Chicago,filinoistime) on a Business Day, paymem for such Commercial Paper Note shaU
be made by the Issuing and Paying Agent in immediately available fimds on such Business Day.
If a Commercial Paper Note is presented for payment after 2:00 p.m. (Chicago, lUinois time) on
a Business Day, payment therefor may be made by the Issuing and Paying Agent on the next
succeeding Business Day without the accrual of additional interest thereon.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the previous paragraph, in die event the Notes
are issued as a master note or master notes in book-entty form, they shall be payable at maturity

 83104

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

without physical presentation or surrender in accordance with the procedures of the Note
Depositoty.
Section 2.03. Execution and Authentication of Conunercial Paper Notes;
Limited Obfigation. The Notes, in certificated form, will be signed for the City as provided in
the CP Note Ordinance. In case any officer whose signature or whose facsimile signature shall
appear on any Notes sbaU cease to be such officer before the authentication of such Notes, such
signature or the facsinaile signature thereof shafi, nevertheless, be. vafid and sufficient for all
purposes the same as if he or she had remained in office until authentication. Also, if a person
signing a Note is the proper officer on the actual date of execution, the Note wiU be vafid even
if that person is not the proper officer on the nominal date of action and even though, at the date
of this Indenture, such person was not such officer.
The Issuing and Paying Agent is, by this Indenture, designated by the City as the
Authenticating Agent and Registrar for the Commercial P ^ r Notes in accordance with the terms
of Section 7.01 hereof. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contraty, the Issuing and Paying
Agent shafi not authenticate Commercial Paper Notes which mature later than the Termination
Date, and the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU not authenticate Commercial Paper Notes if an Event
of Default then exists of which it has actual knowledge or the Issiung and Paying Agent has
received a No-Issuance Notice from the Bank.
If any Commercial Paper Notes are to be issued in bearer form, the City shall from
time to time fiimish the Issuing and Paying Agent with an adequate supply of Commercial Paper
Notes, each of which shafi have attached such number of copies as the Issuing and Paying Agent
shafi reasonably specify. When any Commercial Paper Notes are delivered to the Issuing and
Paying Agent by the City, the Issuing and Paying Agent shafi execute and deUver to the City a
receipt therefor and sbaU hold such Commercial Paper Notes for the accoum of the City in
safekeeping in accordance with its customaty practice.
Section 2.04. Forms of Commercial Paper Notes and Authentication
Certificate. The definitive Series A Notes and Series B Notes. and the Certificate of
Authentication endorsed thereon shall be substantiaUy in the form set forthfr'ExhibitA attached
hereto and made a part hereof, with such appropriate variations, omissions and insertions as shall
be required or appropriate in order to accomplish the purposes of the transactions authorized by
this Indenture.
Section 2.05. Book-Entiy System. Unless an Authorized City Representative or
his designee determines that a Series of Commercial Paper Notes shall be issued in bearer form
orregisteredform other than in book-enny form, the Commercial Paper Notes shall initially be
issued in book-entry form as further provided in this Section.
(a)
The Notes issued pursuant to this Indenmre shall initially be issued in the
form of a separate single fully-registered Note for each Series of the Commercial Paper
Notes. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this Section, all of the Commercial Paper
Notes shall be registered in the name of the Nominee. Notwithstanding any provision to

 5/ 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83105

the confraty in Section 2.06, as long as the Notesremainin the form of one or more
master notes in book-entty form, the issuance of Notes pursuant to an Issuance Request
against payment therefor shaU not require the physical delivety of note certificates.
The Trustee, the Issuing and Paying Agent and the City may treat the registered
owner of each Note as the sole and exclusive owner thereof for the purposes of payment
of the principal of or interest on the Series of Notes to which such Note belongs, giving
any'notice permitted or requfred to be given to Noteholders hereunder,registeringthe
transfer of Notes, obtaining any consent or other action to be taken by Noteholders, and
for all other pmposes whatsoever, and neither the Trustee, the Issuing and Paying Agent
nor the City shafi be affected by any notice to the contraty.
Neither the Trustee, the Issuing and Paying Agent nor the City shall have any
responsibility or obligation to any participant in the Note Depositoty (a "Participant"), any
person claiming a beneficial ownership interest in the Commercial Paper Notes under or
through the Note Depository or any Participant, or any other person who is not shown on
the registration books as being a Noteholder, with respect to (i) the accuracy of any
records maintained by the Note Depositoty or any Participant; Qi) the payment by the Note
Depositoty or any Particq)ant of any amount in respect of the principal of or .interest on
the Commercial Paper Notes; (iii) the delivety of any notice which is permitted or required
to be given to Notdiolders hereunder; .(iv) any consent given or other action taken by the
Note Depositoty as Noteholder; or (v) any other purpose.
The Issuing and Paying Agent shall pay all principal of and interest on the
Commercial Paper Notes only to or upon the order of the Note Depositoty, and all such
payments shafi be valid and effective to fiiUy satisfy and discharge the City's obligations
with respect to the payment of the principal of and interest on the Commercial Paper Notes
to the extent of the sum or sums so paid; Upon delivety by the Note Depositoty to the
Issuing and Paying Agent of written notice to the effect that the Note Depositoty has
determined to substitute a new Nominee in place of the current Nominee, and subject to
the provisions herein withrespectto record dates, the word Nominee in this Article shaU
refer to such new Nominee.
(b)
In order to qualify each Series of Commercial Paper Notes for the Note
Depositoty's book-entty system, an Authorized City Representative is hereby authorized
to execute, seal, countersign and deliver on behalf of the City to the Note Depositoty for
each Series of Commercial Paper Notes, a Representation Letter from an Authorized City
Representative representing such matters as shall be necessary to so qualify the
Commercial Paper Notes. The execution and delivety of the Representation Letter shall
not in any way limit the provisions of this Section or in any other way impose upon the
City any obligation whatsoever with respect to persons having beneficial ownership
interests in the Commercial Paper Notes other than the Noteholders.
(c)
(1) The Note Depository may determine to discontinue providing its
services withrespectto a Series of Commercial Paper Notes at any time by giving

 83106

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCII^-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

reasonable written notice to an Authorized City Representative, the Trustee and the Issuing
and Paying Agent, and by discharging its responsibifities with respect thereto under
applicable law.
(2)
An Authorized City Representative, exercising the sole discretion
of the "City and without die consent of any. other person, may terminate, upon
provision of notice to the Note Dq)ositoty, the Trustee and the Issuing and Paying
Agent, the services of the Note Depositoty with respect to a Series of Commercial
Paper Notes if the Authorized City Representative determines, on behalf of the
City, that the continuation of the system of book-entty only transfers through the
Note Depositoty (or a successor securities depositoty) is not in the best interests
of the owners of a Series of Commercial Paper Notes or is burdensome to the City,
and shall terminate the services of the Note Depositoty "with respect to a Series of
Commercial Paper Notes upon receipt by the City, the Trustee and the Issuing and
Paying Agent of written noticefromthe Note Depositoty to the effect that the Note
Depositoty has received written notice from Direct Participants (as defined in the
Representation Letter) having interests, as shown in the records of the Note
Depositoty, in an aggregate principal amount of not less than fifty percent (50%)
of the aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding Commercial Paper Notes
to the effect that: (i) the Note Depositoty is unable to. discbarge its responsibilities
with respea to such Series of Commercial Paper Notes, or (ii) a continuation of
the reqiiiremem that all of the outstanding Notes be registered in the registration
books kept by the Issuing and Paying Agent in the name of the Nominee of the
Note Depositoty, is not in the best interest of the Noteholders of such Series of
Commercial Paper Notes.
(3)
Upon the termination of the services of the Note Depositoty with
respect to a Series of Commercial Paper Notes pursuant to subsection (c)(1) or
(c) (2) hereof, after which no substimte Note Depositoty wiUing to undertake the
fimctions of the Note Depositoty hereunder can be found or which, in the opinion
of the Cify, is wiUing and able to undertake such functions upon reasonable and
customaty terms, a Series of Commercial Paper Notes shall no longer be restricted
to being registered in theregisfrationbooks kept by the Note Registrar in the name
of the Nominee of the Note Depository. In such event, the City shall issue and the
Issuing aixi Paying Agent shaU transfer and exchange Note certificates as requested
by the Note Depositoty or Direct Participants of like principal amount. Series and
mawrity, in denominations of $100,000 and integral multiples of $1,000 in excess
thereof, to the identifiable Noteholder in replacement of such Noteholder's
beneficial interests in a Series of Commercial Paper Notes.
(d)
Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contraty, as long as the
Commercial Paper Notes of any Series arcregisteredin the name of the Nominee, all
payments with respea to principal of and interest on the Commercial Paper Notes of such
Series and all notices with respect to the Commercial Paper Notes of such Series shall be

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83107

made and given, respectively, as provided in the Representation Letter for the related
Series of Notes or as otherwise instructed by the Note Depositoty.
(e)
The initial Note Depositoty withrespectto each Series of Commercial
Paper Notes shall be DTC. The initial Nominee wifli respect to, each Series of
Commercial Paper Notes shall be CEDE & CO.. as nominee of DTC.
Section 2.06. Conditions Precedent to Delivery of Commercial Paper Notes.
(a)
Prior to the issuance of the first Commercial Paper Notes hereunder.
Commercial Paper Notes of each initial Series shafi be executed on behalf of the City and
defivered to the Issuing and Paying Agem, who shafi hold such Commercial Paper Notes
unaudienticated in safekeeping for the Cify. Subject to the provisions of Sections 2.01 and 2.05
hereof, and paragraphs (0 and (g) of this Section, at any time and firom time to time prior to the
Termination Date, Commercial Paper Notes shafi be manually authenticated and delivered by the
Issuing and Faying Agent for the consideration and in the manner hereinafter provided, but onfy
upon receipt by the Issuiiig aiid Paying Agent of an Issuance Request, no later than 11:30 a.m.
(Clucago, Illinois time) on the Business Day on which Commercial Paper Notes are to be
defivered, directing the Issuing and Paying Agent to authenticate the Commercial Paper Notes
referred to therein and to deliver the same to or upon the order of the Dealer. Each Issuance
Request shaU include: (i) the principal amount and date of each Commercial Paper Note then to
be defivered; (ii) the rate and amount of interest thereon; (iii) the maturity date thereof; and (iv)
the Series designation thereof. No later than 1:30 p.m. (Chicago, Illinois time) on each Business
Day on which the City proposes to issue Commercial Paper Notes, the Dealer shall report to the
City each transaction made with or arranged by it or shall notify the City and the Issuing and
Paying Agem of the difference, if any, between the amount of maturing Notes of a Series and the
amoum of Notes of a Series which the Dealer has arranged to sell or has agreed to purchase.
(b)
Upon recent of such Issuance Request (which may be transmitted by mail,
telecopy or other elecfronic communications method, or by telephone, promptiy confirmed in
writing by 1:00 p.m. Chicago, Dlinois time), die Issuing and Paying Agent shafi, by 2:00 p.m.
(Chicago, Illinoistime)on such day, conqilete each Series A Note and each Series B Note then
to be defivered as to amount, date, maturity date, interest rate and interest amount specified in
such Issuance Request, and deliver each such Commercial Paper Note to or upon the order of the
Dealer upon receipt of payment therefor; provided, however, that no such Commercial Paper
Notes shall be delivered by the Issuing and Paying Agent if such delivety would cause (a) the sum
of the aggregate principal amount of Commercial Paper Notes Outstanding to exceed the
Authorized Amount, or (b) the aggregate principal amount of Commercial Paper Notes described
in each Issuance Request (together with the interest thereon), plus the aggregate principal amount
of all Commercial Paper Notes then Outstanding (together with the interest thereon), less the
aggregate principal amount of any of the then Outstanding Commercial Paper Notes to be retfred
concurrentiy with the issuance of the Commercial Paper Notes described in the Issuance Request
(including interest thereon), to exceed the amount available to be drawn under the Letter of
Credit. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contraty, no such Commercial Paper Notes
of any Scries shall be delivered by the Issuing and Paying Agent if (A) it shall have received

 83108

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

notice from an Authorized City Representative directing the Issuing and Paying Agent to cease
authenticating and delivering Commercial Paper Notes until such time as such direction is
withdrawn by similar noti'ce, (B) it shafi have actual knowledge that an Event of Default shall have
occurred and be continuing, (C) it shall have received notice from Bond Counsel that its opinion
regarding the exclusion of interest on the Notes of such issue or Series (issued as tax-exempt
Notes) from gross income for Federal income tax purposes of the holders thereof is being
withdrawn, (D) the maturity date of such Commercial Paper Notes would extend beyond the
related Termination Date, or (E) the Trustee and the Issuing and Paying Agent shall have received
a No-Issuance Notice from the Bank. If an Issuance Request is received after 11:30 a.m.
(Chicago, Illinois time) on a given day, the Issuing and Paying Agent shall not be obligated to
deliver the requested Commercial. Paper Notes until the next succeeding Business Day.
(c)
The City shafi, upon-a change in the identity of any Designated
Representative, provide a Certificate for each new Designated Representative to the Issuing and
Paying Agent.
(d)
A copy of eacb Commercial Paper Note authenticated in bearer form by the
Issuing and Paying Agent shafi be promptiy transnutted by facsimile and thereafter maUed by first
class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the Cify and the Trustee by the Issuing and Paying
Agent. The Issuing and Ikying Agent shaU fiimish the Cify with such additional information with
respea to die cartying out of its duties hereunder as the Cifyfromtime to time shafi reasonably
request.
(e)
In addition to the Issuance Request described above in this Section, and as
a fiirther condition to the issuance of any Commercial Paper Notes, the Designated Representative
shafi certify to or instraa. for and on behalf of the Cify, the Issuing and Paying Agent that, as of
the date of deUvety of such Commercial Paper Notes, (i) the Letter of Credit is m fiiU force and
effea; (ii) after the issuance of such Commercial Paper Notes and the application of the proceeds
thereof, the sum of the aggregate principal amount of Commennal P ^ r Notes Outstanding will
not exceed the Authorized Amount; (in) the sum of the aggregate principal amount of Commercial
Paper Notes then Outstanding (together with the interest thereon) does not exceed the amount
available to be drawn under the Letter of Credit; (iv) unless interest on the Commercial Paper
Notes to be issued is to be taxable, to the City's knowledge there has been no change in the facts,
estimates, circumstances and representations of the City set forth or made (as the case may be)
.in the Tax Certificate (applicable to such Commercial Paj>er Notes); (v) the terms of the
Commercial Paper Notes do not exceed 270 days and the maturify dates of such Commercial
Paper Notes set forth in the Issuance Request do not extend beyond therelatedTermination Date;
(vi) the City has not been notified by Bond Counsel that its opinion with respect to the validity
of the Commercial Paper Notes and, unless interest on the Notes is to be taxable, the tax treatment
of the interest thereon has been revised or withdrawn or, if any such revision or withdrawal has
occurred, therevisedopinion or a substitute opinion acceptable to the Dealer has been delivered;
(vii) to the actual knowledge of the City, no Event of Default has occurred and is then continuing;
(viii) the Note Proceeds shall be deposited into the Commercial Paper Bank Payment Account or
into the Construction Fund pursuant to Section 4.02 hereof in the amounts specified by the

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83109

Designated Representative; and (ix) all of the conditions precedent to the issuance of such
Commercial Paper Notes set forth in this Section of this Indenture have been satisfied.
The delivety of any Issuance Request to the Issuing and Paying Agent by a
Designated Representative in the manner provided in this Section shall constimte the certification
and representation of the City as of the date of such Issuance Request as to the matters set forth .
in the immediately preceding paragraph.
(f)
Any Issuance Request made by telephone pursuant to this Section may be
recorded by the Issuing and Paying Agent and shall be confirmed promptiy in' writing by a
Designated Representative; provided, however, that any confUa between any recorded oral
Issuance Request and the "written confirmation thereof, shall not affect the vafidity of any recorded
oral Issuance Request received by the Issuing and Paying Agent as provided herein. If the Issumg
aiKl Paying Agent does not record an oral Issuance Request, and a conflict exists between such
oral Issuance Request and the written confirmation thereof, the terms of the wrinen confirmation
shall control.
(g)
Prior to the initial defivety of Commercial Paper Notes under this Indenture
and as a condition to such initial issuance, the Trustee and the City shafi be notifi^ by the Issuing
and jPaying Agent that the Issuing and Paying Agent has receivol:
(1)

a fiilly executed counterpart of the Reimbursernent Agreement;

(2)

the executed Letter of Credit;

(3)
the opinions of the United States counsel and foreign counsel to the Bank,
addressed to the City, the Issuing and Paying Agent and the Trustee, to the effect that the
Letter of Credit and the Reimbursement Agreement are valid and legally binding
obligiations of the Bank, enforceable in accordance with thefr terms; and
(4)

a fiiUy executed coimterpart of the Dealer Agreement.

Section 2.07. Ownership of Commercial Paper Notes. The City and the Issuing
and Paying Agent may deem and treat the bearer of Notes in bearer form or theregistered"owner
of Notes inregisteredform as the absolute owner thereof (whether or not such Commercial Paper
Note shafi be overdue and notwithstanding any notation of ownership or other writing thereon
made by anyone other than the Issuing and Paying Agent) for the purpose of receiving payment
thereof or on account thereof and for all other purposes, and neither the City nor the Issuing and
Paying Agem shall be affected by any notice to the contraty.
Section 2.08. Mutilated, Lost, Stolen or Desfroyed Notes. In the event any
Commercial Paper Note is mutilated or defaced but identifiable by number and description, the
City shall execute and the Authenticating Agent shall authenticate and deliver a new Note of like
Series, date, maturity aixl denomination as such Note, upon surrender thereof to the Issuing and
Paying Agent; provided thai there shall first beftimishedto the Issuing and Paying Agent clear

 83110

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

and unequivocal proof satisfactoty to the Issuing and Paying Agent that the Note is mutilated or
defaced to such an extent as to impafr its value to the Noteholder. The Noteholder shafi
accompany the above with a deposit of money required by the Issuing and Paying Agent for the
cost of preparing the substitute Note and all other expenses connected with the issuance of such
substimte. The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU then cause proper record, to be made of the
cancellation of the original, and thereafter the substitute shafi have the validity of the original.
(a)
In die event any Note is lost, stolen or destroyed, the City may execute and
die Audienticating Agem may authenticate and defiver a new Note of like Series, date,
maturity and denomination as.that Note lost, stolen or desfroyed, provided that there shafi
first be furnished to the Issuing and Paying Agent evidence of such loss, theft or
destruction satisfactoty to the Issuing and Paying Agent, together with indemnity
satisfactoty to it and the City.
(b)
Except as limited by any Supplemental Indenture, the Issuing and Paying
Agent may charge the holder of any such Note aU governmental charges and transfer
taxes, if any, and its reasonable fees and e;q>enses in this coimection. AU substitute Notes
issued and authenticated pursuant to this Section shaU be- issued as a substimte and
numbered, as determined by the Issuing and Paying Agem. In the event any such Note
has matured or been called for redemption, instead of issuing a substimte Note, the Issuing
and Paying Agent may pay the same at its maturity or redemption without surrender
thereof upon receipt of indenmity satisfaaoty to it and the City.
Section 2.09. Transfer or Exchange of Notes. Upon surrender for transfer of
any Note at the designated corporate trust office of the Registrar, the Registrar shafi deliver in the
name of the transferee orfransfereesa new fidly authenticated andregisteredNote or Notes of
authorized denominations of the same Series, and maturity for the same aggregate principal
amount.
Noteholders may present Notes at the designated corporate trust office of the
Registrar for exchange for Notes of different authorized denominations and, upon such
presentation, the Registrar shall deliver to the Noteholder a new fiiUy authenticated and registered
Note or Notes of the same Series and maturity for the same aggregate principal amount.
All Notes presented for transfer or exchange shafi be accompanied by a written
instrtmient or inscrumisnts of transfer or authorization for exchange, in form and with guaranty of
signature satisfactoty to the Registrar, duly executed by the Noteholder or by his duly authorized
attorney.
Except as limited by any Supplemental Indenture, the Registrar also may require
payment from the Noteholder of a sum sufficient to cover any tax, or other governmental fee or
charge that may be imposed in relation thereto. Such taxes, fees and charges shall be paid before
any such new Note shafi be delivered.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83111

Supplemental Indentures may designate certain limited periods during which Notes
wiU not be exchanged or transferred.
Notes delivered upon any exchange or transfer as provided herein, or as provided
in Section 2.08 hereof, shafi be vafid limited obfigations of the City, evidencing the same debt as
the Note or Notes surrendered, shafi be secured by this Indenture and shall be entided to aU of
the security and benefits hereof to the same extent as the Note or Notes surrendered.
Section 2.10. Destruction of Notes. 'Whenever any Notes shafi be delivered to
the Issuing and Paying Agent for canceUation pursuant to this Indenture, upon payment of the
principal amount and interest represented thereby or for replacement pursuant to Section 2.08 or
exchange or transfer pursuant to Section 2.09. such Note shafi be cancelled and destroyed by the
Issuing and Paying Agent or the Registrar and counterparts of a certificate of destruction
evidencing such destruction shall be furnished by the Issuing and Paying Agent to the City.
- • Section 2.11. Tanporaiy Notes. Pending preparation of definitive Notes of any
Series, the City may execute and the T<t<aiing and Payii^ Agent shall authenticate and defiver, in
fieu of definitive Notes and subject to the same limitations and conditions, interim receipts,
certificates or temporaty Notes which shafi be exchanged for the Notes.
If temporaty Notes shafi be issued, the City shafi cause the definitive Notes to be
prepared and to be executed, authenticated and defivered to the Issuing and Paying Agent, and the
Issumg and Paying Agent, upon presentation to it of any temporaty Note, shafi cancel the same
and defiver in exchange therefor at the place designated by the holder, without charge to the
holder thereof, definitive Notes of an equal aggregate priiKipal amoimt of the same Series issue
date, maturity and bearing interest the same as the temporaty Notes surrendered. Until so
exchanged, the temporaty Notes sbaU in afi respects be entided to the same benefit and security
of this Indenture as the definitive Notes to be issued and authenticated hereunder.
Section 2.12. Nonpresentment of Notes. In the event any Note shall not be
presented for payment when the principal thereof becomes due, if moneys sufficient to pay such
Note shall have been deposited with the Trustee for the benefit of the owner thereof, all liability
of the City to the o"wner thereof for the payment of such Note shall forthwith cease, terminate and
be completely discharged, and thereupon it shafi be the duty of the Trustee to hold such moneys,
without liability to the City, any owner of any Note or any other person for interest thereon, for
the benefit of the owner of such Note, who shafi thereafter be restricted exclusively to such
moneys, for any claim of whatever nature on his or her part under this Indenture or on, or with
respect to, said Note.
Any moneys so deposited with and held by the Trustee and not so applied to the
payment of Notes within two (2) years after the date on which the same shall have become due
shall be paid by the Trustee to the City, free from the trusts created by this Indenmre. Thereafter,
the owners of the Notes shall be entided to look only to the City for payment, and then only to
the extent of the amount so repaid by the Trustee. The City shall apply the sums paid to it
pursuant to this Section in accordance with appbcable law. but shall not be liable for any interest

 83112

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

on such sums paid to it pursuant to this Section and shall not be regarded as a trustee of such
money.

AR'nCLEIH'
Security*
Section 3.01. Limited Tax General Obligations. The Commercial Paper Notes
and the Bank Notes shaU be direa and general obfigations of the Cify, and shaU be seamed by a
pledge of, fien on and security interest in aU amounts in the funds and accounts created or'
mainoined pursuant to this Indenture, the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement or any Tax
Certificate (except the Rebate Fund), including earnings on such amounts, subject only to die
provisions of this Indenture and the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement permitting the
application thereof for the purposes and on the terms and conditions set forth herein and therein.
The obligation of the City to make payments of the principal of, [the redenq>tion
premium of,] and the interest on the Commercial Pqier Notes and the Bank Notes shafi be payable
from any funds legally available for such purpose. The City covenants and agrees to take aU
necessaty action to aimuaUy appropriate fiuuls in a timely manner so as to provide for the making
of afi such payments "with respea to the Commercial Paper Notes and the Bank Notes; provided
however, that in no event shall the City be obligated to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax
in addition to other City taxes or any special ad valorem or other tax unlimited as to rate or
amount to pay such principal, [redemption premium] or interest.
. Section 3.02. Punctual Payment. The City covenants that it wiU provide for the
punctual payment of the principal of and interest on each Commercial Paper Note and each Bank
Note as the same shall become due and payable in accordance with its terms.

ARTICLE rV^
Appfication of Commercial Paper Note Proceeds Section 4.01. Creation of Funds and Accoimts. (a) The Proceeds Fund is
hereby created as a separate fiind and shafi be held, maintained and accounted for by the Trustee,
and the moneys in the Proceeds Fund shall be used for the purposes for which the Notes of any
Series are authorized to be issued, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal of and
interest on the Notes, Costs of Issuance and administrative costs of the commercial paper
program. If so specified in a Tax Certificate, the City shall establish one or more accounts and
subaccounts within the Proceeds Fund. The Proceeds Fund is designated as the "Commercial
Paper Proceeds Fund" and herein called the "Proceeds Fund."
(b)
The Debt Service Fund is hereby created as a separate trust fund and shall
be held by the Issuing and Paying Agent. The City may dfrect the Issuing and Paying Agent to

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83113

establish and inaintain a separate account or accounts in the Debt Service Fund with respea to any
or afi of the Notes of one or more Series. Moneys in the Debt Service Fund and the accounts
therein shafi be held in trust separate and apartfromall other moneys, fiinds and accounts held
by the Issuing and Paying Agent, and shall be applied to pay the principal of and interest oh
Outstanding Notes in the amounts, at the times and in the ihanner set forth herein and in any
Supplemental Indenture. ..Moneys in the accounts in the Debt Service Fund may also be applied
to pay orreimbursethe Bank for unreimbursed Advances to the extent provided herein or in any
Supplemental Indenmre. The following accounts are hereby established within the Debt Service
Fund, and the Issuing and Paying Agent shafi hold such accounts in trust in accordance.herewith
and with the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreemeni:
(1)
"Commercial Paper Debt Service Account," aiid herein caUed the fDebt
Service Account;"
(2)
three "Commercial Paper Bank Payment Accounts," and herein called the
"Bank Payment Accounts" designated as

(3)
Account."

(i)

the "Series A Bank Payment Account," and

(u)

the "Series B Bank Payment Account," and

"Bank Note Debt Service Account," and herein cafied the "Bank Note

SeOion 4.02. Deposit of Proceeds of Conunercial Paper Notes. Immediately
upon receipt thereof, the Issuing and Paying Agent shafi, if instractcd by an Authorized City
Representative, first dqposit the proceeds of the sale of Commercial Paper Notes into the
applicable Commercial Paper Bank Payment Account in an amount equal to the unreimbursed
Advances made by the Bank to pay principal of or interest on Commercial Paper Notes of such
Series. Proceeds so deposited shafi be held separate and apartfromaU other fimds and accounts
and shafi not commingled with any other moneys. The remaining proceeds shafi be transferred
to the Trustee for deposit in the Proceeds Fund.
Section 4.03. Application of Moneys in the Proceeds Fund, (a) Moneys in the
Proceeds Fimd attributable to each Series shall be appfied to the payment of the costs of the
Project or Purpose for such Series, Costs of Issuance of such Series and administrative costs of
the commercial paper program. An Authorized City Representative mayfromtime to time amend
the list of Projects or Purposes in a Tax Certificate; provided, however, that the Authorized City
Representative shall not amend the list of Projects or Purposes in such a way as to change the tax
stanis of the related Series of Commercial Paper Notes. An Authorized City Representative is
hereby authorized to execute one or more supplemental Tax Certificates in connection with any
Series of Notes.
(b)
The Trustee shafi make payments or disbursements from the Proceeds Fund
upon receipt from the City of a written requisition, in substantially the form attached aslExhibit

 83114

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

C to this Indenture, executed by an Authorized City Representative, which requisition shafi state,
withrespectto each amount requested thereby, (i) the account, if any, within the Proceeds Fund
frx>m which such amount is to be paid, (u) the number of the requisition from such account, (iii)
the anioimt to be paid, the name of the Person (which may include payment to the City) to which
the payment is to be made and the manner in which the payment is to made, (iv) that the amount
to be paid represents a cost of a qualifying Projea or Purpose as described in a Tax Certificate
of tihie City, or isrelatedto a Series B Project, as appficable, and (v) imless related to a Series B
Project, that the amounts requisitioned wiU be expended only in accordance with and subjea to
the limitations set forth in the applicable Tax Certificate.
(c)
Moneys held in the Proceeds Fund shafi be invested andreinvestedby the'
Trustee in Permitted Investments as directed by an Authorized City Representative.
(d)
Any amountsremainingin the Proceeds Account for a Series of Notes at
the completion of the Project or Purpose for such Series shafi be transferred to therelatedBank
Payment Account and used to repay Advances to the extent that a portion of such Advances is
aUocable to the interest on the Notes of such Series. .
Section 4.04. Deposits Into and Uses of.the Commercial Paper Debt Serrice
Account and the Bank Payment Accoimt. (a) At or before 3:15 p.m., Chicago, Dlinois time,
on the maturity date of each Note, the City may deposit or cause to be deposited, from moneys
of the City legaUy available therefor, including, bm not limited to. Note Proceeds, an amount
sufficient, together with other avafiable moneys, if any, with the Issuing and Paying Agent for
deposit imo therelatedSeries Bank Payment Account, toreimbursethe Bank in an amount equal
to the principal of and interest due on afi Notes maturing on such maturity date; provided that the
City shafi be required to deposit into a segregated account (hereinafter designated the "ShortfaU
Account") such amoimts from such source, at such time, to the extent Advances are not made
under the Letter of Credit to pay the principal of and interest on the Notes TT^amring on such date.
The "ShortfaU Account" is hereby created as a separate trust fimd and shafi be held.by the Trustee
separate and apart from afi other moneys, funds and accounts held by the. Issiung and Paying
Agent. Amounts deposited in.the Shortfall Account, if any, shafi be applied to pay any deficiency
in Advances to pay the fuU amount of the principal of and interest on all Notes maturing on such
maturity date. The Issuing and Paying Agent shafi notify the City on or before 4:00 p.m.,
Chicago, Dlinois time, on the Business Day prior to such maturity date, of the total amoum due
on such mamrity date. Not later than 3:00 p.m., Chicago. Illinois time, on the maturity date of
each Note, either the Issuing and Paying Agent or a Designated Representative shall notify the
Bank if the City has not deposited or caused to be dqposited, with the Issuing and Paying Agent
for deposit into therelatedSeries Bank Payment Account, an amount equal to the Advance drawn
on such date.
(b)
Each Advance received by the Issuing and Paying Agent as a result of a
drawing under the Letter of Credit to pay the principal of and interest on maturing Notes shall be
deposited into the Debt Service Account, and shall be used to pay the principal of and interest on
such maturing Notes upon the proper presentment thereof. Each Advance so deposited shall be
held separate and apart from afi other fimds, accounts and subaccounts, and shall not commingled

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83115

with any other moneys. At or before 2:00 p.m., Chicago, Dlinois time, on each maturity date,
the Issuing and Paying Agent shall notify the Cify whether or not the Issuing and Paying Agent
has received a sufficient Advance or Advances to pay aU such maturing principal and interest.
(c)
Amounts deposited into the Series A Bank Payment Account shafi be used,
on each day that an Advance withrespectto Series A Notes is recei"ved by the Issuing and Paying
Agent and deposited into the Series A Debt Service Account, by the Issuing and Paying Agent to
reimburse the Bank for the amount of such Advance; provided, however, that, if, on any maturity
date of the Series A Notes, the Advances paid under the Letter of Credit with respea to Series
A Notes are not sufficient to pay the fiiU amount of die principal of and interest due on such Series
A Notes on such date, amounts in the Series A Bank Payment Account shafi be used to make the
balance of such payment.
(d)
Amounts deposited into the Series B Baiik Payment Account shafi be used,
on each day that an Advance with respect to Series B Notes is received by the Issuing and Paying
Agent and deposited into the Series B Debt Service Account, by the Issuing and Paying Agent to
reimburse the Bank for the amount of such Advance: provided, however, that, if, on any maturity
date of the Series B Notes, the Advances paid under the Letter of Credit withrespeato Series B
Notes are not sufficient to pay the fiill amount of the principal of and interest due on such Series
B Notes on such date, amounts in the Series B Bank Payment Account shall be used to make the
balance of such payment.
(e)
Moneys in the Debt Service Account shafi not be invested. Moneys in any
Bank Payment Account shafi be invested andreinvestedby the Issuing and Paying Agent in
Permitted Investments as dfrected by an Authorized City Representative, or,- in the absence of
such dfrection, ia Permitted Investments described in subparagraph (9) of the definition thereof.
Section 4.05. Drawings Under the Letter of Credit. On or before each maturity
date for any Commercial Paper Note, the Issuing and Paying Agent shafi present all required
drawing certificates and accompanying documentation, if required, to the Bank and demand
payment be made under the Letter of Credit on such maturity date at such time and in such
amount not in excess of the Stated Amount so as to be timely and sufficient to pay the entire
amount of principal and interest 'becoming due on afi Commercial Paper Notes on such date. No
drawings under the Letter of Credit shall be used to pay principal of and interest due on Bank
Notes or any Notes which are owned or held by or for the account of the City. Without limiting
any other liabUity of the Issuing and Paying Agent for this or any other action, faUure of the
Issuing and Paying Agent to perfoim the duties and obligations set forth in this covenant shafi
constitute negUgence on its part.

 83116

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

ARTICLE
The Bank Notes >
Section 5.01. Authorization and Terms of Bank Notes, (a) The City hereby
authorizes the issuance of one or more of its Bank Notes, subject to the provisions of this Article.
Each Bank Note shafi be issued to the Bank and designated the "City of Chicago Bank Note (2002
Commercial Paper Program) (insert name of Bank)." The initial Bank Note shall be issued by
die City on die Closing Date in order to evidence the obligations of the City toreimbursethe Bank
for drawings under the Letter of Credit, including unreimbursed Advances, together with Interest
thereon at the Bank Rate. Subsequent Bank Notes, substantiaUy in the form of Exhibit B, may
be issued upon delivety of a substimte Letter of Credit as provided in Article X hereol.
(b)
The Bank Notes shafi be dated the date of issuance thereof; shaU be issued
inregisteredform only; shaU be issued in any denomination; and shafi bear interest at the Bank
Rate (calculated on the basis of a year consisting of 365/366 days and actual number of days
elapsed); provided, howeyer, that the interest rate on the Bank Notes shafi never exceed eighteen
percent (18%) per annum, subjea to the appficable provisions of the Reimbursement Agreement.
Bank Notes shafi bear interest from thefr respective dates, payable in accordance with the
Reimbursement Agreement. Principal of Bank Notes shafi be payable in accordance with the
Reimbursement Agreement. The final mabirity of the Bank Notes shafi be no later than such date
as may be provided for in the Reimbursement Agreement
(c)
The maturity date and other terms of each Bank Note, as long as not
inconsistent with the terms of this Indenture, shafi be as set forth in the certificate of an
Authorized City Representative directing the issuance of such Bank Note.
(d)
Each Bank Note shafi be subject to optional .prepayment prior to maturity
in accordance \^th, and upon notice as provided by, the Reimbursement Agreement.
Section 5.02. Nature of Obligations. The Bank Notes are dfrect and general
obligations of the City as described in Section 3.01 hereof.
Section 5.03. Form of Baidt Notes. The definitive Bank Notes shall be
substantially in the form set forth in Exhibit B attached hereto and made a part hereof, with such
appropriate variations, omissions and insertions as shafi be necessaty or appropriate in order to
accomplish the purpose of this Indenture. The Bank Notes may have endorsed thereon such
legends or text as may be necessaty or appropriate to conform to any applicable rules and
regulations of any governmental authority or any usage or requirement of law or regulation with
respect thereto.
Section 5.04. No Transfer of Bank Notes. To the extent permined by applicable
law, the Bank Notes shall be non-negotiable and non-transferable.

 5 / 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83117

Section 5.05. Deposits in Bank Note Account. On the Business Day before each
Bank Note Payinent Date, an Authorized City Representative shaU allocate and transfer to the
Issuing and Paying Agent for deposit in the Bank Note Account amounts from available moneys,
as follows:
. (a).. . .an amount equal to the aggregate amount of interest due and payable on
such Bank Note Payment Date on aU Bank Notes outstanding; and
(b)
an amount equal to the aggregate principal amount due and payable on such
Bank Note Payment Date on the outstanding Bank Notes;
Amounts in the Bank Note Account shall be invested by the Issuing and Paying
Agent in Permitted Investments as directed in writing by an Authorized City Representative, or,
in the absence of directionfroman Authorized City Representative, the Issuing and Paying Agent
shall selea Permitted Investments desoibed in subparagraph (9) of the definition thereof. The
Bank Notes shall not be payable from the proceeds of the Letter of Credit drawing.

ARTICLE V I .

-

Covenants Section 6.01. Tax Covenants. In order to maintain the exclusion from gross
income of the interest on the Series A Notes for Federal income tax purposes, the City covenants
to comply with each appficable requirement of Section 103 and Sections 141 through 150 of the
Code, and fiirther agrees to comply with the covenants contained in, and the instructions given
pursuant to, each Tax Certificate, which by thisreferenceis incorporated herein, as a source of
guidance for compliance with such provisions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Indenture or any Supplemental
Indenture to the contrary, upon the City's failure to observe, or refusal to comply with the
foregoing covenant, no person other than the holders of any Series A Notes sbaU be entided to
exercise any right or reinedy provided to the holders of any Series A Notes under this Indenture
or any Supplemental Indenture on the basis of the City's failure to observe, or refiisal to comply,
with such covenant.
Section 6.02. Taxable Notes. Notwithstanding anything in this Indenture to the
contraty, in the event an Authorized City Representative designates a Series as obfigations not
described in Section 103(a) of the Code, including the Series B Notes issued hereunder, the
provisions of Section 6.01 shall not apply to such Series.
Section 6.03. Letter of Credit. The City hereby covenants to maintain in effea
a Letter of Credit meeting the requirements hereof at all times thai Commercial Paper Notes are
Outstanding hereunder.

 83118

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

ARTICLE V n .
Issuing and Paying Agent; Dealer^
Section 7.01. Appointment of Issuing add Paying Agent. The City hereby
appomts;
;
, as Issuing and Paymg Agent, Authenticating Agent
and Registrar, and agrees that, at or prior to the time of issuance of the initial Commercial Paper
Notes, die City wifi enter into die Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement and wiU at afi times, prior
to the Termination Date, rnaintain in effect an Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement, pursuant to
which the Issiung and Paying Agent wifi agree to hold fiinds and fiilfifi the duties' and obfigations
of the Issuing and Paying Agent, as provided for in this Indenture.
The Issuing and Paying Agent, Authenticati^ Agent, and Registrar shafi (i)
designate to the Trustee its principal office, and (iO signify its acceptance of the duties and
obligations imposed upon it hereunder and under any Supplemental Indenture by "written
instrument of acceptance defivered to the City and the Trustee.
Section 7.02. Reports and Records. The Issuing and Paying Agent shafi at afi
times keep or cause to be kept proper records in which conqilete and accurate entries shaU be
made of all transactions made by itrelatingto the proceeds of the Notes and any fiinds and
accounts established and maintained by the Issuing and Paying Agent pursuant to this Indenture
and any Supplemental Indenture. Such records shaU be available for inspection by the City on
each Business Day upon reasonable notice during reasonable business hours, arid by any Owner
or its agent or representative didy authorized in writing at reasonable hours and under reasonable
circumstances. The Issuing and Paying Agent shall not be required to maintain records with
respect to transactions made by the Trustee or an Audiorized City Representative, or widi respect
to fiinds established and maiittained by the Trustee.
(a)
The Issuing and Paying Agent shall provide to the Authorized City
Representative each month a report of the amounts deposited in each fiind and account held
by it under this Indenture, and the amount disbursedfromsuch fiinds and accounts, the
earnings thereon, the ending balance in each of such fiinds and accounts, the investments
in each such fimd and account, and the yield on each investment calculated in accordance
widi the directions of an Authorized City Representative. Such report shall also include
such informationregardingthe issuance of Commercial Paper Notes during the subject
month as the City shall request.
(b)
The Issuing and Paying Agent shall maintain such books, records and
accounts as may be necessaty to evidence the obligations of the City resultingfromthe
Commercial Paper Notes, the principal amounts owing thereunder, the maturity schedule
therefor, the respective rates of interest thereon, and the principal and interest paid from
time to time thereunder. As long as the Commercial Paper Notes are in book-entty form,
in any legal action or proceeding with respect to a master note, the entries made in such
books, records or accoimts shall be, absent manifest error, conclusive evidence of the
existence and the amounts of the obligations of the City therein recorded.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83119

Section 7.03. Resignati'onandRepIacementof Issuing and Paying Agent. The
Issuing and Paying Agent may at any time resign and be discharged of the duties and obfigations
aeaied by this Indenture by giving at least 60 days' written notice to the Bank, the Trustee and
die City. The Issuing and Paying Agent may be removed, with the written consent of the Bank,
which consent shafi not be unreasonably withheld, at any time by an instrument signed by an
Authorized City Representative and filed with the Issuing and Paying Agem, the Bank and the
Trustee. No such resignation or removal shaU become effective, however, until a successor
Issuing and Paying Agent has been selected and assumed the duties of the Issuing and Paying
Agent hereunder and the Letter of Credit has been transferred to the successor Issuing and Paying
Agent in accordance with its terms.
In the event of the resignation orremovalof the Issuing and Paying Agent, the
Issuing and Paying Agem shafi pay over, assign and deliver any moneys held by it in such
capacity to its successor. The Issuing and Paying Agent shafi make anyrepresentationsand
warranties to the City as may be reasonably requested by the City in connection with any such
assignment.
The Issuing and Paying Agent shafi, at afi times, be a bank or trust con^any having
an office in Chicago, Illinois, and shafi at aU times be a corporation or a national banking
association organized and doing business under the laws of the United States of America or of any
state with a combined capital and surplus of at least $50,000,000 and authorized under such la'ws
to exercise corporate trust powers and be subjea to supervision or examination by Federal or state
authority. If such corporation or national banking association publishes reports of condition at
least annuaUy pursuant to law or the requirements of such authority, then for the purposes of this
Section, the combined capital and surplus of such corporation or national banking association shafi
be deemed to be its combined capital and surplus as set forth in its most recent report of condition
so published.
Any corporation or national banking association into which any Issuing and Paying
Agent may be.merged or convened or "with which it may be. consolidated, or any corporation or
national banking association resulting from any merger, consolidation or conversion to which any
Issuing and Paying Agent shafi be a party, or any corporation or national banking association
succeeding to the corporate trust business of any Issuing and Paymg Agent shafi be the successor
of the Issuing and Paying Agent if such successor corporation or national banking association is
othftrvvise eligible under this Section, without the execution or filii^ of any documem or further
aa On the part of the Issuing and Paying Agent or such successor corporation or national banking
association.
Section 7.04. Dealer. The City hereby appoints
^ Dealer, and agrees that, at or prior to the time of issuance of the initial Commercial Paper
Notes, the City will enter into a Dealer Agreement with Dealer. The City covenants that at all
tunes prior to the Termination Date, it will maintain in effect one or more Dealer Agreements,
pursuant to which each Dealer wUl agree to fidfUl the duties and obfigations of the Dealer as set
forth in this Indenmre and its Dealer Agreement.

 83120

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

ARTICLE V n i i
TrusteeSection 8.01^ Acceptance of Trusts. The Trustee hereby accepts and agrees to
execute the trusts specificaUy Imposed upon it by this Indenmre, but only upon the additional
terms set forth in this Article, to afi of which the City agrees and the respective holders agree by
thefr acceptance of defivety of aiiy of the Notes.
Section 8.02. Duties ofTrustee. (a) If an Event of Defeult has occurred and is
cootuiuing, the Trustee shall exercise itsrightsand powers and use the same degree of care and
skifi in thefr exercise as a prudent person would exercise or use under the circumstances in the
condua of such person's own affairs.
(b)
The Trustee shafi perform the duties set forth in this Indenture; no implied
duties or obligations shafi be read into this Indenture against the Trustee.
(c)
Except during the continuance of an Evem of Default, in the-absence of any
negligence on its part or any knowledge to the contraty, the Trustee may conclusivelyrely,as to
the truth of the statements and the correctness of the opinions expressed, upon certificates or
opinions fiimished to the Trustee and conforming to the requirements of this Indenture. The
Trustee shall examine the certiticates and opinions, however, to determine whether they conform
to the requirements of this Indenture.
(d)
The Trustee may not berelievedfromliability for its own negligent action,
its own negfigent failure to aa or its own wfilfid misconduct, except that: (1) the Trustee shafi
not be liable for any error of judgment made in good faith by a Responsible Officer imless the
Trustee was negfigent in ascertaining the pertinent facts; and (2) the Trustee shall not be liable
with respea to any action It takes or omits to take in good faith in accordance with a direction
received by itfromholders or the City in die manner provided in this Indenture.(e)
The Trustee shafi not, by any provision of this Indenture, berequiredto
expend orriskits own fimds or otherwise incur anyfinancialliabifity in the performance of any
of its duties hereunder, or in the exercise of any of itsrightsor powers, if it shafi have reasonable
grounds for believing that repayment of such fimds or adequate indemnity against such risk or
liabfiity is not reasonably assured to it. The Trustee shall be under no obligation to exercise any
of the rights or powers vested in it by this Indenture at the request or direction of any of the
holders of the Notes, unless such holders shall have offered to the Trustee reasonable security or
indemnity against the costs, expenses and liabUities which might be incurred by it to comply with
suchrequestor direction.
(f)
Evcty provision of diis Indenture that in any way relates to the Trustee is
subject to this Section.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83121

(g)
The Trustee shall not be deemed to have knowledge of an Event of Default
unless it has received actual knowledge at the corporate trust office of the Trustee located in
Chicago. Dlinois.
Section 8.03. Rights of Trustee. Subjea to the foregoing Section, the Trustee
. shafi be protected and shafi incur no liabfiity In acting or proceeding in good faith upon any
resolution, notice, telegram, request, consent, waiver, certificate, statement, affidavit, voucher,
bond, requisition or other paper or document which it shall in good faith befieve to be genuine
and to have been passed or signed by the proper person or to have been prepared and furnished
pursuant to any of the provisions of this Indenture, and the Trustee shaU be uiider no duty to make
investigation or inquity as to any statements contained or mattersreferredto in any such
instrument, but may accept and rely upon the same as conclusive evidence of the truth and
accuracy of such statements.
The Trustee may consult with counsel withregardto legal questions, and the
qpinioa of such coiiiisel shaU be fiill and complete authorization and protection in respea of any
action t ^ n or suffered by the Trustee hereunder in good faidi In accordance therewith.
Section 8.04. Individual Rights ofTrustee. The Trustee in its individual or any
other capacity may become the owner or pledgee of Notes, and may otherwise deal with the City
with the samerightsit would have if it were not Trustee. The Issuing and Paying Agent or any
other agent may do the same with like rights.
Section 8.05. Trustee's Disclaimer. The Trustee shall not be accountable for the
City's use of the proceedsfromthe Notes paid to the City and It shafi not be responsible for any
statement in the Notes.
Section 8.06. Notice of Defaults. If (1) an Event of Default has occurred, or 00
an event has occurred which with the giving of notice and/or the lapse of time would be an Event
of Default, and. with respect to such events for which notice to the City is required before such
events will become Events of Default, such notice has been given, then the Trustee shall
promptiy, after obtaining actual notice of such Event of Default or event described In clause (u)
above, give notice thereof to each holder and to the Issuing and Paying Agent. Except ui the case
of a default in payment on any Notes, the Trustee inay withhold the notice If and as long as a
committee of its Responsible Officers in good faith determines that withholding the notice is in
the interests of the holders.
Section 8.07. Compensation of Trustee. For acting undertinsIndenmre, the
Trustee shall be entided to payment of fees for its services andreimbursementof advances,
counsel fees and other expensesreasonablyand necessarily made or incurred by the Tmstec in
coimection with its services under this Indenmre and the City agrees to pay such amounts to the
Trustee. The City agrees to indemnify and hold the Trustee iiarmless against costs, claims,
expenses and liabilities not arisingfromthe Trustee's own negligence, misconduct or breach of
duty, which the Trustee may incur in the exercise and performance of its rights and obligations

 83122

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

hereunder. Such obligation shafi survive the discharge of this Indenture or the resignation or
removal of the Trustee.
Section 8.08. EiigibiUty ofTrustee. This Indenture shafi always have a Trustee
that is a trust company or a bank ha-ving the powers of a trust company and is organized and doing
business under the laws of the United States or any state or the District of Columbia, is authorized
to conduct trust business under the laws of the State, is subject to supervision or examination by
United States, state or Dlstria of Columbia authority, maintains a corporate trust ofBce in
Chicago, Illinois, and has a combined capital and surplus of at least $50,000,000 as set forth in
its most recent published annualreportof condition.
Section 8.09. Replacement of Trustee. The Trustee may resign by notifying the
City In writing at least 60 days prior to the proposed effective date of the resignation. The holders
of a majority in Outstanding principal amount of the Notes may remove thie Trustee by notifying
the removed Trustee and may appoint a successor Trustee with the City's consent. The City may
remove the Trustee, by notice in writing delivered to the Trustee 60 days prior to the proposed
removal date; provided, however, that the City shafi have no right toremovethe Trustee during
any time when an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, or when an event has occurred
and is continuing, or condition exists, which with the giving of notice or the passage of time or
both would be an Event of Default
Noresignationor removal of the Trustee under this Section shafi be effective untfi
a new Trustee has taken office and defivered a written acceptance of its ^pointment to the retiring
Trustee and to the City. Immediately thereafter, theretiringTrustee shafi transfer afi property
held by it as Trustee to the successor Trustee, the resignation orremovalof the retiring Trustee
shaU then (but only then) become effective and the successor Trustee shall have all the rights,
powers and duties of the Trustee under this Indenture.
If the Trustee resigns or is removed, or for any reason is unable or unwilling to
perform its duties under this Indenture, the City shaU promptiy appoint a successor Trustee.
If a Trustee is not performing its duties hereunder and a successor Trustee does not
take office within 60 days after theretiringTrustee delivers notice of resignation or the City
delivers notice ofremoval,theretiringTrustee, the City or the holders of a majority in aggregate
principal ainount of the outstanding Notes may petition any court of competent jurisdiction for the
appointment of a successor Trustee.
Section 8.10. Successor Trustee or Agent by Merger. If the Trustee consolidates
with, merges or converts into, or transfers afi or substantially afi its assets (or, in the case of a
bank or trust company, its corporate trust assets) to another corporation which meets the
qualifications set forth in this Indenture, the resulting, surviving or transferee corporation, without
any fiirther aa, shall be the successor Trustee.
Seaion 8.11. Other Agents. The City, or the Trustee with the consent of the
City, may from time to time appoint other agents as may be appropriate at thetimeto perform

i
'
 

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83123

duties and obligations under this Indenture or under a Supplemental Indenture all as provided by
Supplemental Indenture or resolution or ordinance of the City.
Section 8.12. Several Capacities. Anything in this Indenmre to the contraty
notwithstanding, with the written consent of the City, the same entity may serve hereunder as the
Trustee and any other agent as appointed to perform duties or obfigations under this Indenture,
under a Supplemental Indenture or an escrow agreement, or in any combination of such capacities,
to the extent permitted by law.
Section 8.13. Accoimtiiig Records and Reports of the Trustee. The Trustee
shafi at afi times keep, or cause tp be kept, proper records in which complete and accurate entries
shafi be made of afi transactions made by itrelatingto the Note- Proceeds and afi fiinds and
accounts established pursuant to this Indenture. Such records shall be available for inspection by
the City on each Business Day during reasonable business hours and by any holder, or his agent
orrepresentativeduly authorized in writing, at reasonable hours and under reasonable
circumstances.
(a)
The Trustee shaU provide to the City each month areportof any Note
Proceeds received during that month, If any, and the amounts deposited into each fimd and
account held by it under this Indenture and the amount disbursed from such fiinds and
accounts, the earnings thereon^ the ending balance in each of such fiinds and accounts and
the investments of each such fiiiid and account.
(b)
The Trustee sbaU annually, within a reasonable period after the end of the
Fiscal Year, fiimish to the City a statement (which need not be audited) covering rece5)ts,
disbursements, allocation and application of Note Proceeds, and any other moneys in any
of the fiinds and accounts held by it established pursuant to this Indenmre or any
Supplemental Indenture for the preceding year.

ARTICLE
Events of Default and Remedies of Noteholders Section 9.01. Events of Default. Each of the following events shall constimte and
is referred to in this Indenture as an "Event of Default":
(a)
a failure to pay the principal of any Commercial Paper Note when the same
shall become due and payable;
(b)
a failure to pay any installment of interest on any Commercial Paper Note
when such interest shafi become due and payable;
(c)
a failure by the City to observe and perform any covenant, condition,
agreement or provision (other than as specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Section)

 83124

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

contained in the Commercial Paper Notes or In this Indenture on the part "of the City to be
observed or performed, which fafiure shall continue for a period of 60 days after written
notice, specifying such faUure and requesting that it beremedied,shall have been given
to the City by the Trustee, which notice may be given at the discretion of the Trustee and
shall be given at the written request of holders of 25% or more in aggregate priiicipal
amoimt of the Commercial Paper Notes then Outstanding (provided that In the case of a
default with respect to die tax covenants in Section 6:01, the Series B Notes shall be
deemed to be not Outstanding), unless the Trustee, or the Tnistee and holders of
Commercial Paper Notes in an amount not less than the Outstanding principal amount of
. Commercial Paper Notes the holders of which requested such notice, shafi agree in writing
to an extension of such period prior to its expiration; provided, however, that the Trustee,
or the Trustee and the holders of such principal amount of Commercial Paper Notes, sbaU
be deemed to have agreed to an extension of such period if'such failure can be remedied,
and corrective action is initiated by the City within such period and is being difigentiy
pursued;
(d)
banknq)tcy, reorganization, arrangement, insolvency or Uquidation
proceedings, including, without limitation, proceedings under Ch^ter 9 or 11 of the
United States Bankruptcy Code (as the same may from time totimebe hereafter amended),
or other proceedings forrefiefunder any Federal or state bankruptcy law or similar law
for therefiefof debtors are instiuted by or'agamst the City, and. If instimted against the
City, said proceedings are consented to or are not dismissed within 60 days after such
institution; or
(e)
the occurrence of any odiier Event of Default as is pro'vided in a
Supplemental Indenture.
If any Event of Default has occurred,- but is subsequendy cured or waived, then
such Event of Default shall no longer constimte an Event of Default hereunder.
Section 9.02. Remedies, (a) Upon the occurrence and continuance of any Event
of Default, the Trustee in its discretion may, and upon the written direction of the holders of 25 %
or more in aggregate principal amount of the Commercial Paper Notes then Outstanding (provided
diat in die case of a default widi respea to the tax covenants in Section 6.01, the Series B Notes
shafi be deemed not to be Outstanding) and receipt of indemnity to its satisfaction, shall, in its
own name and as the Trustee of an express trust: (i) by mandamus, or other'suit, action or
proceeding at law or in equity, enforce afirightsof the Commercial Paper Noteholders, and
require the City to carty out any agreements with or for the benefit of the Commercial Paper
Noteholders and to perform its or their duties under any law to which it is subject and this
Indenture, provided that any such remedy may be taken only to the extent permitted under the
appficable provisions of this Indenture; (ii) bring suit upon the Commercial Paper Notes; (iii)
commence an aaion or suit in equity to require the City to account as if it were the trustee of an
express trust for the Commercial Paper Noteholders; or (iv) by action or suit in equity enjoin any
acts or things which may be unlawful or in violation of the rights of the Commercial Paper
Noteholders.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83125

(b)
The Trustee shafi be under no obfigation to take any action with respect to
any Event of Default unless die. Trustee has actual knowledge of the occurrence of such Event of
Default.
Section 9.03. Restoration to Former Position. In the event that any proceeding
talxn by the Trustee to enforce anyrightunder this Indenture shafi have been discontinued or
abandoned for any reason, or shall have been determined adversely to the Trustee, dien the Cify,
the Trustee, and the Conunercial Paper Noteholders shaU be restored to diefr former positions and
rights hereunder, respectively, and afirights,remedies and powers of the Tnistee shafi continue
as though DO such proceeding had been taken.
Section 9.04. Commercial Paper Noteholders* Right To Dfrca Proceedings.
Subjea to Section 9.05 hereof, anything else infliisIndenture to the contnuy notwithstanding, the
Bank and the holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the Commercial Paper Notes
then Outstanding shafi have the right, at any time, by an instrument in writing executed and
delivered to the Trustee, to direa the time, mohod and place of conducting aU remedial
proceedings available to the Trustee under this Indenmre to be taken in connection "with the
enforcement of the terms of this Indenture or exercising any trust or power conferred-on the
Trustee by this Indenture; provided that such direction sbaU not be otherwise than in accordance
with the provisions of the law and this Indenture; and provided, fiirther, that with respect to any
such direction by the holders of Commercial Paper Notes there shafi have been provided to the
Trustee security and indemnity satisfactoty to the Trustee against the costs, expenses and liabifities
to be incurred as a result thereof by the Tnistee. In the event of any conffia in the directions of
the Bank and the holders of Commercial Paper Notes, the direction of the Bank shafi control.
Section 9.05. Limitation on Right To Institute Proceedings. No Commercial
Paper Noteholder shafi have anyrightto instimte any suit, action or proceeding in equity or at law
for the execution of any trust or power hereunder, or any otherremedyhereunder or on such
Commercial Paper Note, unless such Commercial Paper Noteholder.or Commercial Paper
Noteholders previously shafi have given to the Tnistee written notice of an Event of Default as
- hereinabove provided, and unless also holders of 25% or more in aggregate principal amount of
the Commercial Paper Notes then Outstanding shall have made written request of the Tnistee so
to do, after therightto instimte such suit, action or proceeding under Section 9.02 hereof shall
have accrued, and shaU have afforded the Trustee a reasonable opportunity to proceed to instimte
the same in either its or their name, and unless there also shafi have been offered to the Trustee
security and indemnity satisfactoty to it against the costs, expenses and liabilities to be incurred
therein or thereby, and the Trustee shall not have complied with suchrequestwithin a reasonable
time; and such notification, request and offer of indemnity are hereby declared in evety such case,
at the option of the Trustee, to be conditions precedent to the instimtion of such suit, action or
proceeding; it being understood and imended that no one or more of the Commercial Paper
Noteholders shall have anyrightin any manner whatever by his, her or their action to affect,
disturb or prejudice the security of this Indenture, or lo enforce anyrighthereunder or under the
Commercial Paper Notes, except in the manner herein provided, and that all suits, actions and
proceedings at law or in equity shall be instimted. had and maintained in the manner herein
provided and for the equal benefit of all Commercial Paper Noteholders.

 83126

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 9.06. No Impairment of Right To Enforce Payment. Notwithstanding
any other provision in this Indenture, the right of any Commercial Paper Noteholder to receive
payment of the principal of and interest on such Noteholder's Commercial Paper Notes, on or
after the respeaive due dates expressed therein, or to Institute suit for the enforcement of any such
paymem on or after such respective date, shall not be impaired or affected without the consent of
such Commercial Paper Noteholder.
Section 9.07. Proceedings by Trustee Without Possession of Commercial Paper
Notes. AUrightsof action under this Indenture or under any of the Conunercial Paper Notes
secured hereby which are enforceable by the Trustee may be enforced by it without the possession
of any of the Commercial Paper Notes, or the production thereof at die trial or other proceedings
relative thereto, and any such suit, action or proceeding instituted by the Tnistee shaU be brought
in its name for the equal and ratable benefit of the Commercial Paper Noteholders, subjea to the
provisions of this Indenture.
Section 9.08. No Remedy Exclusive. No remedy herein conferred upon or
reserved to the Trustee or to Commercial Paper Noteholders is intended to be exclusive of any
other remedy or remedies, and each and evety such remedy shafi be cumulative, and shafi be in
addition to evety other remedy given hereunder, or now or hereafter existing at law or in equity
or by stamte; provided, however, that any conditions set forth herein to the taking of any remedy
to enforce the provisions of this Indenture or the Commercial Paper Notes shafi also be conditions
to seeking any remedies under any of the foregoing pursuam to this Section.
Section 9.09. No Waiver of Remedies. No delay or omission of the Tnistee or
of any Commercial Paper Noteholder to exercise any right or power accruing upon any default
shall inqiafr any such right or power, or shall be construed to be a waiver of any such default, or
an acquiescence therein; and evety power and remedy given by this Article to the Tnistee and to
the Commercial Paper Noteholders, respectively, may be exercised from time to time and as often
as may be deemed expedient.
Section 9.10. Appfication of Moneys. Any moneys received by the Trustee, by
any receiver or by any Commercial Paper Noteholder pursuant to any right given or action taken
under the provisions of this Article (which shafi not include moneys provided through the Letters
of Credit, which moneys shafi be restricted to the specific use for which such moneys were
provided), after paymem of the costs and expenses of the proceedings resulting in the coUection
of such moneys and of the expenses, liabifities and advances inciured or made by the Trustee
(including anomeys' fees), shall be applied as follows:
(a)
first, to the payment to the Persons entided thereto of afi installments of
interest then due on the Commercial Paper Notes and Bank Notes, with interest on overdue
installments, if lawful, at the rate per annum borne by the Commercial Paper Notes or
Bank Notes, as the case may be, in the order of mamrity of the installments of such
interest, and, if the amount available shaU not be sufficient to pay in fuU any particular
installment of interest, then to the payment ratably, according to the amounts due on such
installmem.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83127

(b)
second, to the payment to the Persons entided thereto of the unpaid
principal amount of any of the Commercial Paper Notes and Bank Notes which shafi have
become due with interest on such Commercial Paper Notes or Bank Notes, as applicable,
at thefr respective rate bom the respective dates upon which they became due, and, if the
amount avafiable shafi not be sufficient to pay in full Commercial Paper Notes due oil any
particular date, together with such interest, then to the payment ratably, according to the
amount of principal and interest due on such date, in each case to the Persons entided
thereto, without any discrimination or privilege,
(c)
third, to the payment to the Bank of any unpaid Bank Obligations (other
than Bank Notes).
'Whenever moneys are to be applied pursuant to the provisions of this Seaion, such
moneys shaU be ^ipfied at such times, andftomtime to time, as the Trustee shaU determine,
having dueregardfor the amount of such moneys available for application and the likelihood of
additional moneys becoming available for such application in the fiiture. 'Whenever the Tnistee
shaU apply such funds, it shaU fix the date upon which such application is to be made and upon
such date interest on the amounts of principal and interest to be paid on such date shafi cease to
accrue. The Trustee shafi give notice of die deposh with it of any such moneys and of the fixing
of any such date by first-class United States maU, postage prepaid, to aU Commercial Paper
Noteholders, and shaU not be required to make payment to any Commercial Paper Noteholder
until such Commercial Paper Notes shaU be prcsentni to the Trustee for appropriate endorsemem,
or for canceUation if fiiUy paid.
Section 9.11. Severabifity of Remedies. It is the purpose and intention of this
Article to providerightsandremediesto die Trustee and the Commercial Paper Noteholders,
v/iath nay be lawfidly granted under the provisions of applicable law, but should anyrightor
remedy herein granted be held to be imlawftd, the Trustee and the Noteholders shafi be entided,
as above set forth, to evety otherrightandremedyprovided in this Indenture or by applicable
law.
Section 9.12. Additional Events of Default and Remedies. As long as any
particular Series of Commercial Paper Notes is Outstanding, the remedies as set forth in this
Article may be supplemented with additionalremediesas set forth in a Supplemental Indenture.

ARTICLE X Miscellaneous ^
Section 10.01. Substitute Letter of Credit. Notwidistanding anything herein to
the contraty, the City may obuin a substimte Lener of Credit to replace the Lener of Credit then
in effect hereunder as long as said substimte Letter of Credit shall go into effect at least one
Business Day prior to the termination of the Lener of Credit then in effect being substituted for;
at notimemay more than one Letter of Credit or substimte Letter of Credit secure the Notes.

 83128

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCII^-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

The Expiration Date with respect to each substimte Letter of Credit shafi be no earlier than the
earlier of (1) six (6) months after its date, or (ii) the Expiration Date set forth in the Letter of
Credit then in effea being substimted for. Each substitute Letter of Credit shafi be in an amount
sufficient to pay all principal and interest scheduled to be paid on aU Commercial Paper Notes
Outstanding hereunder as of the effective date of such substitute Letter of Credit. The foUowing
are fiirther conditions-to the Issuing and Paying Agent's abifity toreleasean existing Letter of
Credit and accept a substimte Letter of Credit therefor:
(a)
The City shafi defiver written notice of the proposed substimtion to the
Trustee, the Issuing and Paying Agent, the Bank and the Dealer not less than 45 days prior
to the proposed substimtion date.
(b)
There sbaU be defivered to the City, the Tnistee and the Issuing and Paying
"Agent "nnritten evidence from each Rating Agency then maintaining a rating on the
Commercial Paper Notes secured by the Letter of Credit then in effea being substimted
for that the substimtion of such Letter of Credit wifi not, in and of itself,resultin any
rating then assigned to the Commercial Paper Notes secured thereby being suspended,
reduced or withdrawn.
(c)
The Issuing and Paying Agent shafi deliver written notice to the registered
Owners of the Commercial Paper Notes secured thereby at. least 30 days prior to the
proposed substimtion date. If any Outstanding Note secured thereby is in bearer form, the
Trustee sbaU publish notice of the proposed substimtion of such Letter of Credit in a
newspaper of geiieial circulation in the City at least 30 days prior to the proposed
substitution date.
(d)
An opinion or opinions of counsel to the successor Bank, satisfactoty in
form and substance to each Rating Agency then maintaining a rating on the Commercial
Paper Notes to be secured thereby, sbaU be delivered to the effect that the substimte Letter
of Credit is a legal, valid and binding obligation of the issuing Bank and is enforceable
against the Bank in accordance with its terms.
(e)
An opinion of Bond Counsel shafi be defivered to the effect that the
substimtion of the Letter of Credit is authorized hereunder and (withrespectto Notes other
than taxable Notes) wifi not. in and of itself, adversely affect the exclusion ftom gross
income for Federal tax purposes of interest on the Notes.
Section 10.02. Timeliness of Deposits. Funds shall be deemed transferred for
purposes of timeliness of receipt under this Indenture when transfer instructions for transfer by
Federalreservewire have been given and a Federal wire number confirmation has been received;
provided that the party to receive suchfimdsshall not be required to take any action required to
be taken hereunder with respect to such funds until it has confirmation of actual receipt of such
limds.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

. 83129

Section 10.03. Waiver of Events of Default. No Event of Default widi respect
to the Commercial Paper Notes or the Bank Notes shafi be waived imless after such waiver the
reinstatement provisions of the affected Letters of Credit, if any, shafi be in fiiU force and effect.
Section 10.04. Defeasance of Commercial Paper Notes. Commercial Paper
Notes shall not be deemed to have been paid in fiiU unless payment of the principal of and interest
on the Commercial Paper Notes either (a) shaU have been made or causol to be made in
accordance widi the terms of the Commercial Paper Notes and this Indenture, or (b) shafi have
been provided for by irrevocably depositing with the Trustee in trust and irrevocably setting aside
exclusively for such payinent (1) Available Moneys sufficient to make such payment, and/or (ii)
noncallable Qovemment Obligations purchased with Avafiable Moneys, maturing as to principal
and interest in such amounts and at such times as.wifi insure the availabUity of suffidem moneys
to make such paymem.
Section 10.05. Bank to Control Remedies. While theLetter of Credit is in effea
notwithstanding anything else herein to the contraty, as long as the Bank is not Insolvent and is
not in default under the Letter of Credit or the Reimbursement Agreement, noright,power or
remedy with respea to the Commercial Paper Notes seoired by such Letter of Credit may be
pursued without the prior written consent of the Bank, and such Bank shaU have therightto direa
the Trustee to pursue anyright,power or remedy available hereunder with respect to any assets
available heieunder which secure only the Notes secured by such Letter of Credit.
Section 10.06. Payments or Actions Occurring on Non-Business Days. If a
payment date is not a Business Day at the place of payment, or If any action required hereunder
is required ou a date that is not a Business Day, then payment may be made at that place on the
next Business Day. or such action may be taken on the next Business Day, with the same effect
as if payment were made, or the action taken, on the stated date, and no Interest shall accrue for
the intervening period.
Section 10.07. Notices to Rating Agendes. The Authorized City Representative
shall provide the Rating Agencies with written notice of the occurrence of the following events:
(1) changes in the Dealer or the Trustee, (u) the appointment of a successor Issuing and Paying
Agent, (ill), amendments to the Indenture, the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement or the
Reimbursement Agreement, (iv) the expiration, termination, substimtion, extension or
amendment of the Letter of Credit, and (v) the defeasance of all Outstanding Commercial Papeir
Notes.
Section 10.08. Parties in Interest. Except as herein otherwise specifically
provided, nothing in this Indenture expressed or impfied is intended or shall be construed to
confer upon any Person other than the City, the Trustee, the Paying Agent, other agentsfromtime
to time hereunder, the holders of the Notes, and, to the limited extent provided by Section 10.05
of this Indenture, the Bank, anyright,remedy or claim under or by reason of this Indenture, this
Indenmre btmg intended to be for the sole and exclusive benefit of the City, the Trustee, the
Paying Agent, such other agents, the holders of the Notes and. to the limited extent provided in
Section 10.05 of this Indenture, the Bank.

 83130

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

ARTICLE X I ,
Supplementallndentores ^
Section 11.01. Limitations. This Indenture sbaU not be modified or amended in
anyrespeasubsequent to the first delivety of fidly executed and authenticated Notes except as
provided in, and in accordance with and subjea to the provisions of, this Article.
Section 11.02.
Supplanental Indentures Not Requiring Consent of
Noteholders, The City may. and whfie the Letter of Credit is in effea and as long as the Bank
is not Insolvent and has not fafied to honor a properly presented and conforming drawing under
the Letter of Credit, with the prior written consent of the Bank, from time totimeand at any time,
without the consent of or notice to die Noteholders, execute and deUver Supplemental Indentures
supplementing and/or amending this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture as foUo'ws:
(a)
to cure any formal defca, omission, incoiisistency or ambiguity in, or
answer any questions arising under, this Indenmre or any Supplemental Indenture,
provided that such supplement or amendment is not materiaUy adverse to the Noteholders;
(b)
to add to the covenants and agreements of the City In this Indenture or any
Supplemental Indenture other covenants and agreements, or to surrender anyrightor
power reserved or conferred upon the City, provided that such supplement or amendmem
is not materiafiy adverse to the Noteholders;
(c)
to confirm, as fiirther assurance, any interest of the Issuing and Paying
Agent in and to the fimds and accounts held by the Trustee or the Issuing and Paying
Agent, or in and to any other moneys, securities or fiinds of the City provided pursuant
to this Indenture, or to otherwise add additional security for the Noteholders;
. (d)
to evidence any change made in the terms of any Series of Notes if such
changes are authorized by the Supplemental Indenture at the time the Series of Notes is
Issued and such change is made in accordance with the terms of such Supplemental
Indenture;
(e)
to comply with the requirements of the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as
from time to time amended;
(0
to modify, alter, amend or supplement this Indenture or any Supplemental
Indenmre in any other respea which is not materially adverse to the Noteholders;
(g)
to qualify the Notes or a Series of Notes for a rating or ratings by Moody's.
S&P and/or Fitch;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83131

(h)
to accommodate the technical, operational and structural feamres of Notes
which are issued or are proposed to be issued, including, but not limitfd to, changes
needed to accommodate other forms of commercial paper, or other forms of indebtedness
which the City from time to time deems appropriate to incur;
(i)
to comply with die requirements of the Code as are necessaty, in the
oplmon of Bond Counsel, to preserve the exclusionfromgross income for Federal income
taxation of the interest on Notes issued as tax-exempt Notes; or
(j)
to take effea only with respect to Notes issued on or after the effective date
of the Supplemental Indenture accompanied by appropriate disclosure of the amendment
orsupplemenL
Before the City shafi, pursuant to this Section, execute any Supplemental Indenture,
there shafi have been delivered to the City an opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that such
Supplemental Indenmre is audiorized or permitted by this Indenmre and appficable law, complies
with thefr respective terms, wifi, upon the execution and defivety thereof, be valid and binding
npon the City in accordance with its terms, and wiU not cause Interest on any of the Notes which
is thai excludedfromgross income of the recqilent thereof for Federal income tax purposes to
be inchided in gross income for Federal income tax purposes.
Section 11.03. Supplemental Indentures Requiring Consent of Noteholders.
Except for any Supplemental Indenmre entered into pursuant to Section 11.02 hereof and any
Supplemental Indenture entered into pursuant to subsection (b) below, subjea to the terms and
provisions contained in this Section and not otherwise, the holders of not less than a majority in
aggregate principal amount of the Notes then Outstanding shall have therightfrom time to time,
and while the Letter of Credit is in effea, and, as long as the Bank Is not Insolvent and has not
faUed to honor a property presented and conforming drawing under the Letter of Credit, with the
prior written consent of the Bank, to consent to and approve the execution by the City of any
Supplemental Indenture deemed necessaty or desirable by the City for the purposes of modifying,
altering, amending, supplementing or rescinding, in any particular, any of the terms or provisions
contained in this Indenture or in any Supplemental Indenture; provided, however, that, unless
approved in writing by the holders of afi the Notes then Outstandmg. or unless such change affects
less than all Series of Notes and subsection (b) below is applicable, nothing herein contained shafi
permit, or be constmed as permitting, (i) an extension in die stated maturity of any Outstanding
Notes, or a change in the amounts or currency of payment of the principal of or interest on any
Outstanding Notes, or (ii) a reduction in the principal amoum or redemption price of any
Outstanding Notes, or the rate of interest thereon; and provided that nothing herein contained,
including the provisions of subsection (b) below, shafi, unless approved in writing by the holders
of afi the Notes then Outstanding, permit or be construed as permitting (iii) except with respect
to additional security which may be provided for a particular Series of Notes, a preference or
priority of any Note or Notes over any other Note or Notes withrespectto the security granted
therefor under this Indenture, or (iv) a reduction in the aggregate principal amount of Notes the
consent of the Noteholders of which is required for any such Supplemental Indenture. Nothing

 83132

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

herein contained, however, shall be construed as makiiig necessaty the approval by Noteholders
of the execution of any Supplemental Indenture as authorized in Seaion 11.02 hereof.
(a)
Subject to the provisions of Section 11.02 and 11.03(a) hereof, die City
may.fromtime to time and at any time, execute a Supplemental Indenture which amends
the provisions of an earlier Supplemental Indenture. If such Supplemental Indenture is
executed for one of the purposes set forth in Section 11.02 hereof, no notice to or consent
of the Noteholders shall be required. If such Supplemental Indenture contains provisions
which affea therightsand interests of less than all Series of Notes Outstanding and
Seaion 11.02 hereof is not appficable, then this subsection (b) rather than subsection (a)
above shaU control, and, subjea to the terms and provisions contained in this Section and
not otherwise, the holders of not less than a majority In aggregate pruxipal amount of the
Notes of aU Series which are affected by such changes shafi have therightfromtime to
time to consent to any Supplemental Indenmre deemed necessaty or desirable by the City
for the purposes of modifying, altering, amending, supplementing or rescinding. In any
particular, any of the terms or provisions contained in such Supplemental Indenture and
affecting only the Notes of such Series; provided, however, that, unless approved in
writing by die holders of aU the Notes of afi the affected Series then Outstandmg, nothing
herein contained shafi petmh, or be coiistiued as permitting, (1) a change in the scheduled
times, amounts or currency of payinent of the principal of or Interest on any Outstanding
Notes of such Series, or Qi) a reduction in the principal amount or redemption price of any
Outstanding Notes of such Series or the rate of interest thereon. Nodiing herein contained,
however. shaU be construed as making necessaty the approval by Noteholders of the
adoption of any Supplemental Indenture as authorized in Section 11.02 hereof.
(b)
If at any time the City shaU desire to enter into any Supplemental Indenture
for any of the purposes of this Section, the City shaU cause notice of the proposed
execution of the Supplemental Indenture to be given byfirst-classUnited States mail to the
Bank and aU Noteholders or, under subsection (b) above, the Bank and all Noteholders of
the Series. Such notice shafi briefly set forth the nanire of the proposed Supplemental
Indenture and shafi state that a copy thereof is on fUe at the office of the City for
inspection by afi Noteholders, and it shall not be required that the Noteholders approve the
final form of such Supplemental Indenture but it shall be sufficient if such Noteholders
approve the substance thereof.
(c)
The City may execute and deliver such Supplemental Indenture in
substantially the form described in such, notice, but only if there shall have ffrst been
delivered to the City (i) any requfred consents, in writing, of the Bank and the
Noteholders, and (ii) the opinion of Bond Counsel required by the last paragraph of
Section 11.02 hereof.
(d)
If Noteholders of not less dian the percentage of Notes required by diis
Section shaU have consented to and approved the execution and delivery thereof as herein
provided, no Noteholders shafi have any right to object to the adoption of such
Supplemental Indenture, or to object to any of the terms and provisions contained therein

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83133

or the operation thereof, or in any manner to question the propriety of the execution and
delivety thereof, or to enjoin orrestrainthe Cityfromexecuting the same orfronitaking
any action pursuant to the provisions thereof.
Section 11.04. Effea of Supplementallndenture. Upon execution and defivety
of any Supplemental Indenture pursuant to the provisions of this Article, this Indenture or the
Supplemental Indenture shafi be, and shaU be deemed to be, modified and amended in accordance
therewith, and the respective rights, duties and obligations under this Indenture and the
Supplemental Indenture of the City, the Tnistee, the Issuing and Paying Agent, the Bank and afi
Noteholders sbaU thereafter be determined, exercised and enforced under this Indenmre and the
Supplemental Indenture, If appficable, subjea in afi respects to such modifications and
amendments.
Section 11.05. Supplemental. Indentures To Be Part of This Indenture. Any
Supplemental Indenture adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall thereafter
form a pan of this Indenture or the Supplemental Indenture which they supplement or amend, and
afi of the terms and conditions contained in any such Supplemental Indenture- as to any provision
authorized to be contained therein shafi be and shaU be deemed to be part of the' terms and
conditions of this Indenture or the Supplemental Indenture which they supplemem or amend for
any and aU purposes.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused fliis Indenture to be
duly executed, aU as of the datefirstabove written.

[SEAL]
CITY OF CHICAGO
ATTEST:
By:

"

By;

City Clerk.

Chief Financial Officer

[SEAL]

as Trustee

ATTEST:

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

(Sub)Exhibits "A", "B" and "C" referred to in this Trust Indenture read as follows:

 83134

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(Sub)Exhibit "A". .
(To Trust Indenture)
^Form Of Master Note)
City Of Chicago
Commercial Paper Notes
2002 Program Series
Registered Owner: Cede & Co.
Principal Sum:

Not to Elxceed the'Authorized Amount set forth below

• The City of Chicago (the "City"), a municipafity and a home- rule unit of loczd
government duly orgaitized and vafidly existing under the Constitution and laws of the
State of Illinois, for value received, hereby promises to pay to the registered owner
hereinabove named or registered assigns, the prindpal amount, together with unpaid
accrued interest thereon, if any, on the maturity date of each obfigation identified on
the records of the City (the "Underlying Records") as being evidenced by this Master
Note, which Underlying Records are maintained by
, as issuing and
paying agent (the "Issuing and Paying Agent") under that certain Issuing and Paying
Agent Agreement, dated as of
'
1,2002, between the City and the Issuing
and Paying Agent (the "Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement"). Interest on Series A
Notes shafi be calculated on the basis of actual days elapsed in a three hundred sixtyfive (365) or three hundred sixty-six (366) day year, as the case may be, at the rate
specified on the Underlying Records. Interest on Series B Notes shafi be calculated on
the basis of a three hundred sixty (360) day year and actual number of days elapsed,
at the rate or yield specified on the Underlying Records. Payments shall be made from
monies provided by the City and payments of drawings under an irrevocable,
transferrable, dfrect-pay letter of credit of
, by wfre transfer to the
registered owner stated hereinabove from the Issuing and Paying Agent without the
necessity of presentation and surrender of this Master Note.
This Master Note is one of a duly authorized issue of Commerdal Paper Notes of the
City (hereinafter czdied the "Notes") of the series and designation indicated on the face
hereof
Said authorized issue of Notes consists of multiple series of varying
denominations, dates, maturities, interest rates and other provisions, as in the
Indenture hereinafter mentioned provided, cdl issued and to be issued pursuant to the
provisions of Section 6(a) of Article Vll of the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois
and an ordinance (the "CP. Note Ordinance") duly adopted by the City Council of the
City on
, 2002. This Master Note evidences a series of Notes

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83135

designated as the "City of Chicago, Commerdal Paper Note, 2002 Program Series "
(hereinafter called the "Series Notes"). This Note is issued pursuant to the C.P. Note
Ordinance and a Trust Indenture, dated as of
•
1, 2002 (the "Indenture"),
between the City and
as trustee (the "Trustee"), providing
for the issuance of the Series A Notes and the Series B Notes in the aggregate principal
amount outstanding at any time not to exceed Two Hundred MiUion Dollars
($200,000,000). The authorized issue of this Series Note is limited to the prindpal
amount of Two Hundred Milfion DoUars ($200,000,000) reduced by the aggregate
prindpal amount of Notes of the other series then outstanding under the Indenture and
by the outstanding prindpal amount of "Auction Rate Securities" and "Variable Rate
Securities" issued and outstanding under the C.P. Note Ordinance.
Reference is hereby made to the Indenture and the C.P. Note Ordinance for a
description of the terms on which the Notes are issued and to be issued, and the rights
of the registered owners of the Notes; and cdl the terms of the Indenture and the C.P.
Note Ordinance are hereby incorporated herein and made a contract between the City
and the registered ownerfromtime to time of this Master Note, and to afi the provisions
thereof the registered owner of this Note, by its acceptance hereof, consents and agrees.
Additional series of Notes may be issued on a psirity with the Notes of this authorized
series.
This Master Note, together with all other Notes, issued under the Indenture, are dfrect
and general obfigations of the City payablefromany funds of the City legaUy available
and EmnuaUy appropriated for such purpose, including securities and monies held by
the Trustee under the provisions of the Indenture. Pursuant to the Indenture, the City
has covenanted and agreed to take afi necessary action to annuaUy appropriate fimds
in a timely manner so as to provide for the punctual payment of the principal of,
redemption premium of and interest on afi Notes issued under the Indenture; provided,
however, that in no event wifi the City be obfigated to levy any separate ad valorem or
other tax in addition to other City taxes or any special ad valorem or other tax
unlimited as to rate or amount to pay such prindpal, redemption premium or interest.
At the request of the registered owner, the City shafi promptly issue and defiver one
(1) or more separate note certificates evidencing each obligation evidenced by this
Master Note. As of the date any such note certificate or certificates are issued, the
obfigations which are evidenced thereby shafi no longer be evidenced by this Master
Note. This Master Note is transferable by the registered owner hereof, in person or by
attorney duly authorized in writing, at the principal office of the Issuing and Paying
Agent in Chicago, but only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment
of the charges provided in the Indenture, and upon surrender and cancellation of this
Note. Upon such transfer a new fully registered Note or Notes of the same scries
designation, without coupons, of authorized denomination or denominations, for the
same aggregate principal amount wifi be issued to the transferee in exchange herefor.

 83136

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

The City, the Trustee and the Issuing and Paying Agent may deem and treat the
registered owner hereof as the absolute owner hereof for all purposes, and the City, the
Trustee and the Issuing and Pa3dng Agent shafi not be affected by £my notice to the
contrary.
The rights and obfigations of the City and of the registered owners.of the Notes may
be modified or amended at any time in the manner, to the extent, £ind upon the terms
provided in the Indenture and, under certain cfrcumstances as described in the
Indenture, without the consent of the holders of the Notes.
It is hereby certified and redted that any and afi acts, conditions and things requfred
to exist, to happen and to be performed, precedent to and in the incurring of the
indebtedness evidenced by this Master Note, and in the issuing of this Master Note, do
exist, have happened and have been performed in due time, form and manner, and that
this Master Note is not in excess of the amount of Notes permitted to be issued under
the C.P. Note Ordinance.
This Master Note shaU not be entitied to any benefit under the Indenture, or become
vafid or obfigatoiy for any purpose, until the certificate of authentication hereon
endorsed shafi have been signed by the Issuing and Paying Agent. This Master Note
is a vafid and binding obfigation of City.
In Witness Whereof, The City.of Chicago, has caused this Master Note to be executed
in its name and on its behalf by the manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor of the
Issuer and the seal of the Issuer to be impressed or imprinted hereon and attested by the
memual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk of the Issuer, afi as of the
day of
.
2002. .
City of Chicago
By:
Mayor
(Seal]
Attest:
By:
City Clerk

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83137

Certificate Of Authentication.
This Master Note is-the Master Note described in the within Master Note and the
within-mentioned Indenture.
Date of Authentication:

as Issuing and Paying Agent

Authorized Signature:

(Form Of Assignment)
Assignment.
For Value Received, The undersigned hereby seUs, assigns and transfers unto
(Please Print or Typewrite Name and Address) (Please
Insert Social Security or other Taxpayer Identification Number of. Assignee:
) the within Master Note and afi rights and tiUe therein, and hereby
irrevocably constitutes and appoints
, attorney, to transfer the
within Master Note on the books kept for regisfration thereof, "with fuU power of
substitution in the premises.
Dated:
(Registered Ovmer)
Notice:

The signature(s) to this assignment must correspond with the name as it
appears upon the face of the within Master Note in every particular, "without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

Signature Guaranteed:

 83138

Notice:

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Unless this certificate is presented by an authorized representative of The'
Depositoty Trust Company, a New York corporation ("D.T.C."), to the City or
its agent for regisfration of transfer, exchange or payment, and any certificate
. issued is registered in the name of Cede & Co. or in such other name as is
requested by an authorized representative of D.T.C. (and any payment is
made to Cede & Co. or to such other entity as is requested by an authorized
representative of D.T.C, /Vny Transfer, Pledge Or Other Use Hereof For Value
Or Otherwise By Or To Any Person Is Wrongful inasmuch as the registered
owner Hereof, Cede & Co., has an interest herein.

(Sub)Exhibit 'B'.
(To Trust Indenture)
^Form Of Bank Note)
City Of Chicago
Bank Note
(2002 Commercial Paper Program),
[Name Of Bank).
$For Value Received, the Undersigned, City of Chicago (the "Borrower"), hereby
promises to pay to the order of
,
(the "BcUik"), at
[
, in the manner and on the dates pro"vided in this
hereinafter defined Agreement in lawfiil money of the United States of America and in
immediately available funds, the prindped amount of
DoUars
($
). or, if less, the aggregate unreimbursed amount of the Advances'made
by the Bank pursuant to the Agreement. Terms used herein and not otherwise defined
herein shaU have the meanings assigned to them in the Reimbursement Agreement
dated as of
.
1, 2002 (the "Agjreement") between the Borrower and the
Bank, as from time to time in effect.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83139

The Borrower further promises to pay interest from the date hereof on the
outstanding principal amount hereof and unpaid interest hereon from time to time at
the rates and times and in aU cases in accordance with the terms of the Agreement.
The Bank may endorse its records relating to this Bank Note with appropriate notations
evidencing the Advances and payments of prindpal hereunder as contemplated by the
Agreement.
This Bank Note is issued pursuant to, is entitied to the benefits of, and is subjea to,
the provisions of the Agreement and that certain Trust Indenture dated as of
1, 2002 between the Borrower and
, as Trustee. The
prindpad of this Bank Note is subject to prepayment in whole or in part in accordance
with the terms of the Agreement.
The parties hereto, including the undersigned maker and aU guarantors, endorsers
.and pledgors that may exist at £my time with respect hereto, hereby waive presentment,
demand, notice, protest £md afi other demands and notices in connection with the
defivety, acceptance, performance and enforcement of this Bank Note and assent to the
extensions of the time of payment or forbearance or other indulgence without notice.
This Bank Note And The Obfigations Of The Borrower Hereunder ShaU For AU
Purposes Be Governed By And Interpreted And Determined In Accordance With The
Laws Of The State Of Illinois (Excluding The Laws Appficable To Conflicts Or Choice Of
Law).
In Witness Whereof, The Borrower has caused this Bank Note to be signed in its
corporate name as an instrument under seal by its duly authorized officer on the date
and in the yearfirstabove written.
City of Chicago
(Seal)

By:

Attest:

Name:
Chief Financial Officer

By:
City Clerk

 83140

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

[Sub)Exhibit ' C .
(To Trust Indenture)
Form Of 2002 Prograrn Series
Proceeds Fund Requisition.
Requisition Number
To:

Re: Requisition of Funds from City of Chicago
Commerdal Paper Notes, 2002 Progreuns
Series
Proceeds Funds
The amount requisitioned: $_
Payment to be made to:
Manner in which payment is to be made:
T h e undersigned, an Authorized City Representative within the meaning of the Trust
Indenture, dated as of
1,2002 (the "Indenture"), by and between the City
of Chicago (the "City") and
, as trustee (the "Trustee"), hereby
requisitions the amount set forth above and directs that such amount be paid to the
party set forth above from funds held in the Series
Proceeds Fund held under the
Indenture, and directs that payment be made in the manner described above.
For Series A Projects or Purposes only: The amount to be paid represents a cost of
the Series A FYoject or Purpose as described in a Tax Certificate of the City, and the
amounts requisitioned hereby wifi be expended only in accordance with and subject to
the limitations set forth in the Tax Certificate, dated
, 2002, and relating
to the Series A Notes issued under the Indenture.
For Series B Projects or Purposes only: The Etmount to be paid represents a cost of
a Series B Project or Purpose.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83141

City of Chicago

Dated:

By:
Authorized City Representative

Exhibit ' B ' .
(To Ordinance)
Commercial Paper Dealer Agreement
Between
City Of Chicago
And

2002

Dated
Relating To

City Of Chicago
Commercial Paper Notes
2002 Program
Series A (Tax Exempt) And Series B (Taxable).
This Commerdal Paper Dealer Agreement, dated
"Agreement"), by and between the City of Chicago (the "Issuer") and
{the "C.P. Dealer").

, 2002 (the

For and in consideration of the mutual covenants made herein and other valuable
consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, the parties
hereto agree as follows:

 83142

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 1. Background And Definitions.
(a) The Issuer has authorized the issuance and reissuance fromtime-to-timeof its
Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program, Series A (Tax Exempt) and Series B (Taxable)
(the "Notes") in the aggregate principal amount not to exceed Two Hundred MiUion
DoUars ($200,000,000) outstanding at any time.
(b) The Issuer has authorized the issuance of the Notes pursuant an ordinance duly
adopted by the City CouncU of the Issuer on
, 2002 (the "Ordinance") and
the Trust Indenture dated as of
1, 2002 (the "C.P. Indenture") by and
between the Issuer and
, as Trustee, relating to the Notes; and
the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement, dated as of
1, 2002 (the
"C.P. Paying Agent Agreement") by and between the Issuer and
(the "C.P. Paying Agent"). The Ordinance, the C.P. Indenture
and the C.P. Paying Agent Agreement being herein sometimes referred to coUectively
in this Agreement as the "Authorizing Documents" (the "Authorizing Documents").
(c)
:
(the "Facifity Issuing Party") has defivered a letter of
credit (the "Facifity") "with respect to the Notes to
(the
"Account Party") in accordance with the terms of the Authorizing Document and the
Reimbursement Agreement dated as of
, 2002 between the Issuer and
the FacUity Issuing Party (the "Facifity Agreement") among the Issuer and the FacUity
Issuing Party.
(d) The Authoriaang Documents provide for the appointment of a commercial paper
dealer to perform certain duties, including the offering and sale from time-to-time of
the Notes on behalf of the Issuer.
(e)
has agreed to accept the duties Emd responsibifities of the C.P.
Dealer with respect to the Notes under the Authorizing Documents and this
Agreement.
(f) Unless otherwise defined herein, aU capitalized terms shaU have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Authorizing Documents.
Section 2. Appointment Of C.P. Dealer.
(a) Subject to the terms and conditions contained herein, the Issuer hereby appoints
. as the C.P. Dealer for the Notes, and
hereby accepts
such appointment.
(b) The C.P. Dealer shall act as non-exclusive dealer with respect to the Notes. The
C.P. Dealer acknowledges that the Issuer may enter into agreements with other
dealers in connection with the offering and sale of the Notes on behalf of the Issuer.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83143

Section 3. Responsibifities Of C.P. Dealer.
(a) Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement, Merrill Lynch
agrees to perform the duties of C.P. Dealer set forth in this Agreement. It is
understood that in undertsddng to perform such duties, and in.the performance
thereof, it is the intention of the parties that the C.P. Dealer will act solely as an agent
and not as a prindpal, except as expressly provided in this Agreement. The C.P.
Dealer shafi use its best efforts to soficit and arrange sales of the Notes on behalf of
the Issuer at such, rates and maturities as may prevail from time to time in the
market. The C.P. Dealer and the Issuer agree that any Notes which the C P . Dealer
may arrange the sale of or which, in the C.P. Dealer's sole discretion, it may elect to
purchase, wiU be purchased or sold on the terms and conditions and in the manner
pro"vided in the Authorizing Documents and this Agreement. Anything herein to the
confrary notwithstanding, to the extent of any conffict between the provisions hereof
and of the Authorizing Documents, the provisions of the Authorizing Documents shall
be controlling.
(b) Notwithstanding anything to the contraty.contained herein, the C.P. Deader:
(i) "Wifi suspend its efforts -with respect to the offer or sale of the Notes on behalf
of the Issuer upon the receipt of notice of the occurrence of an event of default
under the terms of the Notes, the Authorizing Documents, the Facifity or the Facifity
Agreement; and
(u) may, in its sole tfiscretion. suspend its efforts with respect to the offer or sale
of the Notes on behalf of the Issuer immediately upon the occurrence of any of the
foUowing events, which suspension wiU continue so long as, in the C P . Dealer's
reasonable judgment, such event continues to exist as to the Notes:
(1) suspension or material fimitation in frading in securities generally on the
New York Stock Exchange;
(2) a general moratorium on commercial banking activities in New York is
declared by either federal or New York State authorities;
(3) the engagement by the United States in hostifities if the effect of such
engagement, in the C.P. Dealer's judgment, makes it impractical or inadvisable to
proceed with the sofidtation of offers to purchase the Notes;
(4) legislation shafi be tnfroduced by committee, by amendment or otherwise,
in, or be enacted by, the House of Representatives or the Senate of the Congress
of the United States or within a legislative body within the State of lUinois having
jurisdiction over the issuance of the Notes, or a dedsion by a court of the United
States or the State of Illinois shafi be rendered, or a stop order, ruling, regulation
or official statement by, or on behalf of, the United States Securities and Exchange
Commission or other governmental agency having jurisdiction of the subject

 83144

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

matter shall be made or proposed, to the effect that the offering or sale of
obligations of the genered character of the Notes, as contemplated hereby, is or
would be in violation of any provision of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended
(the "Securities Aa") as then in effect, or the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended (the "Ebtchange Act") as then in effea, or with the purpose or effect of
otherwise prohibiting the offering or sale of obfigations of the general charaaer of
the Notes, or the Notes themselves, as contemplated hereby;
. (5) any event shaU occur or information shaU become known, which, in the C.P.
Dealer's reasonable opinion, makes untrue, incorrea or nusleading in any
materied respect any statement or information contained in any disclosure
documents provided to the. C.P. Dealer in connection with the performance of its
duties hereunder, whether provided pursuant to Section 8 hereof or otherwise, or
causes such documents to contain an untrue, incorrect or misleading statement
of a materi£d fact or to omit to state a material fact requfred to be stated therein
or necessary to make the statements made therein, in fight of the circumstances
under which they were made, not misleading;
(6) any governmental authority shaU impose, as to the Notes, or obfigations of
the general charaaer of the Notes, any materied restrictions not now in force, or
increase materiaUy those now in force;
(7) any-of the representations and warranties of the Issuer made hereunder
shall not have been true and correct on the date made;
(8) the Issuer fads to observe any of the covenants or agreements made herein;
(9) any of the rating agencies then rating the Notes or the Facifity Issuing Party
shall either (i) downgrade the ratings assigned to either the Notes or the Facifity
Issuing Party so that such Notes are not "EUgible Notes" as defined under Rule 2a7 of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended or (u) suspend or withdraw
the then current ratings assigned to either the Notes or the Fadfity Issuing Party;
or
(10) an actual or imminent default or a moratorium in respect of payment of any
United States Treasury bUls, bonds or notes the effect of which in the CiP.
Dealer's judgment makes it impractical to market the Notes or to enforce contrarts
for the sale of the Notes.
Section 4. Transactions In Notes.
AU transactions in Notes between the C.P. Dealer and the Issuer shall be in
accordance with the Authorizing Documents, this Agreement, the Facifity Agreement
and with the customs and practices in the commercial paper market regarding
settiement and defivery formaUy adopted in writingfromtimeto time by the New York

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83145

Clearinghouse, to the extent not.inconsistent with the Authorizing Documents. As
early as possible, but not later than 11:30 A.M. (Chicago time) on the day on which
any Notes are to be issued, the C.P. Dealer shall notify the Issuer of the proposed final
maturities, prices and interest rates (which interest rates shaU not exceed
%
per annum) at which the C P . Dealer wiU piirchase or cause the purchase of the
Notes, and provide the Issuer with any other information as required for defivery. of
such Notes. Except as described below, the C.P. Dealer shall not be obfigated to
purchase or cause the purchase of any Notes unless and until agreement has been
reached in each case on the foregoing points and the C.P. Dealer has agreed to such
purchase. Not later than 11:3.0 A.M. (Chicago time) on the date of each transaction,
the C.P. Dealer shaU either (a) confirm each transaction made with" or arranged by it
or (b) notify the Issuer and the C.P. Paying Agent of the difference, if any, between the
amount of maturing -Notes and the amount of Notes which the C P . Dealer has
arranged to seU or has agreed to purchase. Such confirmation or notification shaU
be given by telephone (or by other telecommunications medium acceptable to the
Issuer) and in writing to the Issuer and the C.P. Paying Agent.
Section 5. Pa3rment For Notes.
The C.P. Dealer shaU pay for the Notes sold by the C.P. Dealer (or purchased by the
C.P. Dealer for its own account) in immediately avaUable funds by 1:15 P.M. (Chicago
time) on the Business Day such Notes are delivered to the C.P. Dealer (provided that
such Notes are so defivered to the C P . Dealer by 1:15 P.M. (Chicago time) on such
Business Day). AU Notes wifi be sold at par, and wiU be evidenced either by (i) a
global note immobilized with The Depositoty Trtist Company of New York or (u) if not,
wiU be executed in the manner provided for in the C.P. Indenture.
Section 6. Designated Representative.
Note transactions with the Issuer, pursuant to Section 4 hereof, shall be with any
one of the officers or employees of the Issuer who are designated as a Designated
Representative by certificate signed by the Chief Financial Officer of the Issuer. The
initial written designation of the Designated Representatives is appended hereto as
Appendix A. The Issuer agrees to provide the C.P. Dealer with revised written
designations in the form of Appendix A when and as requfred by changes in the
Designated Representatives. The C.P. Dealer may rely upon such designation unless
and until otherwise notified in writing by the Issuer.
-Section 7. Resignation And Removal Of C.P. Dealer.
The C.P. Dealer may at any time resign and be discharged of its duties and
obligations hereunder upon providing the Issuer, the C.P. Trustee and the C.P. Paying
Agent with thirty (30) days prior written notice. The C.P. Dealer may be removed at

 83146

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

any time, at the dfrection of the Issuer upon seven (7) days prior written notice to the
C.P. Dealer and the C.P. Trustee and the C P . Paying Agent. Upon removal or
resignation of the C.P. Dealer, the Issuer shaU promptiy cause the C.P. Trustee and
the C P . Paying Agent to give notice thereof by mail to aU owners of the Notes and to
any rating agency which has assigned a rating to the Notes. The C.P. Dealer shaU
assign and defiver this Agreement to its successor if requested by the Issuer.
Section 8. Furnishing Of Disclosure Materials.
(a) The Issuer agrees to fiimish the C.P. Dealer with as many copies as the C.P.
Dealer may reasonably request of the Offering Memorandum dated
_,
2002 of the Issuer relating to the Notes (the "Offering Memorandum"), and such other
information with respect to the Issuer and the Notes as the C.P.' Dealer shall
reasonably request from time to time.
(b) The Issuer agrees to cooperate with the C.P. Dealer in the preparation from
time-to-time of anew Offering Memorandum for the Notes in the event the C.P. Dealer
determines that the preparation and distribution of such Offering Memorandum is
necessaty or desfrable in connection with offering and sale on behaff of the Issuer of
the Notes, and to fiimish or to cause to be furnished to the'CP. Dealer as many
copies of such new Offering Memoremdum as the C.P. Dealer shall request.
(c) If, at any time during the term of this Agreement, any event shaU occur or facts
become known to either party that might affect the correctness or completeness
(under standards appUcable to letter of credit backed commercial paper) of any
statement of a material fact contained in the then current Offering Memorandum,
such party shaU promptiy notify the other in writing of the cfrcumstances and details
of such event.
(d) If any material adverse changes that may affect the offering and sale on behalf
of the Issuer of the Notes or any fact or drcumstance which may constitute, or with
the passage of time wUl constitute, an event of default under the Notes, any
Authorizing Document, the Fadfity or the Facifity Agreement, the Issuer wifi promptiy
notify the C.P. Dealer by electronic means (telephone, facsiimie communication or emaU).
Section 9. Fees And Elxpenses.
For the C.P. Dealer's services under this Agreement, the Issuer wiU pay the C P .
Dealer a fee of
of one percent (
%) per annum of the weighted
average of the principal amount of Notes outstanding during each three (3) month
period. The Issuer wifi pay the fee quarterly in arrears commencing
•
1, 2002, and each March 1, June 1, September 1 and December 1 thereafter.

 5/ 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83147

Section 10. Representations, Warranties, Covenants And Agreements Of The
Issuer.
The Issuer, by its acceptance hereof, represents, warrants, covenants, and agrees
with the C.P. Dealer that:
(a) it is a municipafity and a home rule unit of local go"vemment duly organized
and validly existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of lUinois;
' (b) it has fuU power.and authority to take aU actions requfred or permitted to be
taken by the Issuer by or under, and to perform and observe the covenants and
agreeraients on its part contained in, this Agreement and any other instrument or
agreement relating hereto to which the Issuer is a party;
(c) it has, on or before the date hereof, duly taken all action necessary to be taken
by it prior to such date to authorize (i) the execution, delivery and performance of
, this Agreeihent, the Authorizing Documents, the Facifity Agreement and any other
instrument or agreement to which the Issuer is a party and which has been or wiU
be executed in connection with the fransactions contemplated by the foregoing
documents; and (u) the carrying out, giving effect to, consummati'on and
performance of the transactions and obfigations contemplated by the foregoing
agreements and by the current Offering Memorandum;
(d) Offering Memoranda and supplements, amendments and updates to any
thereof, furnished by the Issuer and used by the C.P. Dealer (including
amendments, supplements and replacements thereof), until suchtimeas they shafi
have been subsequentiy amended, updated or replaced, shaU not, to the personal
knowledge and befief of the Chief Financial Officer of the Issuer (or the officer who
executes this Agreement on behalf-of the Issuer, if other than the Chief Financial
Oflicer) or the City. ComptroUer, contain any untme, incorrect or misleading
statement of a materied fact or omit to state a material fact requfred to be stated
therein or necessaty to make the statements made therein, under common industty
standards of disclosure appficable, as of the date of this Agreement, to letter of
credit backed corbmerdal paper, in light of the cfrcuihstances under which they
were made, not misleading.
Section 11. Term Of Agreement.
This Agreement shall become effective on the date hereof and shafi continue in fuU
force and effect until the cessation of the Notes program, subject to the right of
suspension and termination as provided herein.

 83148

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 12. Governing Law.
This Agreement shaU be governed by and constmed in accordance with the laws of
the State of Illinois.
Section 13. Dealing In Notes By The C.P. Dealer; No Obfigation To Purchase
Notes.
Notwithstanding anything to the confraty contained herein or elsewhere:
(a) The C.P. Dealer, in its individual capadty, may in good faith buy, seU, owri,
hold and deal in any of the Notes, including, "without limitation, any Notes offered
and sold by the C.P. Dealer pursuant to this Agreement, and may join in any action
which any. owner of the Notes may be entitied to take with like effect as if.it did not
act in any capacity hereunder. The C.P. Dealer, in its individual capacity,"either as
prindpal or agent, may also engage in or be interested in any financial or other
fransaction with the Issuer and may act as depositaty, account party, or agent for
any committee or body of owners of the Notes or other obfigations of the Issuer as
freely as if it did not act in any capacity hereunder.
(b) Nothing in this Agreement shaU be deenied to constitute the C.P. Dealer an
underwriter of the Notes or to obfigate the C P . Dealer to purchase any Notes for its
own account at any time.
Section 14. MisceUaneous.
- (a) Except as otherwise specificaUy provided in this Agreement, all notices, demzmds
and formal actions under this Agreement shaU be in writirig and either (i) handdefivered, (u) sent by elecfronic means, or (iu) mafied by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, postage prepaid, to .
The C.P. Dealer:

Attention:
Telephone:
Telecopy:

 5/1 /2002

The Issuer:

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83149

City of Chicago
Chief Financial Officer
33 North LaSaUe Street, Sixth Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602
Attention: Walter K. Knorr
Telephone: (Omitted for printing
purposes)
Telecopy: (Omitted for printing,
purposes)
E-mail: (Omitted for printiiig purposes)

The Issuing and
Paying Agent:

Attention:
Telephone:
Telecopy:
E>-maU:
Each party hereto may, by notice given under this Agreement to the other parties
described above, designate other addresses to which subsequent notices, requests,
reports or other communications shafi be dfrected.
(b) This Agreement shafi inure to the benefit of and be binding only upon the parties
hereto and thefr respective successors and assigns. The terms "successors" and
"assigns' shafi not include any purchaser of any of the Notes merely because of such
purchase. Neither the Facifity Issuing Party nor any owner of the Notes or other third
party shafi have any rights or privileges hereunder.
(c) AU of the representations and warranties of the Issuer and the C.P. Dealer in this
Agreement shaU remain operative and in fiiU force and effect, regardless of (i) any
investigation made by or on behalf of the C.P. Deader or the Issuer, (u) the offering and
sale of and any payment for any Notes hereunder, or (iii) suspension, terinination or
canceUation of this Agreement.
(d) This Agreement and each provision hereof may be amended, changed, waived;
discharged or terminated ordy by an instmment in writing signed by the parties hereto.
(e) Nothing herein shall be constmed to make any party an employee of the other or
to establish anyfiduciatyrelationship between the parties except as expressly provided
herein.

 83150

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(0 If any provision of this Agreement shaU be held or deemed to be or shaU, in fact,
be invafid, inoperative or unenforceable for any reason, such cfrcumstances shall not
have the effect of rendering any other provision or provisions of this Agreement invalid,
inoperative or unenforceable to any extent whatsoever.
(g) This Agreement may be executed in several counterparts, each of which shaU be
regarded as an original and aU of which shaU constitute one (1) and the same
document.
In Witness 'Whereof, The parties hereto have executed this Agreement as of the date
first above written.
City of Chicago
By:
Name: Walter K. Knorr
Titie:

Chief Finandal Officer

By:
Name:
Titie:
Appendix "A" referred to in this Commerdal Paper Dealer Agreement reads as follows:
Appendix "A".
(To Coxniriercial Paper Dealer Agreement)

Certificate Of Designated

Representative.

1 am the Chief Finandal Officer of the City of Chicago (the "Issuer") duly authorized
pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the City Coundl of the Issuer on

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83151

2002, as supplemented (the "Authorizing Document") to appoint Designated
Representatives of the Issuer in connection with the issuance, from time to time, by the
Issuer of commerdal paper notes (the "Notes") in accordance with the Authorizing
Document. I hereby designate the foUowing persons to act on my behalf in accordance
with the Authorizing Document and specimen signatures of such persons are set forth
beside thefr names.
Designated Persons

Executed this

-"

Specimen Signature

day of.
Name: Walter K. Knorr
Titie:

Chief Financial

Exhibit ' C .
(To Ordinance)
Issuing And Paying Agent

Agreement.

This Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement (this "Agreement") is entered into as of
1, 2002, by and between the City of Chicago (the "City"), a municipal
corporation and home mie unit of local government duly organized and existing under
the laws of the State of Illinois, and
(the "Issuing and
Paying Agent"), a
organized and existing under the laws of the
. All capitalized terms used but not otherwise defined herein shaU have
the meanings specified in the Commercial Paper Indenture (as hereinafter defined).

 83152

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 1.- Appointment.
The City has appointed
•_ and
hereby accepts such
appointment, as the Issuing and Paying Agent in connection with the issuEmce and
payment of up to Two Hundred Milfion DoUar ($200,000,000) aggregate prindpal
amount of City of Chicago, Commerdal Paper Notes, 2002 Program, Series A (Tax
Exempt) and Series B (Taxable) (the "Commercial Paper Notes"), pursuant to that
certain Tmst Indenture, dated as of
1, 2002 (the "Commercial Paper
Indenture"), providing for the issuance of the Commercial Paper Notes in such Series.
Such Commercial Paper Notes are to be initiaUy issued in book-entty form only and are
to be initiaUy evidenced by Master Note Certificates (the "Master Note Certificates") in
the form attached to the Commercial Paper Indenture as (Sub)Exhibit A..
The Issuing and Pajnng Agent agrees to observe and perform its duties and obfigations
hereunder and under the Commercial Paper Indenture. Without limiting the generafity
of the foregoing,, the Issuing and Pajring Agent shafi estabfish and maintain the
Commerdal Paper Bank Payment Account, the Commerdal Paper Debt Service Account
and the Bank Note Debt Service Account, and afi requfred subaccounts therein. The
Issuing and Paying Agent agrees to provide to the City and the Tmstee a monthly report
on the ffrst (1**) business day of each month, which report shaU set forth such
information regarding the authentication and issuance of Commerdal Paper Notes
during the prior month, as the City and the Issuing and Paying Agent shafi have agreed
upon.
The Issuing and Paying Agent agrees to keep such books and records, including,
"Without limitation, a complete record of afi Issuance Requests, as shaU be consistent
with industry practice and as may reasonably be requested by the City, and to make
such books and records available for inspection by the City, the Tmstee and the Bank,
such books and records to be avaUable on each business day during reasonable
business hours, and, if so requested, to send copies of such books and records to the
City, the Tmstee or the Bank (at thefr expense), as appficable.
Section 2. Certificate Agreement.
The City acknowledges that (i) the Issuing and Paying Agent has previously entered
into a commerdal paper certificate agreement (the "Certificate Agreement") with The
Depositoty Triist Company, New York, New York ("D.T.C"), and (ii) the continuation in
effect of the Certificate Agreement is a necessaty prerequisite to the Issuing and Paying
Agent's providing services related to the issuance and payment of the Commercial
Paper Notes while the Commercial Paper Notes are in book-entry only form and D.T.C.
is the Note Depository.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83153

Section 3, Letter Of Representations; Commerdal Paper Indenture; Designated
Representatives.
Prior to the issuance of any Commercial Paper Notes, the City shall defiver to Issuing
and Paying Agent an executed Letter of Representations (the "Letter of
Representations"), a copy of which is attached hereto a (Sub)Exhibit A. The Letter of
Representations, when executed by the City, the Issuing and Paying Agent and D.T.C,
shall supplement the provisions of this Agreement, and the City and the Issuing and
Paying Agent shall be bound by the p'roAdsions of the Letter of Representations, to the
extent not inconsistent with the provisions of the Commerdcd Paper Indenture.
The City has defivered to the Issuing and Paying Agent (a) a certified copy of the
Commerdal Paper Indenmre, which copy is attached hereto a (Sub)Exhibit B, (b) a
certified original Certificate of the Chief Finandal Officer setting forth the Authorized
City Representatives (the "Certificate of Chief Financial Officer"), containing the name,
title and true signature of those officers and employees of the City designated by the
City as an Authorized City Representative, and (c) a certified original of a Certificate of
an Authorized City Representative setting forth the Designated Representatives (the
'Certificate of Authorized City Representative" and, together with the Certificate of Chief
Finandal Officer, the "Certificates"), containing the name, titie and tme signature of
those ofiiccrs and employees of the City authorized, pursuant to the Commerdal Paper
Indenture, to take action with respect to the Commercial Paper Notes, which
Certificates are attached hereto as (Sub)Exhibit C. The City agrees to provide the
Issuing and Paying Agent "with revised Certificates when there are changes in the
Authorized City Representatives or Designated Representatives. Until the Issuing and
Pajong Agent recdves any subsequent Certificate, the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU
be entitied to rely on the last Certificate defivered to it for the purpose of determining
the Authorized City Representatives or Designated Representatives.

Section 4.. Master Note Certificate.
Prior to the issuance of any Commercial Piaper Notes, the City shafi defiver to the
Issuing and Paying Agent the Master Note Certificates evidencing the.Commerdal Paper
Notes. Such Master Note Certificates shaU be duly executed, specify the date of
issuance, the series of Commercial Paper Notes, and be registered in the name of Cede
& Co., as nominee of D.T.C, all as provided in the Commerdal Paper Indenture.
Section 5. Issuance Requests.
Issuance Requests shafi be in the form attached hereto as (Sub)Ejchibit D. Issuzmce
Requests may be delivered by a Designated Representative through a elecfronic
instmction and reporting communication service offered by either the Dealer or the
Issuing and Paying Agent pursuant to Section 10 hereof, in each case received by the
Issuing and Paying Agent at the address specified in Section 17 hereof prior to 11:30

 83154

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCILS-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

A.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) on the day on which such Issuance Request is to be
operative.
If the Issuing and Pa5nng Agent, at its option, acts upon an Issuance Request received
after 11:30'A.M. (Chicago, lUinois time) on the day on which the Issuemce Request is
to be operative, the City understands and agrees that (a) such Issuance Request shaU
be acted upon a best efforts, basis, and (b) the Issuing and Pa3ring Agent makes no
representation or warranty that the issuance and defivery of any Commercial Paper
Note pursuant to such Issuance Request shafi be completed prior to the close of
business on such date.
Any Issuance Request given by telephone shaU be confirmed to the Issuing and
Paying Agent in "writing, either by regular maU (upon receipt), elecfronic fransmission
or facsimUe, by a Designated Representative prior to 1:00 P.M. (Chicago, Illinois time)
in the form of (Sub)Exhibit D hereto on the day on which such Issuance Request is to
be operative.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, upon receipt of a notice from the
Bank under the Reimbursement Agreement in the form described in Section [9.02) of
the Rdmbursement Agreement (a "No-Issuance Notice"), the Issuing and Paying Agent
shafi cease issuing Conunercial Paper Notes untfi such time as the Bank shall have
rcfraaed (by defivety of a "written notice to the Issuing and Paying Agent) such NoIssuance Notice.
Section 6. Issuance.
The Issuing and Paying Agent's duties and responsibifities in cormection with the
issuance of the Commerdal Paper Notes shadl include:
(a) holding the Master Note Certificates in safekeeping and completing or causing
to be completed, each Master Note as to amount, date, maturity date, interest rate
and interest amount upon receipt of Issuance Requests in accordance with the
Commerdal Paper Indenture;
(b) (1) verifying that the aggregate prindpal amount of Commercial Paper Notes
described in each Issuance Request (together with the interest thereon), plus the
aggregate principal amount of aU Commerdal Paper Notes then outstanding (together
with the interest thereon), less the aggregate principal amount of any of the then
Outstanding Commerdal Paper Notes to be retfred concurrentiy with the issuance of
the Commerdal Paper Notes described in the Issuance Request (including interest
thereon), does not exceed the amount avaUable to be drawn under the Letter of Credit
securing such Commercial Paper Notes, and (2) assigning to each Issuance Request
received from the City a C.U.S.I.P. Number;

 SI 112002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83155

(c) causing to be delivered a Commerdal Paper Note on behalf of the City upon
receipt of instmctions from a Designated Representative of the City, as to the series,
principal amount, registered owner, date of issue, maturity date (which shafi be no
more than two hundred seventy (270) days from the date of issuance thereof) and
interest rate, (if appUcable) by way of data entry fransfer to the D.T.C. M.M.I. Same
Day Funds Settiement System ("S.D.F.S."), and to receive from S.D.F.S aconfirmation
receipt that such delivety was effected;
. (d) if instmcted by an Authorized City Representative, crediting the proceeds of
sales of the Commerdal Paper Notes to the appropriate subaccount within the Bank
Payment Account estabfished with the Issuing and Paying Agent pursuant to the
Commerdal Paper Indenmre in an amount equad to the unreimbursed Advances
made by the Bank to pay principal of or interest on the Commercial Paper Notes of
such Series;
(e) fransferring to the Tmstee for deposit in the Proceeds Fund any remedning
proceeds of the sale of the Commerdal Paper Notes after the credits pursuant to
subsection (d) above; and
(f) holding the amounts on deposit in the appropriate subaccount of the Bank
Payment Account separate from afi other funds, accounts and subaccounts of the
Issuing and Paying Agent, and applying such amounts in accordsmce with the terms
hereof and of the Commerdal Paper Indenture.
The Issuing and Paying Agent shafi have no duty or responsibiUty to make any
transfer of the proceeds of the sale of the Commercial- Paper Notes, or to advance any
monies or effea any credit with respect to such proceeds orfransfersuidess and until
the Issuing and Paying Agent has actuaUy received the proceeds of the sale of the
Commercisd Paper Notes.
Section 7. Payment.
The Issuing and Paying Agent's duties and responsibifities in connection with the
payment of the Commerdzd Paper Notes shafi include:
(a) upon presentment at maturity of a Commercial Paper Note, paying the principal
of and interest on the Commercial Paper Note to the Owner thereof;
(b) making the necessary and timely drawings under the Letter of Credit in
accordance with the terms and provisions thereof in order to effectuate the timely
payment of prindpal and interest on the Commercial Paper Notes as the same become
due;

 83156

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(c) crediting amounts received from the City for the payment of the prindpal of or
interest on the Commercial Paper Notes to the related Series subaccount of the Bank
Payment Account;
(d) crediting amounts received from the Bank as a result of drawings under the
Letter of Credit to the Commercial Paper Debt Service Account; and
(e) keeping amounts on deposit in the Commercial Paper Debt Service Account
separate from all other funds, accounts and subaccounts of the Issuing and Pajdng
Agent, and utilizing such amounts in accordance with the terms hereof and of the
CommerciEd Paper Indenture.
In making draws under the Letter of Credit, the Issuing and Pajnng Agent shaU be
acting solely on behaff and for the benefit of the Owners of the Commercial Paper Notes,
and not as agent of the City.
The Issuing and Paying Agent shafi have no obfigation to pay amounts due on the
Commerdal Paper Notes at thefr maturity other than from fimds received by the
Issuing and Paying Agent from, or for the account of, the City, or from draws under the
Letter of Credit.
Section 8. Bank Notes.
(a) The City agrees from time to time to instmrt the TYustee to furnish the Issuing
and Paying Agent with an adequate supply of executed Bank Notes, which are in form
satisfactoty to comply with the provisions of the Commerdal Paper Indenture emd
which are seriaUy numbered and executed by facsimile signatures in accordance with
the Commercial Paper Indenture, with the principal amount, date of issue, maturity
date and Owner left blank. The Issuing and Paying Agent agrees to hold the unissued
Bank Notes in safekeeping for the account of the City in accordemce with the customary
practice of the Issuing Emd Paying Agent.
(b) Upon receipt of written noticefromthe Bank that an Advance made by the Bank
has not been reimbursed on the day thereof arid of the certificate of an Authorized City
Representative, the Issuing and Paying Agent agrees to withdraw the necessary Bank
Note(s) from safekeeping and, in accordance with such notice and certificate, agrees to:
(i) complete each Bank Note as to prindpal amount, date of issue, series arid
maturity date in accordance with the Commercial Paper Indenture, register such
Bank Note in the name of the Bank and record each payment and prepayment on the
schedule attached thereto;
(ii) manuaUy authenticate each Bank Note by any officer or employee duly
authorized and designated for such purpose;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83157

(ui) defiver the Bank Note(s) to or upon the order of the Bank; and
(iv) promptiy defiver one (1) nonnegotiable copy of each Bank Note to the City.
(c) The Issuing and Paying Agent shall credit amounts received from the City for
pajment of the. prindpal of and interest on Bank Notes to the Bank Note Account.

Section 9.

Notice.

The Issuing and Pa5ring Agent's duties, and responsibifities in cormection with
providing notification of certain matters described in the Commercial Paper Indenture
shaU indude:
(a) notification by 4:00 P.M. (Chicago, lUinois time) one (1) Business Day prior to
the maturity date of any Commerdal Paper Notes to the City of the total amount due
with respect to such maturing Commerdal Paper Notes;
(b) notification by 2:00 P.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) on the maturity date of any
Commercial Paper Notes to the City, if funds held in the Bank Payment Account on
such maturity date, together with the proceeds of Commercial Paper Notes to be
issued on such date, are insuflident to repay an Advance made pursuant to a
Reimbursement Agreement in cormection with the maturity of such Commercial
Paper Notes, which notification shaU specify the amount of the deficiency;
(c) notification by 3:00 P.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) on the maturity date of any
Commerdal Paper Notes to the Bank, ff insuffident funds have been deposited in the
Series Bank Payment Accounts to reimburse the Bank for an Interest Advance made
on such day;
(d) monthly notification to the City on the first (1") business day of each month
stating the cimount of interest paid on Commercial Paper Notes during the prior
month; and
(e) any notification to be provided by the Issuing and Paying Agent as specified in
the Commercial Paper Indenture.

Section 10. Operating System. .
Issuance Requests may be defivered by a Designated Representative through either
the Dealer's or the Issuing and Paying Agent's commercial paper elecfronic instmction
and reporting communication service (each a "System", and coUectively the "Systems").
Elecfronic instmctions must be fransmitted in accordance with the procedures
furnished by the either the Dealer or the Issuing and Paying Agent, as applicable, to the

 83158

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

City in connection "with the Systems. These transmissions shall be the equivalent to
the giving of a written Issuance Request to the Issuing and Paying Agent, ff either
System is inoperable at any time, a Designated Representative may defiver written,
telephone or facsimUe instmctions to the Issuing and Paying Agent, which instmctions
shall be verified in accordance "with any security procedures agreed upon by the
parties.
Section 11. Representations.
(a) The City represents to the Issuing and Paying Agent that this Agreement, the
Commercial Paper Notes and the Bank Notes have been duly authorized, and that this
Agreement, when executed, and the Commerdal Paper Notes and the Bank Notes,
when issued in accordance with the Issuance Requests and the Commerdal Paper
Indenture, "wiU be vafid and binding obfigations of the City, enforceable in accordance
with thefr respective terms, subject to bankmptcy, insolvency, moratorium and other
simUar laws affecting creditors' rights generaUy and to equitable prindples when
equitable remedies are sought.
(b) The City represents to the Issuing and Paying Agent that each Commerdal Paper
Note and each Bank Note issued under this Agreement wiU be exempt from regisfration
under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
Each Issuance Request to issue Commercial Paper Notes under this Agreement and
the Commerdal Paper Indenture shaU be deemed a representation by the City as of the
date thereof that such issuance conforms in aU respects to the requfrements of the
Commercial Paper Indenture and this Agreement, and that the representations herein
are tme and correct as if made on and as of such date.
Section 12. Additional Information.
Upon the reasonable request of the City, the Tmstee or the Bank, as applicable, given
at any time and from time to time, the Issuing and Paying Agent agrees promptiy to
provide the City, the Tmstee or the Bank, as appficable, with information with respea
to the Commercial Paper Note(s), including, without limitation, the Bank Notes, issued
and paid hereunder. Such request shafi be in written form and shaU include the
principal amount, date of issue, maturity date, interest rate and amount of interest, as
appUcable, of each Commerdal Paper Note which has been issued or paid by the
Issuing and Paying Agent, and for which the request is being mace.
Section 13. Compensation.
The City agrees to pay compensation for the Issuing and Paying Agent's services
pursuant to this Agreement in accordance with the Issuing and Paying Agent's fee

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83159

schedule, as amended from time to time, and to reimburse the Issuing and Paying
Agent for such disbursements (including the reasonable fees and expenses of counsel).
The City shaU also reimburse the Issuing and Paying Agent for any fees and charges
imposed by the Note Depository with respect to Commercial Paper Notes issued in
book-entty form.
Section 14. Liabifity.
The City agrees that the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU not be liable for any losses,
damages,fiabUitiesor costs suffered or incurred by the City or the Issuing and Paying
Agent as a result of (a) the Issuing and Paying Agent's having duly executed'Issuance
Requests in good faith in siccordance therewith and with the Commei"ciaI Paper
Indenture and this Agreement, except to the extent, if any, that such execution
constitutes negfigence by the Issuing and Paying Agent; (b) the Issuing and Paying
Agent's improperly executing or fading to execute any Issuance Requests because of
any material error contained in information provided by the City to the Issuing and
Paying Agent for the purpose of preparing such Issuance Request, fafiure of
communications media or any other cfrcumstances beyond the Issuing and Paying
Agent's confrol; (c) the actions or inactions of D.T.C. or any broker, dealer, consignee
or agent not selected by the Issuing and Paying Agent; or (d) any other acts or
omissions of the Issuing and Paying Agent (or of any of its agents, dfrectors, officers,
employees or correspondents) relating to this Agreement or the fransactions or
activities contemplated hereby, except to the extent, if any, that such other acts or
omissions constitute negfigence or willful misconduct by the Issuing and Paying Agent.
This section shaU survive any termination of this Agreement, the issuance and payment
of any Note(s) and the resignation or removal of the Issuing and Paying Agent.
Section 15. Indenmity.
The City agrees to indemnify and hold the Issuing and Paying Agent, its employees
and any of its officers and agents harmless from and against, and the Issuing and
Paying Agent shall not be fiable for, any and aU losses, fiabUities (including fiabifities
for penalties), actions, suits, judgments, demands, damages, costs and expenses of any
nature (including, "without limitation, attorneys' fees and expenses) arising out of or
resulting from the exercise of its rights and/or the performance of its duties (or those
of its agents and employees) hereunder; provided, however, that the City shafi not be
fiable to indemnify or pay the Issuing and Pajring Agent or any of its officers or
employees with respect to any loss,fiabifity,action, suit, judgment, demand, dcunage,
cost or expense that results from or is attributable to tiie Issuing and Paying Agent's
negfigence or wiUful misconduct or" thsit of its officers or employees. The foregoing
indemnity includes, but is not limited to, any action taken or omitted to be taken by the
Issuing and Paying Agent or any of its officers or employees upon written, telecopy,
telephonic or other clectronicaUy transmitted instmctions (authorized herein) received
by the Issuing and Paying Agent from, or believed by it in good feiith to have been given

 83160

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

by, an Authorized City Representative or Designated Representative. The provisions
of this section shall survive (i) the Issuing and Paying Agent's resignation or removal
hereunder, and (u) the termination of this Agreement.
Section 16. Termination.
Subject to the terms of the Commerdal Paper Indenture, either the Issuing and
Paying Agent or the City may terminate this Agreement at any time, upon not less than
sixty (60) days prior written riotice in the case of the Issuing and Paying Agent, arid
upon written notice in the case of the City, to the other and to the Tmstee and the
Bank. No such termination shaU affect the rights and obfigations of the City and the
Issuing and Paying Agent which have accmed under this Agreement. prior to
terinination. No termination can occur prior to (1) a substitute Issuing and Paying
Agent being appointed by the City and assuming its duties under the Commerdal Paper
Indenture, and (2) the Letter of Credit being fransferred to the substitute Issuing and
Paying Agent, ff no substitute Issuing and Paying Agent has been appointed at the end
of the sixty (60) day period, then the Issuing and Paying Agent may petition a court of
competent jurisdiction to make such appointment.

Section 17. Addresses.
Issuance Requests hereunder shaU be (a) maUed, (b) telephoned, (c) transmitted by
facsimUe device, and/or (d)fransmittedelecfronicaUy to the Issuing and Paying Agent
at the address, telephone number and/or facsimUe number specified below, and shaU
be deemed delivered upon receipt by the Issuing and .Paying Agent at the address,
telephone number and/or facsimUe number specified below.
AU notices, requests, demands, including any No Issuance Notices and other
communications hereunder (excluding Issuance Requests) shafi be in writing and shall
be deemed to have been duly given (a) upon defivery by hand (against receipt), (b) by
facsimile, or (c) three (3) days after such notice, request, demand or other
communication is defivered to a United States Post Office certified maU (against receipt)
or by regular medl (upon receipt) to the party and at the address set forth below or at
such other address as a party may designate by written notice:
(a) If To The City:

City of Chicago
33 North LaSaUe Street, 6"^ Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602
Attention: Chief Finandal Officer

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83161

(b) IfTo The Issuing
and Payirig Agent:

(c) IfTo The Bank:

to the address set forth in the
Reimbursement Agreement

Section 18. MisceUaneous.
(a) Governing Law. This Agreement shedl be governed and interpreted in accordance
with the laws of the State of fifinois.
(b) Assignment, Modification And Amendment; Issuing And. Paving Agent's
Successor In Interest. This Agreement may not be assigned by either the City or the
Issuing and Paying Agent, and may not be modified, amended or supplemented except
by a writing or writings duly executed by the duly authorized representatives of the City
and the Issuing and Paying Agent. Anything in this Agreement to the confraty
notwithstanding, emy corporation or national banking association into which the
Issuing and Paying Agent may be merged or converted, or with which it may be
consofidated, or any corporation or national banking assodation resulting from any
merger, consofidation or conversion to which the Issuing and Paying Agent shafi be a
party, or any corporation or national banking association succeeding to the corporate
tmst business of the Issuing and Paying Agent, shafi be the successor of the Issuing
aiid Paying Agent if such successor corporation or national banking assodation is
otherwise efigible under Section 7.03 of the Commerdal Paper Indenture, without the
execution orfilingof any document or the undertaking of any further act on the part
of the Issuing and Paying Agent or such successor corporation or national banking
assodation.
(c) Complete Agreement. This Agreement contains the entfre understanding and
agreement between the parties with respect to the subject matter hereof, and all prior
agreements, understandings, representations, statements, pronuscs, inducements,
negotiations and undertakings between the parties with respect to said subject matter
are superseded hereby. In the event of any inconsistency between the pro"visions hereof
and the Commerdal Paper Indenture, the provisions of the Conunercial Paper
Indenture shaU govem.

 83162

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

. 5/1 /2002

(d) Singular Plural And Gender References. With respect to afi references of the
Commerdal Paper Indenture shafi govem herein to nouns, insofar as the context
requfres, the singular form shall be deemed to include the plural, the plural form shall
be deemed to include the singular, and the neuter, masculine and feminine genders
shall be deemed to refer to aU such genders. The words "hereoF, "herein", "hereby" and
"hereunder" and words of simUar import, refer to this Agreement as a whole.
(e) Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in counterparts, each of which
shaU be an origined, and aU of which shaU constitute but one and the same instmment.
(f) Section Headings. Section headings in this Agreement are for convenience of
reference only, shaU not constitute part of this Agreement and shaU not be used to
constme the meaning or intent of the provisions hereof.
(g) Waiver Of' Set-Off, Offset Lien Or Counterdaims. The Issuing and Paying
Agent hereby waives to the fullest extent possible under applicable law any and all
rights of set-off, offset, fien or counterdaim it may have with respect to any amounts
held by it in the Bank Payment Account, the Bank-Note Account and the Commerdal
Paper Debt Service Account by reason of any claim it may have against the City, the
Tmstee, the Bank or any other person.
(h) Benefit Of Agreement. This Agreement is solely for the benefit of the parties
hereto and the owners of the Commerdal Paper Notes and the Bank Notes, and no
other person shaU acqufre or have any right under or by virtue hereof.
In Witness Whereof, The parties, hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly executed
and defivered by thefr respective officers thereunto duly authorized as of the date first
above written.
City of Chicago
By:
Chief Finandal Officer
ISealJ

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83163

Attest:

City Clerk

as Issuing and Paying Agent
By:

,

:

Its:
[(Sub)Exhibits ."A":.and "B" referred to in this Issuing
and Paying Agent Agreement un avaUable
at time of printing.)
[(Sub) Exhibit "C" referred to in this Issuing
and Paying Agent Agreement constitutes
Appendix "A" to the Commercial Paper
Dealer Agreement Emd is printed
on pages 83150. through 83151
of this JoumaLJ
(Sub)Exhibit "D" referred to in this Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement reads as
foUo"ws:

(Sub)Exhibit "D".
(To Issuing And Paying Agent Agreement)
Issuance Request
^2002 Program).
The undersigned, a Designated Representative of the City of Chicago (the "City") does
hereby request
. as Issuing and Paying Agent (the

 83164

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Issuing and Paying Agent") under the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement, dated as
of
1, 2002 (the "Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement"), between the
City and the Issuing and Pa3nng Agent, to issue Commercial Paper Notes as foUows:
1.

Date of Issuance:

2.

Prindpal Amount:
A.

B.

3.

Series A (Tax Exempt)
Refunding Notes, 2002 ProgrEun Series A

$_

New Money Notes, 2002 Program Series A

$_

Series B (Taxable)
Refundiiig Notes, 2002 Program Series B

$_

New Money Notes, 2002 Program Series B

$_

Total Prindpal Amount and Purchase Price
for Notes

$_

*Terms of Series A Notes (Tax Eicempt):
Maturity Date

Principal Amount

Interest Rate

Interest Amount

To be completed by 11:30 A.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) on the Date of Issuance specified in Paragraph ].

 5/1 /2002

4.

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

*Terms of Series B Notes (Taxable):
Maturity Date

5.

83165

Prindpal Amount

Iriterest Rate

Interest Amount

Pursuant to Section 2.06(b) of that certain Tmst Indenture, dated as of
1, 2002 (the "Indenture"), by and between the City and
.
as tmstee, relating to Commerdal Paper Notes, 2002
Program, the undersigned hereby certifies as foUows:
(i) - a Letter of Credit -with respect to the Series
and effect;

Notes is in fiiU force

(ii)

after the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes as requested hereby and
the appfication of proceeds thereof, the aggregate principal amount of
Commerdgd Paper Notes Outstanding wifi not exceed the amount
currentiy authorized to be Outstanding under the Indenture as
provided in Section 2.0 1(b) thereof;

(iu)

the issuance of Commerdal Paper Notes, Series A requested hereby,
if refunding notes issued under the 2002 Program, wiU be appfied to
pay $
of Commerdal Paper Notes, Series A maturing
on the date hereof and wifi not be used to pay any Commercial Paper
Notes, Series B;

To be completed by 11:30 A.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) on the Date of Issuance specified in Paragraph 1.

 83166

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(iv)

the issuEmce of Commercial Paper Notes, Series B requested hereby,
ff refunding notes issued under the 2002 Program, "wUI be appfied to
pay $
of CommerciEd Paper Notes, Series B maturing
on the date hereof and wifi not be used to pay any Commercial Paper
Notes, Series A;

(v)

the aggregate prindpal amount of Commercial Paper Notes described
in this Issuance Request (together-with the interest thereon), plus the
aggregate principal amount of aU Commercial Paper Notes currentiy
outstanding (together with the interest thereon), less the aggregate
prindpsd Eunount of any of the currentiy OutstEmding Commercial
Paper Notes to be retired concurrentiy virith the issuance of the
Commerdal Paper Notes described in this Issuance Request (including
interest thereon), does not exceed the Eunount avaUable to be drawn
under the Letter of Credit securing such Commercial Paper Notes;

(vi)

unless interest on the CommerciEd Paper Notes to be issued is taxable,
to the City's knowledge there has been no change in the facts,
estimates, cfrcumstances and representations of the City set forth or
made (as the case may be) in each Tax Certificate appficable to the
Commercial Paper Notes being issued and to the extent that Note
Proceeds are being deposited to the Proceeds Fund or are being used
during the eighteen (18) month period described in the TEIX Certificate
to reimburse interest on Commercial Paper Notes then maturing, a
certificate regarding the use of such proceeds, as requfred by the Tax
Certificate, is attached hereto as Attachment A;

(vii)

the term to maturity of the CommerciEd Paper Notes to be defivered
does not exceed two hundred seventy (270) days, and the maturity
dates of such Commerdal Paper Notes set forth herein do not extend
beyond the Termination Date of the Letter of Credit securing such
Commercial Paper Notes;

(viU)

the City has not been notified by Bond Counsel that its opinion with
respect to the validity of the CommerciEd Paper Notes and, unless
interest on the Commercial Paper Notes is to be taxable, the tax
treatment of the interest thereon has been revised or withdrawn or, if
any such revision or withdrawal has occurred, the revised opinion or
substitute opinion has not been revised or withdrawn;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83167

(ix)

to the actual knowledge of the City, no Event of Default has occurred
and is now continuing;

(x)

$
of Note Proceeds shaU be deposited into the
appropriate subaccount of the Bank Payment Account;.,
$
of Note Proceeds shaU be deposited into the
appropriate account of the Proceeds Fund; and
$
of funds shall be deposited by the City into the
appropriate subaccount of the Bank Payment Account to reimburse
interest currentiy payable on maturing Commercial Paper Notes; and

(xi)

afi of the conditions precedent to the issuance of CommerciEd Paper
Notes set forth in Section 2.06 of the Indenture have been satisfied.

AU capitafized terms used but not defined herein shaU have the meanings ascribed
thereto in the Indenture.'
Date:

City of Chicago

Request Number:

By.
Designated Representative

[Attachment "A" referred to in this Issuance
Request unavailable at time of printing.)

 83168

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Exhibit "D".
(To Ordinance)
Indenture Of Trust
Between
City Of Chicago
And
(Name Of Trustee]
As Trustee
Relating To
$.

•

City Of Chicago, Illinois
Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
Dated As Of

, 2002.

THIS INDENTURE OF TRUST, made and entered into as of
2002 (tiiis
"Indenture"), by and between the CiTY OF CHICAGO (the "Issuer"), a municipal corporation and
a home rule unit of local government of the State of Illinois, and [NAME OF TRUSTEE], as Trustee
(the "Trustee"), a banking corporation, with its principal corporate trust office located in

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83169

WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, the Issuer is a municipal corporation and a home rule unit of local
government of the State of Illinois, iii accordance with the provisions of Section 6(a) of Article
v n of die 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois; and
WHEREAS, the execution and delivety of this Indenture and the issuance of the
Bonds have been In aU respects duly and validly authorized by an ordroance of the Issuer adopted
on
, 2002; and
WHEREAS, afi acts and proceedings required by law necessaiy to make the Bonds
when executed by the Issuer, authenticated and defivered by the Trustee and duly issued, the
vafid, binding aixi legal direct and general obfigations of the Issuer, and to constimte this
Indenmre a valid and binding agreement for the uses and purposes herein set forth, in accordance
with its terms, have been done and taken; and the execution and defivety of this Indenture have
been in all respects duly authorized;

Now, THEREFORE, Tms iNDEmrnuE OF TRUST WITNESSETH, and it is expressly
declared, that aU Bonds issued and secured hereunder are to' be issued, authendcated and
defivered, upon and subject to the terms, conditions, stipulations, covenants, agreements, trusts,
uses and purposes as hereinafter expressed, and the Issuer has agreed and covenanted, and does
hereby agree and covenant, with the Trustee and with the respective ownersfromtime to time of
the Bonds, as foUows:
ARTICLE I
Definitions and Rules of Interpretation
Section l.OI. Rules of Interpretation. For aU purposes of this Indenture, except
as otherwise expressly provided or unless the context otherwise requires:
(A)
AU references in this Indenture to designated "Articles," "Secuons" and
other subdi-visions are to the designated Articles, Sections and other subdivisions of this
Indenture.
(B)
The words "herein," "hereof," "hereto," "hereby," and "hereunder" and
other words of simUar import refer to this Indenture as a whole and not to any particular
Article, Secdon or other subdivision.
(C)
The teims defined in this Anicle have the meanings assigned to them in this
Article, and include the plural as well as the singular.

 83170

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(D)
AU accoimting terms not otherwise defined herein have the meanings
assigned to them in accordance with generaUy accepted accounting principles as in effect
from time to time.
.;
(E)
Every "request," "order," "demand," "appfication," "appointment,"
"notice," "statement," "certificate," "consent," "direction," "Instmction" or sumlar
action hereunder by the Issuer shaU, imless the form thereof is specificaUy provided, be
in writing signed by the Authorized Issuer Representative.
(F)
AU other terms used herein which are defined in the Auction Procedures
sbaU have the same meanings assigned them in the Auction Procedures unless the context
otherwise requires.
Section 1.02. Definitions. For aU purposes of diis Indenture, except as otherwise
expressly provided or unless the context otherwise requires:
"Administrative Expenses" means the reasonable and necessaty expenses (including
the reasonable and necessaty out-of-pocket expenses and fees of Counsel) incurred by the Issuer
In connection with the Bonds, thisfridentureand any transaction or event contemplated by the
Agreement or this Indenture.
"Auction Procedures" shaU mean with respect to the Bonds during an Auction Rate
Period the procedures set forth in Appendix B to this Indenture.
"Authorized Denominadons" means with respect to any Term Rate Period, $5,000
and any integral multqile thereof; widi respert to any Daily Rate Period or Weekly Rate Period,
$100,000 and any integral muldple of $5,000 in excess thereof; with respect to any Flexible Rate
Period, $100,000 and any integral multiple of $5,000 in excess thereof; and with respea to any
Auction Rate Period, $25,000 and any iniegral multiple thereof.
"Beneficial Owner" means the owner of a Bond or portion thereof for federal
income tax purposes.
"Bond" or "Bonds" means any one or more of the bonds authorized, authendcated
and delivered under this Indenture.
"Bond Fund" means the fund created by Section 6.02 hereof.
"Bond Fund Requirement" means, as of any dale of calculation, an amoimt equal
to the sum of (i) the interest on the Bonds accmed and unpaid; (ii) the interest on the Bonds to
accrue to the first Business Day of the next month calculated at the then current rate to the end
of the then current Rate Period and thereafter at the rate of [18]% per annum; (iii) the principal
of the Bonds then due and unpaid; and (iv) if principal of the Bonds matures within one year of
the first Business Day of the next mondi, that portion of the principal next due that would have
accrued to the first Business Day of the next month if deemed to accrue daily from a date one year
prior to its due date.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OP COMMITTEES

83171

"Bondholder" or "holder" or "Owner" or "owner of Bonds" means the Person or
Persons in whose name or names a Bond shaU be registered on books of the Issuer kept by the
Registrar for that purpose in accordance with the terms of this Indenture.
"Bond Insurance Poficy" means thefinancial,guaranty insurance poficy. including
the endorsements thereto, issued by the Bond Insurer guaranteeing payment of principal of and
Interest on the Bonds.
"Bond Insurer" means
or any successor thereto.

. .a

•

_,

"Book Enlty Bond" means a Bond authorized to be issued to and restricted to being
registered in the name of a Securities Depositoty.
"Business Day" means a day on which banking institutions. located, in New York,
New York, and Chicago, lUinois and ia the city or cities in which the Designated. Office of the
Trustee is located, are not required or authorized to remain closed and on v/tnch the New York
Stock Exchange is not closed.
"Counsel" means an attorney at law or a firm of attorneys (who may be an
employee of or counsel to the Issuer or the Trustee) duly artmittpd to the practice of law before
the highest court of any state of the United States of America or of the District of Columbia.
"DaUy Rate" means the interest rate on the Bonds established in accordance with
Section 2.03(a) hereof.
"DaUy Rate Period" means each period during which Bonds bear interest at DaUy
Rates.
"Dated Date" means (i) the date of issuance and delivety to the Underwriters of
die Bonds or (u)
, 2002 if die Initial Rate Period for the Bonds is a Term Rate
Period.
"Default" or "default" means any event which with the giving of notice, the
passage of time, or both, becomes an "event of default".
"Designated Office" means the office of the Trustee or its affiliates designated from
time to time by the trustee as the appropriate office for a given purpose herein, and in the absence
of a contraty designation, means the Principal Office of the Trustee. The Designated Office for
purposes of tenders shall initiaUy be
.
"DTC" means The Depositoty Trust Company, a limited purpose trust company
organized under the laws of the State of New York, and its successors and assigns.
"Event of Default" or "event of default" means an occunence or event specified
in and defmed as such by Section 9.01 hereof.

 83172

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Exttaordinaty Services" and "Extraordinaty Expenses" means aU services
rendered and aU expenses (including fees and expenses of Counsel) Incurred under this Indenture
other than Ordinaty Services and Ordinaty Expenses.
. "Fiscal Year" shafi mean the period of time beginmng on Januaty 1 and ending on
December-31 of each year, or such other similar period as the City designates as thefiscalyear,
of die City.
"Fitch" means Fitch DBCA, Inc., its successors and thefr assigns, and, If such
securities rating agency shafi be dissolved or liquidated or sbaU no longer perform the .functions
of a securities rating agency, "Pitch" shall be deemed to refer to any other nationaUy recognized
securities rating agency designated by the Issuer and approved by die Bond Insurer, with notice
to die Trustee.
"Rexible Rate" sbaU mean, with respect to any Bond, the interest rate associated
"with such Bond established In accordance with Section 2.03(d) hereof.
"FlexibleRate Period" means eacbperiod, comprised of Flexible-Segments, during
which Bonds bear Interest at Flexible-Rates.
"Flexible Segment" shafi mean, with respect to each Bond bearing Interest at a
Flexible Rate, the period established in accordance, with Section 2.03(d) hereof.'
"Government Obfigations" means each of the foUowing:
1.
United States Tieasuty Certificates, Notes and Bonds (including State and
- . Local Government Series — "SLGs").
2.
Direct obligations of the United States Tieasuty which have been stripped
by the United States Treasuty itself.
3.
The interest conqwnent of Resolution Funding Corporation strips which
have been stripped by request to die Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
4.
Pre-refimded municipal bonds rated "Aaa" by Moody's and "AAA" by
Standard & Poor's Corporation.
5.
Obligations issued by the following agencies which are backed by the fidl
faith and credit of the United States:
a.

United States Expon-Impon Bank (Eximbank)
Direct obfigations or fully guaranteed certificates of beneficial ownership

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

b.

-

83173

Farmers Home Administration (FmHA)
Certificates of beneficial ownership

. . c.
d.

Federal Financing Bank
General Services Administration
Participation certificates

e.

United States Maritime Administration
Guaranteed Tide XI financing

f.

United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
Project Notes
Local Authority Bonds
New Communities Debentures —United States government guaranteed
debentures
United States Public Housing Notes and Bonds -United States government
guaranteed public housing notes and bonds

"Indenture" means this Indenture of Trust, including any indentures supplemental
hereto or amendatoty hereof.
"Interest Payment Date" means (i) with respea to any DaUy Rate Period or Weekly
Rate Period, thefirstBusiness Day of each calendar month, (u) with respect to any Term Rate
Period, thefirstday of the sixth calendar month following the effective date of such Term Rate
Period, and the first day of each successive sixth calendar month, if any, of such Term Rate
Period, (iu) with respect to any Flexible Segment, the Business Day next succeeding the last day
thereof, (iv) with respea to any Auction Rate Period, (A) for an Auction Period nominaUy of less
than seven days, the first Business Day of thefirstcalendar month commencing after the end of
such Auction Period, (B) for an Auction Period of 91 days or less (other than an Auction Period
described in clause (A)), the Business Day next succeeding the last day of such Auction Period
and (C) for an Auction Period of more than 91 days, (1) each 13th Thursday after the first day
of such Auction Period (or if such Thursday shall not be a Business Day, the next succeeding
Business Day) and (2) the Business Day next succeeding the last day of such Auction Period, and
(v) with respect to each Rate Period, the Business Day next succeeding the last day thereof
"Investment Securities" means each of the following:

 83174

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

A.
Direa obligations of the United States of America (including obfigations
issued or held in book-entty form on the books of the Department of the Treasiuy. and
CATS and TIGRS) or. obfigations the principal of and interest on which are
uhcbncfitionaUy guaranteed by the United States of America.
B.
Bonds, debentures, notes or other evidence of Indebtedness issued or
guaranteed by any of the foUowing federal agendes and provided such obligations are
backed by die fidl faidi and credit of the United States of America (stripped securities are
only permitted if they have been stripped by the agency itselO:.
1.

United States Export-Import Bank (Eximbank)
Direct obligations or fiifiy guaranteed certificates of beneficial ownership

2.

Farmers Home Administration (FmHA)
Certificates of beneficial ownership

. 3.

Federal Finandng Bank

4.

Federal Housing Administration Debentures (FHA)

5.

General Services Administration
Participation certificates

6.

Government National Mortgage Association (GI>IMA or "Ginnie Mae")
GNMA — guaranteed mortgage-backed bonds
GNMA — guaranteed pass-through obligations
(not acceptable for certain cash-flow sensitive issues)

7.

United Slates Maritime Administration
Guaranteed Tide XI financing

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

8.

83175

United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
Projea Notes
Local Authority Bonds
New Communities Debentures —United States government guaranteed
debentures
United States Public Housing Notes and Bonds-United States government
guaranteed public housing notes and bonds

C.
Bonds, deben&ires,. notes or other evidence of Indebtedness issued or
guaranteed by any of the foUowing non-fiiU faith and credit United States government
agencies (including stripped securities if snipped by die agency itself):
1.

Federal Home Loan Bank System
Senior debt obligations

2.

Federal Home Loan Monpage Corporation (FHLMC or "Freddie Mac")
Participation certificates
Senior debt obfigations

3.

Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA or "Fannie Mae")
Mortgage-backed securities and senior debt obligations

4.

Smdent Loan Marketing Association (SLMA or "SaUie Mae")
Senior debt obfigations

5.

Resolution Funding Corp. (REFCQRP) obligations

6.

Farm Credit System
Consolidated systemwide bonds and notes

D.
Money market funds registered imder the Federal Investment Company Act
of 1940, whose shares are registered under the Federal Securities Act of 1933, and having
a rating by Standard & Poor's Corporation of AAAm-G; AAA-m; or AA-m and if rated
by Moody's rated Aaa. Aal or Aa2.

 83176

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

E.
Certificates of deposit secured at afi times by collateral described in (A)
and/or (B) above. Such certificates must be Issued by commercial banks, savings and loan
association or mutual savings banks. The collateral must be held by a thfrd party and the
Bondholders must have a perfected first security interest in the collateral.
F.
Certificates of deposit, savings accounts, deposit accounts or money market
deposits which are fiiUy Insured by FDIC, Including BIF and SAIF.
G.
Investment Agreements, including GIC's, Forward Purchase Agreements
and Reserve Fimd Put Agreements accqitable to the Bond Insurer.
H.
Commercial paper rated, at the time of purchase, "Prime - 1" by Moody's
and "A-l" or better by Standard & Poor's Corporation.
I.
Bonds or notes issued by any state or municipafity which are rated by
Moody's and Standard & Poor's Corporation in one of the two highest rating categories
assigned by such agencies.
J.
Federal fiiixls or bankers acceptances with a maximum term of oiie year of
any bank which has an unsecured, uninsured and unguaranteed obfigation rating of
"Prime - 1" or "A3" or better by Moody's and "A-l" or "A".or better by Standard &
Poor's Corporation
K.
Any pool investment fund administered by the State of Ulinois in which the
Issuer Is permitted or required to invest fimds.
L.
Repurchase Agreements for 30 days or less must'foUow the foUowing
criteria: Repurchase Agreements which exceed 30 days must be acceptable to the Bond
Insurer. (Repurchase Agreements provide for the transfer of securitiesfroma dealer bank
or securities firm (seUer/borrower) to the Issuer (buyer/lender), and the transfer of cash
from the Issuer to the dealer bank or securities firm with an agreement that the dealer bank
or securities firm wlU repay the cash plus a yield to the Issuer in exchange for the
securities at a specified date.)
1.

Repurchase Agreements must be between the Issuer and a dealer bank or
.securities firm
a.

Primary dealers on the Federal Reserve reporting dealer list which
are rated A or better by Standard & Poor's Corporation and
Moody's, or

b.

Banks rated "A" or above by Standard & Poor's Corporation and
Moody's

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

2.

The written Repurchase Agreement contract must include the following:
a.

b.
C;

d.

Securities which are acceptable for transfer are:
(1)

Direa United States government obfigations, or

(2)

Federal agencies backed by the fidl faith and credit of die
United States government (and FNMA & FHLMC)

The term of the Repurchase Agreement may be up to 30 days
The collateral must be delivered to the Issuer.- the Trustee (ff the
Trustee is not supplying the collateral) or third party acting as
agency for the Tnistee (if die Trustee Is supplying the collateral)
before/simultaneous "with payment (perfection by possession of
. certificated securities)
Valuation of Collateral
(1)

The securities must be valued weekly, marked-to-market at
current market price plus accmed interest
(a)

3.

83177

The value ofcoUatend must be equal to 104% of the
amount of cash transferred by the municipal entity to"
the dealer bank or security firm under the
Repurchase Agreement plus accrued interest. If the
value of securities held as collateral declines below
104% of the value of the cash transferred by the
Issuer, then additional cash and/or acceptable
securities must be transfisrTed: If, however, the
securities used as collateral are FNMA or FHLMC.
then the value of cofiateral must equal 105 %.

Legal opinion which must be delivered to the Issuer stating that the
Repurchase Agreement meets guidelines under state law for legal
investment of public funds.

"Moody's" means Moody's Investors Service, Inc., a corporation organized and
existing under the laws of the State of Delaware, its successors and thefr assigns, and, if such
corporation shall be dissolved or liquidated or shall no longer perform thefimctionsof a securities
rating agency, "Moody's" shaU be deemed to refer to any other nationally recognized securities
rating agency designated by the Issuer and approved by the Bond Insurer, with notice to the
Trustee.

 83178

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Ordinaty Services" and "Ordinaty Expenses" means those services normally
rendered and those expenses (including fees and expenses of Counsel) normally Incurred by a
trustee or paying agent under instnunents .similar to this Indenture.
"Outstanding" or "outstanding" or "Bonds Outstanding," in conneaion with the
Bonds means, as of the time in question, aU Bonds authenticated and delivered under this
Indenmre, except:
A.
Bonds theretofore canceled or required to be canceled under Section 2.10
or 6.07 hereof;
-B.
. hereof; and

Bonds which are deeined to have been paid in accordance with Article'Vin

C.
Bonds (including Bonds which are deemed to have been purchased pursuant
to Section 4.03 bereoO in substitution for which other Bonds have been authenticated and
defivered pursuant to Article n hereof.
"Paying Agent" means the Tnistee, acting as paying agent for the Bonds hereunder.
"Person" means naoiral persons,firms,partztershQis. associations, corporations,
trusts, limited liabiUty companies and public bodies.
"Prevailing Market Conditions" means, "without limitation, the foUowing factors:
existing short-term marka rates for securities, the interest on which is excliided from gross
income for federal income tax purposes, indices of such short-term rates and the existing market
supply and demand for securities bearing such short-term rates, existing yield curves for shortterm and long-term securities for obfigations of credit quality comparable to the Bonds', the
interest on which is excluded from gross income for federal income tax purposes, general
economic conditions, industty economic andfinancialconditions that may affea or be relevant
to the Bonds, and such otherfacts, circumstances and conditions as the Remarketing Agent, in its
sole discretion, shall determine to be relevant.
"Principal Office" means, with respea to the Trustee, the designated corporate
trust office of the Trustee, which office at the date of acceptance of the Trustee of the duties and
obligations imposed upon it hereunder is located at the address specified in Section 13.05 hereof.
"Rate Period" means any DaUy Rate Period, Weekly Rate Period, Flexible Rate
Period, Auction Rate Period or Term Rate Period.
- "Rating Categoty" or "Rating Categories" means one or more of the generic rating
categories of a nationaUy recognized securities rating agency, without regard to any refinement
or gradation of such rating categoty or categories by a numerical modifier or otherwise.
"Record Date" means with respect to any Interest Payment Date in respect of a
Daily Rate Period, a Weekly Rate Period, a Flexible Segment or an Auction Rate Period, the

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83179

Business Day next preceding such Interest Payment Date and, .with respect to any Interest Payment
Date in respect of a Term Rate Period, the fifteenth day of the calendar month next preceding such
Interest Payment Date.
"Registrar" means the.Trustee, acting as registrar for the Bonds hereunder.
"Remarketing Agent" means the remarketing agent appointed in accordance with
Section 4:08 hereof and any permitted successor thereto.
"Responsible Officer" means when used with respea to the Trustee,, any officer
of the Trustee. Including any Vice President, Assistant Vice President, corporate trust officer or.
any other officer of the Trustee customarUy performingfimctionssimilar to those performed by
any of the above designated officers and also, with respect to a particular matter, any other officer
to whom such matter is referred because of such officer's knowledge of and fiamiliarity with the
particular subject.
"Securities Depositoty" means, "with respect to a Book Enity Bond, DTC or any
person, firm, association or corporation constimting a "clearing agency" (securities.depositoty)
registered under Section 17A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which may at
any time be substituted in its place to act as Securities Depositoty for the Bonds, or its successors,
or any nominee therefor.
"Series
Bond Ordinance" means the ordinance of the Issuer adopted on
, 2002 authorizing the issuance of the Bonds.
"Series

Bond Order" means the written order of the Chief Financial Officer

or ComptroUer of the Issuer fixing and determining the details of the Bonds.
"State" means the State of Dlinois.
"Tender Agent" means the Tnistee, acting as tender agent for die Bonds hereunder.
"Term Rate" means the interest rate on the Bonds established in accordance with
Section 2.03(c) hereof.
"Term Rate Period" means each period during which a Term Rate is in effect.
"Trustee" means [Name of Trustee] and any successor trustee appointed and
qualified pursuant to Seaion 10.06 or 10.09 hereof at the time serving as successor Trustee
hereunder.
"Underwriter" means,

.

"Weekly Rate" means the interest rate on the Bonds established in accordance with
Section 2.03(b) hereof
. .

 83180

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Weekly Rate Period" means each period during which Bonds bear interest at
Weekly Rates.
Section 1.03. Number and Gender. The singular form of any word used herein,
including the terms defiiled in Section 1.02, shaU include the plural, and vice versa. The use
herein of a word of any gender shall include afi genders.
Section 1.04. Bonds Owned By Issuer. In determining whether the Owners of
a requisite aggregate principal amount of outstanding Bonds have concurred in any request,
demand, authorization, direction, notice, consent or waiver under the provisions of this Indenture,
Bonds which are owned of record by the Issuer or held by the Trustee for the account of the Issuer
shafi be disregarded and deeined not to be Outstanding hereunder for the purpose of any such
determination (except that, in determining whether the Trustee shafi be protected in relying upon
any such request, demand, authorization, direction, notice,- consent or waiver, only Bonds which
a Responsible Officer of the .Trustee actuaUy knows to be so owned or held shall be disregarded).

ARTICLE n
The Bonds
Section 2.01. Authorized Amount of Bonds. The Bonds are issued pursuant to
Section 6 of Article V n of the Illinois Constimtion of 1970. No Bonds may be issued under the
provisions of this Indenture except in accordance widi this Article. The total principal amoum
of Bonds that may be issued hereunder is hereby expressly limited to $200,000,000 less the
principal amount of conunercial paper or other bonds or obligations issued pursuant to the Series
Bond Ordinance and then outstanding, except as provided.in Section 2.08 hereof.
Section 2.02. Issuance of Bonds, (a) Authorization of Issuance. The Issuer may
issue the Bonds following the execution of this Indenture; and the Trustee shall, at the Issuer's
• written request, authenticate such Bonds and defiver them as specified in such request. The Bonds
shafi be designated "City of Chicago Auction Rate Bonds, Series
." The Bonds shaU be
issuable as fiiUy registered bonds without coupons in Authorized Denominations. Unless the Issuer
shaU otherwise dfrea, the Bonds shaU be numbered consecutively from 1 upwards.
(b)
General Terms. The Bonds shall be issued as fiiUy registered bonds,
without coupons, in Authorized Denominations, shall be dated the Dated Date, shall mature
subject to prior redemption upon the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth, on Januaty 1,
20 , the maturity date specified in the Series
Bond Order, and shaU bear interest as herein
providedfromthe Dated Date. Interest on each Bond shall be payable on each Interest Payment
Date for each such Bond for the period commencing on the next preceding Interest Payment Date
(or if no interest has been paid thereon, commencing on the Dated Date) and ending on the day
next preceding such Interest Payment Date; provided, however, that if, as sho"wn by the records
of the Tmstee, interest on the Bonds shall be in default. Bonds shall bear interest from the last
date to which interest has been paid in fiill or duly provided for on the Bonds or, if no interest has
been paid or duly provided for on the Bonds,fromthe Dated Date thereof. Each Bond shall bear

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83181

interest on overdue principal at the rate tiome by the Bonds on the date on which such principal
became due and payable. The Trustee shaU insert the date of authentication of each Bond in the
place provided for such purpose in the form of the oeitificate of authentication of the Tnistee to
be printed on each. Bond.
(c)
Manner of Payment. The principal of and premium, if any, and interest on
the Bonds shafi be payable in any coin or currency of the United States of America which, at the
respective dates of payment thereof, is legal tender for the payment of pubUc and private debts
(which sbaU be immediately available fiinds), and such prindpal and premium, if any, shall be
payable at the Designated Office of the Trustee, as Paying Agent. Payment of interest on any
Interest Payment Date on any Bond shaU be made to the Owner thereof as of the close of business
on the Record Date immediately prior thereto and shaU be (1) made by check of the Trustee, as
Paying Agent, to the extent it has been provided with fimds for such purpose in a timely manner,
maUed on the.Inteiest Payment Date to the Owioer as of the close of business on the Record Date
immediately preceding the Interest Payment Date, at the Owner's address as it appears on the
registration books of the Issuer kept by the Tnistee or at such odier address as is furnished to the
Tnistee in writing by such Owner not later than the dose of business on the Record Date for such
Interest Payment Date, or (u) except with respect to interest in respect of any Term Rate,
transmitted by wire transfer to the accounts with members of the Federal Reserve System located
within the continental United States of America of those Owners which own at least $1,000,000
in aggregate principal amount of the Bonds and which shaU have provided written wire transfix
instmctions to the Trustee prior to the close of business on such Record Date, but in the case of
interest payable in respect of a Flexible Segment, only upon presentation of such Bond (if such
Bond is not a Book Entty Bond) at the Designated Office of the Trustee for exchange or fransfer
in accordance with the provisions hereof, except, in each case, that, if and to the extent that there
sbaU be a default in the payment of the interest due on such Interest Payment Date, such defaulted
interest shall be paid to the Owners in whose names any siich Bonds are registered at the close of
business on the fifth (5th) Business Day next preceding the date of payment of such defaulted
interest.
(d)
Interest. The Bonds shaU bear interestfromand including the Dated Date
untU payment of the principal or redemption price thereof shaU have been made or provided for
in accordance with the provisions hereof, whether at maturity, upon redemption or otherwise, at
the rate or rates per annum determined pursuant to Section 2.03 hereof. Interest on the Bonds
shaU be paid on each Interest Payment Date. During any Flexible Rate Period, DaUy Rate Period
or Weekly Rate Period, interest on the Bonds shall be computed upon the basis of a 365 or 366day year, as applicable, for the number of days actuaUy elapsed. During any Term Rate Period,
interest on the Bonds shaU be coiiq>uted upon the basis of a 360-day year, consisting of twelve
(12) thirty (30) day months. Ehiring any Auction Rate Period, interest on the Bonds shaU be
computed on the basis of a 360-day year for the number of days actuaUy elapsed.
Section 2.03. Determination of Rate Periods and Interest Rates. In the maimer
hereinafter provided, the term of the Bonds will be divided into consecutive Rate Periods during
which the Bonds shall bear interest at the Daily Rate, the Weekly Rate, the Flexible Rate, the
Term Rate, or the Auction Rate. Prior to an adjustment to a DaUy Rate, Weekly Rate. Term Rate
or Flexible Rate, the Issuer and the Trustee shall enter into a Supplemental Indenture pursuant to

 83182

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 11.01 hereof and in form approved by the Bond Insurer, such ^proval to be evidenced
by the written consent of the Bond Insurer filed with the Trustee. The first Rate Period shafi
commence on the date of issuance of the Bonds hereunder and shaU be the Rate Period elected by
the Issuer in writing upon.the issuance of the Bonds. AU Bonds shaU be in the same Rate Period.
The Bonds shaU bear Interest at the rate or rates per ^tpynm established fiom time to time in
accordance "with the provisions of this Indenture.
. .
(a)
G) Determination of Daily Rate. During each DaUy Rate Period, the Bonds
shall bear Interest at the DaUy Rate, which shall be determined by the Remarketing Agent on each
Business Day for such Business Day. The DaUy Rate shall be the lowest rate determined by die
Remarketing Agent to be the interest rate which would enable the Remarketing Agent to seU the
Bonds on the effective date of such rate at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof
(without regard to accnied Interest); provided, however, that widi respect to any day which is not
a Business Day and any other day for which the Remarketing Agent shaU not have determined a
DaUy Rate, the DaUy Rate for such day sbaU be the same as the DaUy Rate for the immediately
preceding day; provided, fiirther, that if a DaUy Rate for thefirstday of any DaUy Rate Period
Is not detemdned, the DaUy Rate for the first day of such DaUy Rate Period shaU be one hundred
percent (100%) of the most recent One-Year Note Index theretofore published in The Bond Buyer
(or, if The Bond Buyer is no longer published or no longer pubUshes the One-Year Note Index,
the one-year note index contained in the pubfication determined by the Remarketing Agent as the
most comparable to The_Bond Buver"). In no event shafi the DaUy Rate exceed the lesser of [18] %
per annum and the maximum rate per aimum then permitted by s^licable law. The Remarketing
Agent shaU provide the Tnistee with immediate' notice by facsimUe of each DaUy Rate, as
determined.
(u)
' Adjustment to Daily Rate. At any time, the Issuer, by written direction lo
the Trustee and die Remarketing Agent, may elea that the Bonds shaU bear interest at a
DaUy Rate. Such direction shaU (A) spedfy the effective date of such adjustment to a
Daify Rate which shaU be a Business Day not earlier than the fifteenth (15th) day
foUowing the fifth (5th) Business Day after the date of receipt by the Tnistee of such
direction, and shall be (1) in the case of an adjustmentfroma Term Rate Period, the day
itnmediately fofiowing the last day of the then current Term Rate Period, (2) in the case
of an adjustmentfroma Flexible Rate Period, the day immediately fofiowing the last day
of the then currem Flexible Rate Period as determined in accordance with
Seaion 2.03(d)(lv) hereof, and (3) In die case of an adjustment from an Auction Rate
Period, the day immediately foUowing the last day of the then current Auction Rate
Period; and (B) io the case of an adjustment ftom a Term Rate Period ha"ving a duration
in excess of one year or an Auction Rate Period, be accompanied by an opinion of Bond
Counsel stating that such adjustment (1) is authorized or permitted by this Indenture and
(2) will not adversely affect the exclusion of the interest on the Bondsfromgross income
for federal income tax purposes. During each DaUy Rate Period commencing on a date
so specified or determined (provided that the opinion of Bond Counsel described in clause
(B) above, ff required, is reaffirmed as of such date) and ending on the day immediately
preceding the effective date of the next succeeding Rate Period, the interest rate borne by
the Bonds shall be a Daily Rate.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83183

(iii)
Notice of Adjustment to Daily Rate. FoUowing the Issuer's election
pursuant to Section 2.03(a)(u) hereof, the Trustee shaU give notice of an adjusnnent to a
. ... DaUy Rate Period to Owners, by first class mail, postage prepaid, postmarked not less
than fifteen (15) days prior to the effective date of such Daily Rate Period. Such notice
shaU be prepared by the Issuer and shaU state (1) that the Interest rate on the Bonds wiU
be adjusted to a DaUy Rate (subjea to the receipt of the reaffinhing opinion of Bond
Counsel referred to in the immediately preceding paragraph (a)(ii), ff required, and to the
Issuer's abUity to rescind its election as described in Section 2.03(f) hereof), (2) the
. effective date of such DaUy Rate Period, (3) that aU Bonds are subjea to mandatoty
purchase on such effective date and (4) die procedures of such purchase and payment of
the purchase price.
(b) . .(i) Determination of Weekly Rate. During each Weekly Rate Period, the
Bonds shaU bear Interest at die Weekly Rate, which. In the case of the first Weekly Rate
detenmned for each Weekly Rate Period, shaU be determined by the Remarketing Agent no later
than the first day of such Weekly Rate Period and thereafter no later than the Business Day next
preceding Wednesday of each week during such Weekly Rate Period. The Weekly Rate shaU be
the rate determined by the Remarketing Agent to be the lowest interest rate which would enable
the Remarketing Agent to seU the Bonds on the effective date of such rate at a price equal to 100%
of the principal amount thereof (without regard to accnied interest); provided, however, that ff
the Remarketing Agent shall not have determined a Weekly Rate for any period, the Weekly Rate
for such period shaU be the same as the Weekly Rate for the immediately preceding period;
provided, however, thatff,for any reason, thefirstWeekly Rale for aity Weekly Rate Period shafi
not be determined or become effective, the Rate Period for the Bonds shaU be adjusted to a DaUy
Rate Period. In no event shaU the Weekly Rate exceed the lesser of [18) % per annum and the
maximum rate per annum then permitted by applicable law. The first Weekly Rate determined
for each Weekly Rate Period shaU apply to die period commencing on the ffrst day of such period
and ending on the next succeeding Tuesday.. Thereafter, each Weekly Rate shall apply to the
period commencing on each Wednesday and ending on the next succeeding Tuesday; provided,
however, if a Weekly Rate Period shall end on a day other dian Tuesday, the last Weekly Rate
for such Weekly Rate Period shall apply to the period commencing on the Wednesday preceding
the last day of such Weekly Rate Period and ending on such last day. The Reroailceting Agent
shall provide the Trustee with immediate telephonic notice (promptiy confirmed in -writing) or
facsimUe notice of each Weekly Rate, as determined.'
(u)
Adjustment to Weekly Rate. Al any time, the Issuer, by written direction
to the Trustee and the Remarketing Agent, may elect that the Bonds shall bear interest at
a Weekly Rate. Such dfrection shaU (A) specify the effective date of such adjustment to
a Weekly Rate, which shaU be a Business Day not earlier than thefifteenth(15th) day
following the fifth (5th) Business Day after the date of receipt by the Trustee of such
direction, and shaU be (1) in the case of an adjustmentfroma Term Rate Period, the day
immediately following the last day of the then current Term Rate Period, (2) in the case
of an adjustmentfroma Flexible Rate Period, die day immediately following the last day
of the then current Flexible Rate Period as determined in accordance with
Section 2.03(d)(iv) hereof, and (3) in the case of an adjustment from an Auction Rate
Period, the day immediately foUowing the last day of the then current Auction Rate

 83184

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL -CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Period; and (B) in the case of an adjustmentfroma Term Rate Period having a duration
in excess of one year or an Auction Rate Period, be accompanied by an opinion of Bond
Counsel stating that such adjustment (1) is authorized or permitted by this Indenture and
(2) wiU not adversely affea die exclusion of the interest on the Bondsfromgross income
for federal income tax purposes. During each Weekly Rate Period, commeiicing on a date
so specified or determined (provided that the opinion of Bond Counsel described in clause
(B) above, if required, is reaffirmed as of such date) and ending on the day Immediately
preceding the effective date of the next succeeding Rate Period, the Interest rate borne by
die Bonds shaU be a Weekly Rate.
(In)
Notice of Adjustment to Weekly Rate. FoUowing the Issuer's election
pursuant to Section 2.03(b)(u) hereof, the Tnistee shaU give notice of an adjustment to a
Weekly Rate Period to Owners, by first class maU, postage prepaid, postmarked not less
thanfifteen(15) days prior to the effective date of such Weekly Rate Period. Such notice
- shaU be prepared by die Issuer and shall state (1) that the interest rate on the Bonds wUI
be adjusted to a Weekly Rate (subject to the receipt of the reaffirming opinion of Bond
Counsel referred to In the lnunediately preceding paragraph (11), if required, and to the
Issuer's abUity to rescind its election as described In Section 2.03(0 hereof), (2) the
effective date of such Weekly Rate Period, (3) that aU Bonds are subjea to mandatoty
purchase on such effective date, and (4) the procedures of such purchase and paymem of
the purchase price.
(c)
(1) Determination of Term Rate. During each Term Rate Period the Bonds
shall bear ioterest at the Term Rate determined by the Remarketing Agent on a Business Day
selected by the Issuer but not more than thirty (30) days prior to thefirstday of such Term Rate
Period. Hie Term Rate shaU be the rate determined by the Remarketing Agent on such date, and
fUed on such date with the Tnistee and the Issuer, by written notice or by telephone promptiy
confirmed by telecopy or other writing, as being the lowest rate which, would -enable the
Remarketing Agent to seU the Bonds on the effective date of such Term Rate at a price equal to
100% of the principal amount thereof; provided, however, that if, for any reason, a Term Rate
for any Term Rate Period shall not be determined or become effective, then (1) in the event the
current Term Rale Period is for one year or less, the Rate Period for the Bonds shall automaticaUy
adjust to a DaUy Rate Period and (2) in the event the current Term Rate Period is for more dian
one year, the Rate Period for the Bonds ishaU autonaatically adjust to a Term Rate Period of one
year and one day, subject to the proviso contained in the last sentence of Section 2.03(c)(ii);
provided, fiirther, that in the case of clause (2) above, ff the Issuer delivers to the Trustee an
approving opinion of Bond Counsel prior to the end of the then effective Term Rate Period, the
Rate Period for the Bonds wUl adjust to a DaUy Rate Period. If a Daily Rate for the furst day of
any such DaUy Rate Period is not determined as provided in Section 2.03(a)(i) hereof, the DaUy
Rate for the first day of such Daily Rate Period shall be 100% of the most recent One-Year Note
Index theretofore published in The Bond Buyer (or, if The Bond Buyer is no longer published or
no longer publishes the One-Year Note Index, the one-year note index contained in the publication
determined by the Remarketing Agent as the most comparable to The Bond Buyer). If a Term
Rate for any such Term Rate .period described in clause (2) above is not determined as described
in the second preceding sentence, the Term Rate for such Term Rate Period shall be 100% of the
most recent One-Year Note Index theretofore published in The Bond Buyer (or, if The Bond

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83185

Buyer is no longer published or no longer pubfishes the One-Year Note Index, the one-year note
index contained in the publication determined by the Remarketing Agent as the most comparable
to The Bond Buyer). In no event shaU any Term Rate exceed die lesser of [1S%] per annum and
the maximum rate per annum then permitted by applicable law. The Remarketktg Agent shaU
provide the Trustee with immediate telephonic notice (pr6iiq)dy confirmed in writing) or facsimUe
notice of each Term Rate, as determined.
(ii)
Adjustment to or Continuation of Term Rate. At aity time, the Issuer, by
written direction to the Tnistee and the Remarketing Agent, may elect that the Bonds shafi bear,
or continue to bear, interest at a Term Rate, and if it sbaU so elea, sbaU determine the duration
of the Term Rate Period duriiig which the Bonds shaU bear interest at such Term Rate. As a part
of such election, the Issuer also may determine that the initial Term Rate Period shaU be foUowed
by successive Term Rate Periods and, if the Issuer so elects, t^aii specify.' the duration of each
such successive Term Rate Period as provided in this paragrx^h (U).. Such direction shaU
(A) specify the effective date of each Term Rate Period (which shaU be a Business Day not earlier
than the fifteenth (15th) day foUowing the fifth (5th) Business Day after the date of receipt by the
Trustee of such direction, and sbaU be (1) in the case of an adjustment from a- Flexible Rate
Period, the day immediately foUowing the last day of the then current Flexible Rate Period as
determined in accordance widi Section 2.03(d)(iv) hereof, (2) in the case of an adjusttnent from
a Term Rate Period, the day immediately foUowing the Last day of the then current Tenh Rate
Period, and (3) in the case of an adjustment from an Auction Rate Period, the day immediately
foUowing the last day of the Uien current Auction Rate Period; (B) specify the last day of such
Term Rate Period or, if successive Term Rate Periods shaU have been designated, the last day of
each such Term Rate Period (which shaU be for each Term Rate Period either the date
immediately preceding thefinalmaturity of the Bonds, or a day which both Immediately precedes
a Business Day and is at least 90 days after the effective date thereoO aod (Q in the case of an
adjustmentfroma DaUy Rate Period, a Weekly Rate Period, a Flexible Rate Period, an Auction
Rate Period or a Term Rate Period having a duration of one year or less to a Term Rate Period
having a duration in excess of one year, or an adjustment from a Term Rate Period ha"ving a
duration In excess of one year to a DaUy Rate Period, a Weekly Rate Period, a Flexible Rate
Period, an Auction Rate Period or a Term Rale Period having a duration of one year or less, be
acconqianied by an opinion of Bond Counsel stating that such adjustment (1) is authorized or
permitted by this Indenture and (2) wiU not adversely affea the exclusion of the Interest on the
Bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes. If the Issuer shall designate successive
Term Rate Periods, but shaU not, with respea to the second or any subsequent Term Rate Period,
specify any of the iiffonnation destnibed in clause (A) above, the Issuer, by written direction to
the Trustee and the Remarketing Agent, given not later than thefifth(5th) Business Day preceding
thefifteenth(15th) day prior to the first (1") day of such successive Term Rate Period, inay
specify any of such information not previously specified with respect to such Term Rate Period
which information shall be accompanied by an opinion of Bond Counsel as described above, if
required. During the Term Rate Period commencing and ending on the dates so determined and
during each successive Term Rate Period, ff any, the interest rate borne by the Bonds shall be a
Term Rate (provided that the opinion of Bond Counsel described in dause (C) above, if requfred,
is reaffirmed as of such date of commencement). If, by the fifUi (5th) Business Day preceding
the founeenth (14th) day prior to the last day of any Term Rate Period, the Tmstee shall not have
received notice of the Issuer's election that, during the next succeeding Rate Period, the Bonds

 83186

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

'5/1/2002

shall bear interest at a DaUy Rate, a Weekly Rate, a Hexible Rate, an Auction Rate or a Term
Rate, the next succeeding Rate Period shaU be a Term Rate Period of the same duration as the
immediately preceding Term Rate Period; provided, however, that if the last day of any
successive Term Rate Period shaU not be a day immediately preceding a Business Day, then such
successive Term Rate Period shaU end on thefirstday immediately preceding the Business Day
next succeeding such day or, if such Term Rate Period would end after the day prior to the. final
mamrity date of the Bonds, the next succeeding Rate Period shall be a Term Rate Period ending
on the day prior to thefinalmaturity date of the Bonds.
.(ill) Noti'ce of Adjustment to or Continuation of Term Rate. FoUowng the
Issuer's election pursuant to Section 2.03(c)(ll) hereof, the Trustee shafi give notice of an
adjustment to a (or the continuation of another) Term Rate Period to Owners, by first class maU,
postage prepaid, postmarked not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the effective date of such Term
Rate Period. Such notice sbaU be prepared by .die Issuer and shall state (1) that the. interest rate
on the Bonds wUl be adjusted to, or continue to be, a Term Rate (subject to the receipt of the
reaffirming opinion of Bond Counsel referred to in the immediately preceding paragraph (u), if
required, and to the Issuer's abUlty to rescind its election as described in Section 2.03(f) hereof),
(2) die effective date and the last day of such Term Rate Period, (3) that the Term Rate for such
Term Rate Period wUl be determined on or prior to the effective date thereof, (4) how such Term
Rate may be obtained from the Remarketing Agent, (5) the Interest Payment Dates after such
effective date, (6) that aU Bonds are subjea to mandatoty purchase on such effective date, (7) the
procedures for such purchase and the payment of the purchase price, (8) that, during such Term
Rate Period. Owners wiU not have therightto require the purchase of Bonds, but that aU Bonds
"wiU be subjea to mandatoty purchase on the day foUowing the last day of such Term Rate Period
and (9) the redenqition provisions set forth In Section 3.01 hereof which wUl apply during such
Term Rate Period.
(d)
(i) Determination of Flexible Segments and Flexible Rates. During each
Flexible Rate Period, each Bond shall bear interest during each Flexible Segment for such Bond
at the Flexible Rate for such Bond as described herein. Different Flexible Segments may apply
to different Bonds at any time andfromtlme to time. The Flexible Segment for each Bond sbaU
be a period of at least one day and not more than 270 days ending on a day that .immediately
precedes a Business Day, determined by the Remarketing Agem in consultation with the Issuer.
The Flexible Rate for each Flexible Segment for each Bond shaU be determined by the
Remarketing Agent no later than the first day of such Flexible Segment (and intimeto enable the
Remarketing Agent to give to the Trustee the notice required by Section 4.04(c) hereof) to be the
lowest interest rate which would enable the Remarketing Agent to seU such Bond on the effective
date of such rate at a price equal to 100% of the prindpal amount thereof. If a Flexible Segmem
or a Flexible Rate for a Flexible Segment is not determined or effective, the Flexible Segment for
such Bond shaU be a Flexible Segment of at least one day ending on the day immediately
preceding the next succeeding Business Day, and the interest rate for such Flexible Segment shall
be 100% of die most recent One-Year Note Index theretofore pubfished in The Bond Buyer (or,
if The Bond Buyer is no longer published or no longer publishes the One-Year Note Index, the
one-year note index contained in the publication deteraiined by the Remarketing Agent as most
comparable to The Bond Buyer). In no event shall the Flexible Rate for any Flexible Segment
exceed the lesser of [18%] per annum and the maximum rate per annum then permitted by

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83187

appficable law. The Remarketing Agent shaU provide the Tnistee with facsinule notice of each
Flexible Segment and Flexible Rate, as provided in Section 4.04(c) hereof.
(ii)
Adjustment to Flexible Rates. At any time, the Issuer, by written direction
to the Trustee and the Remarketing Agem, may elect that the Bonds shaU bear interest at Flexible
Rates. Such direction shafi (A) specify the effective date of die Flexible Rate Period during which
the Bonds shall bear interest at Flexible Rates which shall be a Business Day not earlier than the
fifteenth (15th) day fofiowing the fifth (5th) Business Day after the date of receipt by die Trustee
of such direction, and shaU be. In the case of an adjustmentfroma Term Rate Period, the day
immediately fofiowing the last day of the then current Term Rate Period, and m the case of an
adjustment from an Auction Rate Period, the day immediately foUowing the last day of the then
current Auction Rate Period; and (B) in the case of an adjustmentfroma Term Rate Period having
a duration in excess of one year or an Auction Rate Period, be accompanied by an opinion of
Bond Counsel stating that such adjustment (1) is authorized or permitted by the Indenture and
(2) wifi not adversely affect the exclusion of the interest on the Bondsfiximgross income for
federal income tax purposes. During each Flexible Rate Period commencing on the date so
specified (provided that the opinion of Bond Counsel described in clause (B) above,ffrequfred,
is reaffirmed as of such date) and ending on the day immediately preceding the effective date of
the next succeeding Rate Period, each Bond shaU bear interest at a Flexible Rate during each
Flexible Segment for such Bond.
ful) Notice of Adjustment to Flexible Rates. FoUowing the Issuer's election
pursuant to Section 2.03(d)(il) hereof, the Trustee shaU give notice of an adjustment to a Flexible
Rate Period to Owners, by first class maU, postage prepaid, postmarked not less than fifteen (15)
days prior to the effective date of such Flexible Rate Period. Such notice shall be prepared by the
Issuer and state (1) that the interest rate on the Bonds wiU be adjusted to the Flexible Rate (subject
to receipt of the reaffirming opinion of Bond Counsel refenwl to in the immediately preceding
paragraph (il). If required, and to the Issuer's abifity to. rescind Its election as described in
Section 2.03(f) hereof), (2) die effective date of such Flexible Rate Period, (3) diat all Bonds are
subjea to mandatory purchase on such effective date, and (4) the procedures of such purchase and
the pajrment of the purchase price.
(iv)
AdjustmentfipomFlexible Rate Period. As a condition precedent to the
election during a Flexible Rate Period to adjust to a different Rate Period for the Bonds pursuant
to Section 2.03(a)(u), (b)Oi) or (c)(ii) hereof, the Remarketing Agent shall determine, not later
dian die fourtecnUi (14di) day foUowing the fifth (5di) Business Day after receipt by the Trustee
of the direction of the Issuer effecting such election. Flexible Segments of such duration that, as
soon as possible, all Flexible Segments shall end on the same date. The date on which all Flexible
Segments so determined shall end shaU be the last day of the then current Flexible Rate Period
and the day next succeeding such dale shall be the effective dale of the DaUy Rate Period, the
Weekly Rate Period, the Term Rate Period or die Auction Rate Period elected by the Issuer. The
Remarketing Agent, prompdy upon the determination thereof, shall give written notice of such
last day and such effective dates to the Issuer and the Trustee.

 83188

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

(e)
(1) • Determination of Auaion Rates and Auaion Periods, ff the Interest
Rate Mode for the Bonds is the Auction Rate, the Auction Rates and Auction Periods shall be
determined as described herein, subject, in aU cases, to Section 12.12 hereof.
Auction Rates. The interest rate on the Bonds for each Auction Period shaU be the
rate determined by the Auction Agent at or prior to 3:00 p.m. (New York City time) on the
Auction Date in accordance with the Auction Procedures; provided that the Imtial Auction Period
of an Auction Rate Period shaU be a period selected by the Issuer at the time of the election of the
Auction Rate Period as the initial Rate Period for the Bonds or at the time of the election to adjust
to the Auction Rate Period, as the case may be, and the Auction Rate for the initial Auction Period
of an Auction Rate Period .shall be the rate estabfished by the Underwriter with respea to the
initial Auction Period If the initial Rate Period for the Bonds is the Auction Rate Period and by
the Remarketing Agent for the initial Auction Period'In the case of an adjustment to the Auction
Rate Period on a date no later than the effective date thereof as the miniTmTm rate of Interest
necessaty, in the judgment of the Underwriter or the Remarketing Agent, as the case may be,
taking into account then PirevaUlng Market Conditions, to enable the Underwriter or the
Remarketing Agent, as the case may be, to seU the Bonds on the effective date of such Auction
Period at the principal amount thereof.- If on any Auction Date, the Auction Agent shaU fad to
take any action necesisaty to determine or take aity action which effectively prevents the
determination of, a rate of Interest pursuant to the Auction Procedures, the Auction Rate for the
next succeeding Auction Period shaU equal the No Auction Rate on such Auction Date or. in the
event the No Auction Rate cannot be determined, then the current Auction Rate shafi remain in
effea for the succeeding Auction Period. The Auction Rate for each-Auction Period commencing
after the occurrence of an Event of Default to and including the Auction Period^ ff any, during
which or commencing less than two Business Days after such Event of Default has been cured or
waived shaU be equal to the Maximum Auction Rate as determined on the Auction Date.
Auction Periods. Each Auction Period shall be a Standard Auction Period unless
a different Auction Period is established as herein provided and each Auction Period which
immediately succeeds a non-Standard Auction Period shafi be a Standard Auction Period unless
a different Auction Period is established as herein provided. During an Auction Rate Period, the
Issuer may change the length of a single Auction Period or the Standard Auction Period by written
notice delivered at least 20 days but not more than 60 days prior to the Auction Date for such
Auction Period to the Tnistee, the Remarketing Agent, the Auction Agent, the Bond Insurer and
the Securities Depositoty. If such Auction Period wUI be less than 7 days, such notice shall be
effective only ff it is acconqianied by a written statement of the Registrar, the Paying Agent, the
Trustee, the Remarketing Agem, the Auction Agent and the Securities Depositoty to the effea that
they are capable of performing thefr duties hereunder and imder the Remarketing Agreement and
the Auction Agreemeni with respect to such Auction Period. If such notice specifies a change in
the length of the Standard Auction Period, such notice shall be effective only if it is accompanied
by the wrinen consent of the Remarketing Agent to such change. The length of an Auction Period
or the Standard Auction Period may not be changed imless Sufficient Qearing Bids existed at both
the Auction immediately preceding the date the notice of such change was given and the Auction
immediately preceding such changed Auction Period. The change in length of an Auction Period
or the Standard Auction Period shall take effect only if (W) the Tnistee, the Bond Insurer and the
Auction Agent receive, by 11:00 a.m. (New York City time) on the Business Day immediately

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83189

preceding the Auction Date for such Auction Period, a certificate from the Issuer by telecopy
notice, authorizing the change in the Auction Period or the Standard Auction Period, which shall
be specified in such certificate, and confirming that Bond Counsel expects to be able to give an
opinion on the ffrst day of such Auction Period to the effect that the change in the Auction Period
is authorized by this Indenture and wiU not adversely affect the exclusionfromgross income of
interest on the Bonds for federal income tax purposes, (X) the Tnistee shaU not have defivered
to the Auction Agent by 12:00 noon (New York City time) on the Auction Date for such Auction
Period notice that a faUure to deposit has occurred, (Y) Sufficient Clearing Bids exist at the
Auction on the Auction Date for such Auction Period, and (Z) the Trustee, the Bond Insurer and
die Auction Agem receive by 9:30 a.m. (New York City lime) on the lust day of such Auction
Period, an opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that the change in the Auction Period is
authorized by this Indenture and wiU not adversely affea the exclusion fiom gross income of
interest on the Bonds for federal Income tax purposes, ff the condition referred to in (W) above
is not ma. the Auction Rate for the next succeeding Auction Period shaU be determined pursuant
to the Auction Procedures and the next succeeding Auction Period shaU be a Standard Auction
Period. If any of die conditions referred to in (X), (Y) or (Z) above is not met, die Auction Rate
for the next succeeding Auction Period shaU equal the Maximum Auction Rate as determined as
of the Auction Date for such Auction Period. During an Auction Rate Period, the Remarketing
Agent, with the written consent of the Issuer, may change, in order to conform with tben-cunent
market practice widi respect to similar securities or to accommodate economic and financial
factors that may affea or be relevant to the day of the week constimtiog an Auction Date, the
Auction Date for aU fiiture Auction Periods to a different day, so long as thefirstsuch Auction
Date wUI be a Business Day in the pai>>nHar week In which the next succeeding Auction Date is.
then scheduled to occur, ff a change in an Auction Date is undertaken in conjunction with a
change in an Auction Period and the conditions for the establishment of such change in Auction
Period are not met, the Auction Date may be, and the next succeeding Auction Period may be
adjusted to end, on a Business Day in the calendar week In which such Auction Date was
scheduled to occur and such Auction Period was scheduled to end to accommodate the change in
the Auction Date. The Remarketing Agent shaU communicate its determination to change an
Auction Date by means of a written notice delivered at least 10 days prior to the Auction Date
immediately preceding such Auction Date to the Issuer, the Trustee, die Bond Insurer, the Auction
Agent and the Securities Depositoty which sbaU state 0) the determination of the Remarketing
Agent to change the Auction Date, (u) the new Auction Date and (iii) the date on which such
Auction Date shall be changed, ff, after any proposed change in the Auction Date, any Auction
Period would be less than 7 days in duration, such notice shaU be effective only if it Is
accompanied by a written statement of the Bond Registrar, the Paying Agent, the Tnistee, the
Remarketing Agent,, the Auction Agent and the Securities Depositoty to the effect that they are
capable of performing thefr duties hereunder and under the Remarketing Agreement and Auction
Agency Agreement widi respect to any such Auction Period.
(ii)
Adjustment lo Auction Rate. At any time, the Issuer, by written direction
to the Trustee and the Remarketing Agent, may elect that the Bonds shaU bear interest at the
Auction Rate. Such direaion shall (A) specify the effective date of such adjustment to the Auction
Rate which shaU be a Business Day not earlier than thefifteenth(15th) day fofiowing the
fifth (5lh) Business Day after the date of receipt by the Trustee of such direction, and shall be
(1) in the case of an adjustment from a Term Rale Period, the day immediately following the last

 83190

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

day of the then current Term Rate Period, and (2) in the case of an adjusttnentfroma Flexible
Rate Period, the day immediately foUowing the last day of the then current Flexible Rate Period
as detemuned in accordance with Section 2.03(d)(iy) hereof; and (B) be accompanied by an
opinion of Bond Counsel stating that such adjustment (1) is authorized or permitted by this
Indenture and . (2) wiU not adversely affect the exdusion of the interest on the Bonds from gross
Income for federal Income tax purposes. During each Auction Rate Period commencing on a date so specified or determined (provided that the opinion of Bond Counsel described in clause
(B) above is reaffirined as of such date) and ending on the day immediately preceding the effective
date of the next succeeding Rate Period, the interest rate borne by the Bonds shall be the Auction
Rate.
(iii)
Notice of Adjustment to Auction Rate. Following the Issuer's election
pursuant to Section 2.03(e)(il) hereof, the Trustee shall give notice of an adjustment to the Auction
Rate Period to Owners, by ffrst class maU, postage prepaid, postmarked not less than fifteen (15)
days prior to the effective date of such Auction Rate Period.-. Such notice shall be prepared by the
Issuer and shaU state (1) that the interest rate on the Bonds "wiU be adjusted to the Auction Rate
(subjea to the receipt of the reaffirming opinion of Bond Counsel referred to in the immediately
precedmg paragraph Qi), if required," and to the Issuer's abUity to rescind its election as described
in Section 2.03(0 hereof), (2) the effective date of such the Auction Rate Period, (3) diat all Bonds
are subjea to mandatoty purchase on such effective date, (4) the procedures of such purchase and
payment of the purchase price, and (5) the Identity of the Auction Agent.
(iv)
The Auction Agent. Concurrentiy with the giving of notice for an'
adjustment of the interest rate to the Auction Rate, or upon the election of the first Rate Period
if it be the Auction Rate Period, the Issuer shaU appoint an Auction Agent for the Bonds. The
Auction Agent shall evidence its acceptance of such appointment by entering into an Auction
Agreement with the Issuer. The Auction Agent shall be (a) a bank or trust company duly
organized under the laws of the United States of America or any state or territoty thereof having
its prindpal place of business in the Borough of Manhattan, in The .City of New York and having
a combined capital stock, surplus and undi^ded profits of at least $
or (b) a member
of the National Association of Securities Dealers. -Inc., having a capitalization of at least
$
and, in either case, authorized by law. to perform aU the duties imposed upon it
under the Auction Agreement. The Auction Agent may at any time resign and be discharged of
the duties and obligations created by this Indenture by giving at least 45 days' notice to the
Trustee, the Issuer, the Remarketing Agent and the Market Agent. The Auction Agem may be
removed at any time by the Issuer upon at least 45 days' notice; provided that the Issuer shall have
entered into an agreement in substantiaUy the form of the Auction Agreement with a successor
Auction Agent. The appointment of a successor Auction Agent shaU be subject to the approval
of the Bond Insurer. The Trustee shall, within 25 days of the resignation or removal of the
Remarketing Agent, the Tender Agent or the Auction Agent or the appointment of a successor
Remarketing Agent, Tender Agent, or Auction Agent give notice thereof by firsi class mail,
postage prepaid, to the owners of the Bonds.
(v)
The Market Agent.
is hereby
appointed as the initial Market Agem. On or before the effective date of any subsequent
adjustment to an Auction Rate Period, or upon the resignation or removal of the Market Agent,

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83191

a Market Agent shaU be appointed by the Issuer. Any such Market Agent shall be a BrokerDealer, and shaU signify its acceptance of the duties and obligations imposed on it hereunder as
Market Agem by the execution of the Broker-Dealer Agreemeni. The Market Agent may at any
time resign and be discharged of the duties and obligations created by this Indenture by giving at
least 45 days' notice to the Tnistee, the Auction Agent and the Issuer. The Market Agent may
be removed at any tune by the Issuer upon at least 45 days' notice; provided that, the Issuer or
the Auction Agent shafi have entered into aii agreement in substantiaUy the form of the BrokerDealer Agreement with a successor Market Agent. The appoiiitment of a successor Market Agent
shall be subject to the approval of the Bond Insurer. During an Auction Rate Period, all
references in this Indenture to the RemarketlDg Agent shaU, to the extent not Inconsistent with the
rights, duties and obligations of the Market Agent, be deemed to refer to the Market Agent.
(f)
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the Issuer may rescind any
election by..it to adjust to, or in the case of a Term Rate Period continue, a Rate Period pursuant
to Section 2.03(a)(u), (b)(li)," (c)(u), (d)(u) or (e)(u) hereof by giving written notice thereof to the
Tnistee and the Remarketing Agent prior to such effective date, ff the Trustee receives notice of
such rescission prior to thetimethe Trustee has given notice to the Owners of the Bonds of the
change in or continuation of Rate Periods pursuant to Section 2.03(a)(iu), (bXiiO. (c)(ur), (d)(iu)
or (e)(iu) hereof, then such rescission shafi be Immediately effective without any fiirther action
by the Issuer or the Trustee and such notice of a change in or continuation of Rate Periods shafi
be of no force and effea and shafi not be given to the Owners, ff the Trustee receives notice of
such rescission after the Trustee has given notice to the Owners of the Bonds pursuant to
Seaion 2.03(a)(u0, (b)(iii), (c)Ou), (d)(iu) or (eXili) hereoffromoUicr than a Term Rate Period
in excess of one year or an attempted adjustmentfromone Rate Period (other than a Term Rate
Period in excess of one year) to another Rate Period does not become effective for any other
reason, then the Rate Period for the Bonds shall automatically adjust to or continue in a DaUy Rate
Period and the Trustee shaU pron^dy give notice thereof to the Owners of the Bonds, ff the
Tnistee receives notice of such rescission after the Trustee has given notice to the Owners of the
Bonds pursuant to Section 2.03(c)(ui) of an adjustmentfixima Term Rate Period in excess of one
year to another Rate Period (including a Term Rate Period of a different duration), or ff an
attempted adjustment from a Term Rate Period in excess of one year to another Rate Period
(including a Term Rate Period of a different duration) does not become effective for any reason,
then the Rate Period for the Bonds shaU continue to be a Term Rate Period of the same duration
as die immediately preceding Term Rate Period, provided that if the Issuer delivers to the Trustee
an approving opinion of Bond Counsel prior to the end of the then effective Term Rate Period,
the Rate Period for the Bonds shall be as directed by the Issuer in writing, ff a DaUy Rate for the
first day of any DaUy Rate Period to which a Rate Period is adjusted under this Section 2.03(0
is not determined as provided in Section 2.03(a)(i) hereof the DaUy Rate for the first day of such
DaUy Rate Period shall be 100% of the most recent One-Year Note Index dieretofore published
in The Bond Buyer (or, if The Bond Buyer is'no longer pubfished or no longer publishes the OneYear Note Index, the one-year note index contained in the publication determined by the
Remarketing Agent as most comparable to The Bond Buyer). The Trustee shall prompdy give
wrinen notice of each such automatic adjustment to a Rate Period pursuant to this Section 2.03(0
to the Owners in the form provided in Section 2.03(a)(iii) or (c)(iii) hereof, as the case may be.
Notwithstanding the rescission of any election to adjust to or continue a Rate Period, if notice has

 83192

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

been given to Bondholders pursuant to Section 2.03(a)(ui), (b)(iu), (c)(iii), (d)(iu) or (e)(ui), the
Bonds shall be subject to mandatoty purchase as specified in such notice.
(g)
The determination as herein provided by the Remarketing Agent and the
Auction Agent, as the case may be, of the various interestrates.Flexible Segments and Auction
Periods shafi be conclusive and blixUng upon the Tnistee, the Issuer and the Owners of the Bonds.
Section 2.04. Ownership, Transfer, Exchange and Registration of Bonds. The
Issuer shafi cause books for the registration and for the transfer of the Bonds as provided herein
to be kept by the Tnistee at its Principal Office, which Is hereby constituted and appointed the
Registrar and transfer agent for the Bonds. The Issuer shaU prepare and defiver to the Trustee,
and die Trustee sbaU keep custody of, a supply of unauthenticated Bonds duly executed by the
Issuer, as provided in Section 2.C^ hereof, for use in the.transfer and exchange of Bonds. The
Trustee is hereby authorized and directed to complete such forms of Bonds as to prindpal amounts
and registered owners,, and in the case of a Bond bearing interests at a Flexible Rate the
information specified in the second paragraph of Section 2.06 hereof, in accordance, with the
provisions hereof, in effecting transfers and exchanges of Bonds as provided herein.
Upon surrender forfransferof aiiy Bond at the Designated Office of the Tnistee,
duly endorsed for transfer or accompanied by a written instrument or instruments of transfer in
form satisfactoty to the Tnistee duly executed by the registered owner or his attorney duly
authorized in writing, the Trustee shaU date and execute the certificate of authentication on and
deliver in the name of the transferee .or transferees a new Bond or Bonds duly executed by the
Issuer of Authorized Denominations and for a like aggregate principal amount.
Any Bond or Bonds may be exchanged at the Designated Office of the Trustee for
a new Bond or Bonds of like aggregate princ^ial amoimt in Authorized Denominations. Upon
surrender of any Bond or Bonds for exchange, the Tmstee shafi date and execute the certificate
of authentication on and deliver a new Bond or Bonds duly executed by the Issuer which the
Bondholder making the exchange is entided to receive.
Except In connection with the remarketing of Bonds, the Tnistee shafi not be
required to transfer or exchange any Bond after the mailing of notice calling such Bond or portion
thereof for redenqition, nor during the period of ten days next preceding the mailing of such
notice of redemption.
Except as provided in Section 4.03, hereof, the person in whose name any Bond
shaU be registered shall be deemed and regarded as the absolute owner thereof for aU purposes,
and payment of the principal of. premium, if any. or interest on any Bond shall be made only to
or upon the written order of the registered Owner thereof or his legal representative, but such
registration may be changed as hereinabove provided. AU such paymenls shall be "valid and
effective to satisfy and discharge the liability upon such Bond to the extent of the sum or sums so
paid.
The Issuer and die Tnistee shall require the payment by the Bondholder requestmg
exchange or transfer (other than an exchange upon a partial redemption of a Bond) of any tax, fee

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83193

or other governmental charge requfred to be paid with respect to such exchange or transfer, but
otherwise no charge shaU be made to the Bondholder for such exchange or transfer.
Section 2.05. Execution of Bonds. The Bonds shaU be executed on behalf of die
Issuer with the manual or facsrmUe signature of its Mayor, and attested by the manual or facsimile
signature of its City Clerk, and shaU have impressed or imprinted thereon the official seal of the
Issuer or a facsimUe thereof. In case any officer who shaU have signed any of the Bonds, shafi
cease to be such officer before the Bonds so signed or attested shaU have been authenticated or
delivered by the Registrar or issued by the Issuer,'such Bonds may neverthdess be authenticated,
delivered and issued and, upon such authentication, defivety and Issuance, shaU be as binding
upon the Issuer as though those who signed and attested the same had continued to be such
officers of the Issuer. Also, any Bond may be signed on behalf of the Issuer by such persons as
on the actual date of the execution of such Bond shaU be the proper officers although on the
nominal date of such Bond any such person shaU not have been such officer.
Section 2.06. Authentication. No Bond shaU be valid for any purpose until die
certificate of authentication on such Bond shaU have been duly executed by the Trustee, and such
aiithentication shaU be conclusive proof that sudi Bond has hecn duly authenticated and delivered
under this Indenture and that the Owner thereof is entitied to the benefits of die trust hereby
created. The Trustee's.certificate of authentication on any Bond shall be deemedtohave beeai
executed by it ff maniiaUy signed by an authorized signatoty of the Trustee, but It shafi not be
necessaty that the same signatoty sign the certificate of authentication on aU of tbe Bonds issued
hereunder.
Upon authentication of any Bond, the Tnistee shall set forth on such Bond (1) the
date of such authentication and (2) in the case of a Bond bearing interest at a Flexible Rate, such
Flexible Rate, the day next succeeding the last day of the appficable Flexible Segment, the number
of days conq)rising such Flexible Segment and the amount of interest to accrue during such
Flexible Segment.
Section 2.07. Form of Bonds; The Bonds and the certificate of authentication to
be executed thereon shaU be in substantiaUy the form attached hereto as Appendix A, with such
appropriate variations, omissions and insertions as are permitted or required by this Indenture.
Upon adjustment to a Term Rate Period, the form of Bond may include a summaty of the
mandatoty and optional redeir^tion provisions to apply to the Bonds during such Term Rate
Period, or a statemem to the effect that the Bonds wUl not be optionaUy redeemed during such
Term Rate Period, and a statement indicating the applicable Term Rate and the duration of the
applicable Term Rate Period, provided that the Registrar shaU not authenticate such a revised
Bond form prior to receiving an opinion of Bond Counsel that such Bond form conforms to the
terms of this Indenture and that authentication thereof "will not adversely affea the exclusion of
interest on the Bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes.
Section 2.08. Mutilated, Desfroyed, Lost or Stolen Bonds. In die event any
Bond or ten^orary Bond is mutilated, lost, stolen or destroyed, the Tmstee may authenticate a
new Bond duly executed by the Issuer of like date and denomination as that mutilated, lost, stolen
or destroyed; provided that, in the case of any mutilated Bond, such mutUated Bond shall ffrst be

 83194

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

surrendered to the Trustee, and in the case of any lost, stolen or destroyed Bond, there shaU be
first fiimished to the Tnistee evidence of such loss, theft or destruction satisfactoty to the Trustee,
togedier with Indemnity to the Issuer and the Trustee satisfactoty to them. In the event any such
Bond shafi have matured, instead of issuing a duplicate Bond, the Tnistee on behalf of the Issuer
may pay the same "without surrender thereof. The Issuer and tbe Trustee may charge the Owner
of such Bond with thefr reasonable fees and expenses. In this connection. The Issuer shafi
cooperate with the Tnistee In connection with the issuance of replacement Bonds, but nothing in
this Section shafi be construed In derogation of anyrightswhich the Issuer or the Tnistee may
have to receive indemnification against liability, or payment or reimbursement of expenses, in
connection with tbe issue of a replacement Bond. AJl Bonds shall be held and owned upon the
e>q>ress condition that the foregoing provisions are, to the extent permitted by law, exclusive with
respea to the replacement or payment of mutUated, destroyed, lost or stolen Bonds, and shall
predude aity and afi otherrightsor remedies.
•r
Section 2.09. Temporary Bonds. Pending preparation of definitive Bonds, or by
agreement with the purchasers of aU Bonds, the Issuer may Issue and, upon its request, the
Tnistee shaU authenticate, in fieu of definitive Bonds, one or more tenqioraty printed or
typewritten Bonds in Authorized Denominations of substantiaUy the tenor recited above. Upon
request of the Issuer, the Trustee shaU authenticate definitive Bonds in exchange for and upon
surrender of an equal principal amoimt of teiiqK>raty Bonds. UntU so exchanged,. temporaty
Bonds shaU have the samerights,remedies and security hereunder as definitive Bonds.
Section 2.10. Cancellation and Disposition of Surrendered Bonds. Whenever
any Outstanding Bond shaU be defivered to tbe Trustee for transfer, exchange or canceUation
pursuant to this Indenture, upon payment of the prlncqial amount represented thereby, or for
replacement pursuant to Section 2.08 hereof, such Bond shaU be promptiy canceled and disposed
of by the Tnistee in accordance with its ordinaty customs and practices.
Section 2.11. Defivery of the Bonds. Upon the execution and defivety of this
Indenture, the Issuer shaU execute and deUvertothe Trustee and the Tnistee shaU authenticate the
Bonds and deliver them to the purchasers as directed by the Issuer as hereinafter in this
Section provided.
Prior to the defivety by the Trustee of any of the Bonds there shafi befiledwith
the Trustee:
(1)

A duly certified copy of the Series

Bond Ordinance.

(2)

An original executed counterpart of this Indenture.

(3)

An original executed copy of the Series

Bond Order.

(4)
An order to authenticate the Bonds, signed by the Chief Financial Officer
or City Comptroller of the Issuer.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83195

Section 2.12. Book Entry System. The Tnistee and the Issuer, mayfromtime
to time enter into, and discontinue, an agreement with a Securities Depositoty to establish
procedures with respect to the Bonds not inconsistent with tbe provisions of dils Indenmre;
provided, however, that, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Indenture, any such
agreement may provide:

(a)
that such Securities Depositoty is not required to present a Bond to the
Trustee in order to receive a partial payinent of principal;
(b) : that such Securities Depositoty is not required to present a Bond or any
portion thereof in order to receive payment of a purchase price;
(c)
that beneficial owners may give, or cause to be given, notices respecting
the tender of a Bond or portion thereof for purchase;
(d)
that different provisions for noticetoor by such Securities Depositoty may
be set forth therein; and
(e)
that a legend may ^ipear on each Bond so long as the Bonds are subjea to
such agieemem.

Widi respea to Bonds registered in the name of a Securities Depositoty (or its
nominee) neither the Trustee, the Bond Insurer nor the Issuer shall have any obligation to any of
its members or participants or to any person on behalf of whom an interest is held in the Bonds.
"WhUe an agreement with a Securities Depositoty is in effect, the procedures established thereia
shaU apply to the Bonds notwithstanding any other provisions of this Indenture to the contraty.
Section 2.13. Defivery of tbe Bonds; Designation of the Bonds as Book Entry
Bonds; Appointment of Initial Securities Depository for the Bonds. The Bonds are hereby
-authorized to be and shall be issued initiaUy. subject to the pro"visioiis of this Indenture, as Book
Entty Bonds within the meaning of and subject to Section 2.12 hereof. DTC is hereby appointed
as the initial Securities Depositoty for the Bonds.

 83196

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 2.14. CUSIP Numbers. The Issuer in issuing die Bonds may use
"CUSIP" numbers Of dien generaUy in use), and, ff so, die Trustee shaU use "CUSIP" numbers
in notices of redemption as a convenience to Owners; provided that any such notice may state that
no representation is made as to the correctoess of such numbers eidier as printed on the Bonds or
as contained in any notice of a redemption and that reliance may be placed only on the. other
identification numbers printed on the Bonds, and any such redemption shaU not be affected by any
defect in or omlssion of such numbers. The Issuer wiU prompdy notify the Trustee of any change
m die "CUSIP" numbers.

ARTICLE m
Redemption of Bonds Before Maturity
Section 3.01. Redemption Dates and Prices. The Bonds shall be subject to
redemption priortomaturity, at tbe written direction of the Issuertothe Trustee, in the amounts,
at the times and in the manner provided below.
(A)
Optional Redemption. (l)Onany Business Day during a DaUy Rate Period
or a Weekly Rale Period, and on the day next succeeding the last day of each such Rate Period,
the Bonds shafi be subject to optional redemption by the Issuer, in whole or in part, at 100% of
thefr principal amount, plus accrued interest, ff any, to the redemption date.
(2)
On the day next succeeding tbe last day of any Flexible Segment with
respect to any Bond, such Bond shall be subjea to optional redemption by the Issuer, in whole
or in part, at 100% of its principal amount.
(3)
On the Business Day Immediately succeeding any Auction Date, the Bonds
shafi be subject to optional redemption by the Issuer, in whole or in pan, at 100% of thefr
principal amount, together with accrued interest, ff any, to the redemption date.
(4)
During any Term Rate Period, and on the day next succeeding the last day
of each Term Rate Period, the Bonds shaU be subjea to optional redemption by the Issuer, during
the periods specified below, in whole at anytimeor in panfromtime to lime on any date, at the
redemption prices (expressed as percentages of principal amount) hereinafter indicated plus
accrued interisst, if any, lo the redemption date:

 5/1/2002

Length of Current Tenn
Rate Period

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

CpiyiTPf nccmeni of Redemption Period

83197

Redemption Price as
Percentage of Principal Amount

Tenth anniversary of commencement of
Term Raie Period

102%, declining by 112% on each
succeeding anniversaiy of thefineday of
the redemption period' untfl reaching
100% and thereafter 100%

More than 13 years, but Eighth anniversaiy of commeocentcnt of
no more than IS yean Term Rate Period

102%,- tif-riiTiing by 1/2% on each
succeeding amiiversaiy of the first djy of
the redempdon period until reaching
100% and thereafter 100%

More than 10 years, but Fifth aimiveisary of cofflmencemou of
no more than '13 years
Term Rate Period

101-1/2%. declining by 1/2% on each
succeeding anniversary of the iiisi day of
the redemption period unnl reaching
100% and thereafter 100%

More than 7 years, but Founh anniveisary of comntencemenl of
no more than 10 years Term Rate Period.

101%. declining by 1/2% on each
succeeding anniversary of thefirstday of
the redemption period imtS reaching
100% and thereafter 100%

More than 3 years, but Third amtivenary of .commencemeiu of
Term Raie Period .
not more than 7 years

101%. declining to 100% on the next
succeeding anniveisaiy of the first day of
the redemption period and thereafter
100% .

More than IS years

3 years or less

On day next succeeding last day of Term- 100%.
Rate Period

'

With respea to any Term Rate Period, the Isstier may specify in the notice requfred
by Section 2.03(c)Cui) hereof redemption prices and periods other than those set forth above for
Bonds not then caUed for redemption; provided, however, that such notice shaU be accompanied
by an opinion of Bond Counsel stating that such changes in redemption prices and periods (i) are
authorized or permitted by this Indenture and (11) wiU not adversely affea the exclusion of the
interest on the Bonds &x3m gross income for federal Income tax purposes.
(B)
Mandatory Redemption. The Bonds are subject to mandatoty redemption
on the dates and in the principal amounts set forth below at a redemption price equal to 100% of
the principal amount thereof plus accrued interest, if any, to the redemption date.
Date

Principal Amount

Section 3.02. Notice of Redemption. Notice of the call for any redemption of
Bonds or any portion thereof (which shall be in Authorized Denominations) pursuant to

 83198

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 3.01 hereof identifying the Bonds or portions thereof to be redeemed, specifying the
redemption date, the redemption price, the place and manner of payment and thatfrtnnthe
redemption date interest wiU cease to accrue, shaU be given by the Tnistee by mailing a copy of
the reden^tion notice by first-class maU, postage prepaid, to. the Owner of each Bondtobe
redeemed in whole or in pan at the address shown on the registration books. Such notice shaU
be given at least fifteen (15) days (thirty (30) days if the Rate Period for the Bonds is then a Term
Rate Period) prior to the date fixed for redenqition to the Owners of Bonds to be redeemed;
provided, however, that faUure to diUy give such notice, or any defect therein, shaU not affea die
vafidity of any proceedings for the redemption of Bonds wiUi respea to which no suchfoUureor
defect occurred. Upon presentation and surrender of Bonds so caUed for redemption in whole or
in part at the place or places of payment, except as otherwise provided pursuant to Section 2.12
hereof with respect to Book Entty Bonds, such Bonds or portions thereof shaU be redeemed. Any
notice inaUed as pro"vided in this Section shafi be conclusively presumedtohave been duly given,
whether or not the Owner receives the notice, ff a Bond Is presented to the Trustee for fransfer
after notice of redemption of such Bond has been maUed as herein provided, the Tnistee shaU
defiver a copy of such notice of redemption.to the new Owner of such Bond.
With respecttoany notice of optional redemption of Bonds, unless upon the giving
of such notice such Bonds shaU be deeined to have been paid within the meaning of Article Vm
hereof, such notice may state (ff so directed by the Issuer) that such ledenqition shafi be
conditional upon the receipt by the Tnistee on or prior to the datefixedfor such redemption of
moneys sufficienttopay the principal of, and premium, if any, and interest on, such Bonds to be
redeemed, and thatffsuch moneys shaU not have been so received said notice shaU be of no force
and effea and the Issuer shaU not be requiredtoredeem such Bonds. In the event that such notice
of redemption contains such a condition and, such moneys are not so received, the redemption shaU
not be made and the Trustee shall within a reasonabletimethereafter give notice, in the manner
in which the notice of redemption was given, that such moneys were not so received.

j
'

Section 3.03. Deposit of Ftinds. For tbe redenqition of any of the Bonds," the
. Issuer shaU cause to be deposited In the Bond Fund, to the extent legaUy available therefore,
moneys suffidem to pay when due the principal of and premium, ff any, and interest on the
redemption date.
Section 3.04. Partial Redemption of Bonds. In case a Bond is of a denomination
larger than tbe mininTiim Authorized Denomination, aU or a portion of such Bond may be
redeemed provided the principal amount not being redeemed is in an Authorized Denomination.
Upon surrender of any Bond for redemption in part only, the Issuer shaU execute and the Tnistee
shaU authenticate and defiver to the Owner thereof, without cost to the Owner, a new Bond or
Bonds of Authorized Denominations in aggregate prindpal amount equal to the unredeemed
portion of the Bond surrendered.
Section 3.05. Selection of Bonds for Redemption, ff less than aU of the Bonds
arc called for redemption, the Trustee shall selea the Bonds or portions thereof to be redeemed,
from the Bonds Outstanding not previously called forredemption,at random or in such other
manner as in the Trustee's sole discretion it shall deem appropriate and fair, in either case in
Authorized Denominations provided that the aggregate principal amoimt of each Bond remaining

j

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83199

Outstanding following such redemption shaU be in an Authorized Denomination. The Tmstee shaU
have no liabifity to any person as a result of making any such selection. The Tnistee shaU
prompdy notify the Issuer in writing of the Bonds or portions thereof selected for redemption,
pro"vided, however, that In coimection with any redemption of Bonds the Trustee shaUfirstselea
for redemption any Bonds held by the Trustee for the account of the Issuer or held of record by
the Issuer and that if, as Indicated In a certificate of an Authorized Issuer Representative delivered
to the Trustee, tbe Issuer shaU have offered to purchase aU Bonds then outstanding and less than
all such Bondis shaU have been tendered to the Issuer for such purchase, die Tnistee, at the
direction of the Issuer, shaU selea for redemption aU such Bonds which have not been so
tendered. If it is detennloed that one or more, but not afi, of the units of prindpal amount
represented by any such Bond is to be caUed for redemption, then, upon notice of intention to
redeem such unit or units, die Owner of such Bond sbaU, except las provided in Section 2.12
hereof with respea to Book-Entty Bonds, forthwith surrender such Bond to the Tnistee for
(a) payment to such Owner of the redenqition price of tbe unit or units of principal amount caUed
for redemption, and (b) defivetytosuch Owner of a new Bond or Bonds in the aggregate prindpal
amount of the unredeemed balance of the principal amount of such Bond. New :Bonds
representing the unredeemed balance of the principal amount of such Bond shaU be issuedtothe
Owner thereof, without charge therefor. If the surrender of such Bonds is required hereunder and
the Owner of any such Bond shall faU to present such Bond to die Trustee for payment and
exchange as aforesaid, such Bond shaU." nevertheless, become due and payable, and interest
thereon shaU cease to accrue, on the dqte fixed for redenqition to the extent of the unit or units
of principal amount caUed for redemption (andtothat extent only).

ARTICLE IV
Tender and Purchase of Bonds;
Remarkefuig; Remarketing Agent
Section4.01. Purchase of Bonds At Option of Owners, (a) DaUv Rate Period.
On any Business Day during any DaUy Rate Period, any Bond (or portion thereof in an
Authorized Denomination provided that tbe prindpal amount to be retained by the Owner shafi
be in an Alithorized Denomination) shaU be purchased by the Trustee, acting as Tender Agent,
to the extent it has been provided with funds sufficient to make such payment, at a purchase price
equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof plus accrued interest, ff any, thereon to the date
of purchase, upon, subjea to Section 4.10 hereof, (i) defivety by the Owner of such Bond to the
Tnistee, acting as Tender Agent, at its Principal Office by no later than 9:30 a.m.. New York
time, on such Business Day, of an irrevocable written notice or an irrevocable telephonic notice,
which states the principal amount or portion thereof to be purchased and number of such Bond
and the date on which such Bond shall be purchased pursuant to this subsection (a), and
(ii) delivery of such Bond to the Trustee, acting as Tender Agem, at its Designated Office
accompanied by an instrument of transfer thereof, in form satisfaaoty to the Trustee, executed
in blank by the Owner thereof with the signature of such Owner guaranteed, at or prior to 1:00
p.m.. New York time, on such Business Day.

 83200

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(b)
Weekly Rate Period. On any Business Day during any Weekly Rate Period,
any Bond (or portion thereof In an Authorized Denomination provided that the principal amount
to be retained by the Owner shafi be in an Authorized Deoomination) shaU be purchased from Its
Owner by the Tnistee. acting as Tender Agent, to the extent it has been provided "with funds
sufficient to make such payment, at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount
thereof plus accrued Interest, ff any, thereon to the date of purchase, upon, subject to Section 4.10
hereof, (1) delivety by the Owner of such Bond to the Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, at its
Principal Office of an Irrevocable written notice or an irtevocable telephonic notice prompdy
confirmed by telecopy or other writing, which states tbe principal amount or portion thereof to
be purchased and number of such Bond and the date on which the same shaU be purchased, which
date shaU be a Business Day not prior to the seventh day next succeeding the date of the defivety
of such notice to the -Tnistee, and (ii) defivety of such Bond to the Tnistee, acting as Tender
Agent, at its Designated Office,' accompanied by an Instrument of transfer thereof, in form
satisfactoty to the Trustee, executed in blank by the Owner thereof "with the signature of such
Owner guaranteed, at or prior toll :00 a.m.. New York time, on the date specified in such notice.
Section 4.02. Mandatory Purchase of Bonds, (a) Bonds shafi be subjea to
mandatoty purchase at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, on the
foUowing dates: (1) as to each Bond in a Flexible Rate Period, on the day next succeeding the last
day of each Flexible Segment appficabletosuch Bond; (u) in the event of an adjustmentfromone
Rate Period to a different Rate Period, on the day next succeeding the last day of the preceding
Rate Period; and (iu) in the event of an adjustment from one Term Rate Period to anodier Term
Rate Period (including a Term Rate Period of the same duration), on the day next succeeding the
last day of the preceding Term Rale Period.
(b)
An Owner must deliver each Bond subject to mandatoty purchase as
provided in Section 4.02(a) hereof to the Tnistee, acting as Tender Agent, at its Designated Office
accompanied by an Instrument of transfer thereof, in form satisfactoty to the Trustee, executed
in blank by the Owner thereof, with the signature of such Owner guaranteed at or prior to 11:00
a.m.. New York time, on the purchase date in order to receive payment of the purchase price on
such date to the extent the Trustee, acting as Tender Agem. has been provided with fiinds
suffidem to make such payment.
(c)
Notice of each mandatoty purchase pursuant to the provisions of
Section 4.02(a)(ii) and Section. 4.02(a)(iii) hereof Is required by the provisions of
Section 2.03(a)(iu), 2.03(b){iu), 2.03(c)(ul), 2.03(d)(m) or 2.03(e)(iil), as the case may be, to be
included in the notice given pursuant to such Section.
Section 4.03. Obfigation To Surrender Bonds. The giving of notice as provided
in Section 4.01 hereof shall constimte the irrevocable tender for purchase of each Bond or portion
thereof with respea to which such notice shaU have been given, irrespective of whether such Bond
shall be delivered as provided in Section 4.01. The occurrence of any event specified in
Section 4.02(a) hereof shall constimte the mandatoty tender for purchase of each Bond or portion
thereof, irrespective of whether such Bond shall be delivered as provided in Section 4.02(b).
Upon the purchase of each Bond or portion thereof so deemed to be tendered, such Bond or
portion thereof shaU cease to bear interest payable to the former Owner thereof, who thereafter

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83201

shall have norightswith respea thereto, odier than therightto receive die purchase price thereof
upon surrender of such Bond to the Trustee, acting as Tender. Agent, and such Bond or portion
thereof shaU be no longer outstanding. The Trustee shaU audienticate, register and deliver new
Bonds in replacement of Bonds or portions thereof deemed so tendered and not surrendered on
the date of purchase.
Section 4.04. Remarketing of Bonds, (a) By 11:30 a.m.. New Yorktime,on
the date the Trustee receives notice from any Bondholder In accordance "with Section 4.01(a)
hereof, and promptiy, but In no event later than 11:30 a.m., New York time, on the Business Day
foUowing the day on which the Tnistee receives notice from any Bondholder of Its demand to have
the Tnistee purchase Bonds pursuant to Section 4.01(b) hereof, die Tnistee sbaU give facsimUe
or telephonic notice, confinned in writing thereafter, to the Remarketing Agent specifying the
principal amount of Bonds which such Bondholder has demandedtohave purchased and the date
on which such Bonds, are demanded to be pun±ased.
(b)
Upon the giving of noticetothe Tnistee by any Bondholder In accordance
with Section 4.01(a) or (b) hereof and the giving of notice by the Trustee to the Remarketing
Agent as provided in Section 4.04(a) hereof with respect to such notices, and on each date on
which the Bonds aretobe purchased in accordance with Section 4.02 hereof, the Remarketing
Agent shaU offer for sale and use its best efforts to sell such Bonds on the date such Bonds are
to be purchased at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof phis accnied
interest, ff any, to the purchase date. AU sales of Bonds hereunder must be at a purchase price
equal to 100% of the principal amount of such Bonds plus accrued Interest,ffany. diereon.
(c)
Not later than 1:00 p.m., New York time, on the date on which Bonds are
to be purchased pursuant to Section 4.01(a) or 4.02(a)(1) hereof, and not later than 3:00 p.m..
New York time, on the Business Day next preceding the date on which Bonds aretobe purchased
pursuant to Section 4.01(b) or Section 4.02(a)(ii) hereof, the Remarketing Agent shaU give
(1) facsimUe or telephonic notice to the Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, spedfying the names,
addresses and taxpayer identification numbers of the purchasers of, and the principal amount and
denominations of, and with respea to Bonds which iire being purchased pursuant to
Section 4.02(a)(i) hereof die Flexible Segments and the Flexible Rates for, such Bonds remarketed
by it pursuant to subsection (b) and the amount of remarketing proceeds it wUl provide to the
Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, on the date on which the Bonds aretobe purchased, as set forth
in Section 4.04(d) hereof and (ii) telephonic notice to the Issuer and the Trustee, acting as Tender
Agem, of the prindpal amount of and accrued interest on any Bonds not remarketed by such time;
provided, however, that, in addition, ou any date on which Bonds are to be purchased pursuant
to Section 4.01(a) or 4.02(a)(i) hereof, ff aU the Bonds wUl not be remarketed, the Remarketing
Agent shall give the Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, and the Issuer notice by 12:00 noon. New
York time, rather than by 1:00 p.m.. New York time, of the principal amount of and accnied
interest on Bonds that have not been remarketed.
(d)
Upon the giving of the notice specified in Section 4.04(c)(i) hereof, the
Remarketing Agent shall be obligated to deliver to the Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, the
amount of remarketing proceeds specified in such notice, as follows:

 83202

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(i)
in the case of Bonds which are being purchased pursuant to Section 4.01
or 4.02(a)(u) hereof, by 1:00 p.m.. New York time, on the purchase date; and
(U)
in tie case of Bonds which are being purchased pursuant to
' Section 4.02(a)(i) hereof, by 3:00 p.m.. New York time, on the purchase date, subject
onlytotimelydelivety of Bonds by tbe Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, as set forth in
Section 4.04(e) hereof and verification by the Remarketing Agent that such Bonds conform
to the instructions contained in the notice given by the Remarketing Agent to the Tnistee
pursuant to Secti'on 4.04(c) hereof.
Any remarketing proceeds received by the Remarketuig Agent in excess of such
amounts so transferred shafi be defivered to the Issuer as soon, as practicable after the receipt
thereof.
(e)
Upon receipt by the Tnistee, acting as Tender Agent, of notice from the
Rematiceting Agent pursuanttoSection 4.04(c) hereof, the Tnistee shafi authenticate and defiver
new Bonds to the Remarketing Agent, as friUows:
(i)
In the case of Bonds which are being purchased pursuanttoSection 4.01
or Section 4.02(a)(ii) hereof, and pro"vided that moneys derivedfromthe sources specified
in Seaion 4 .05(a) hereof In an amount equaltothe Purchase Price therefor shafi have been
received by the Tnistee, acting as Tender Agent, by 1:00 p.m.; New Yorktime,such new
Bonds shafi be delivered by 2:30 p.m.. New Yorktime;and
(ii)
in the case of Bonds which are bemg purchased pursuant to
Section 4.02(a)(i) hereof, such new Bonds shaU be delivered by 2:30 p.m.. New York
time.
Section 4.0S. Purchase of Bonds Tendered To Trustee, (a) By die close of
business on the date Bonds or portions thereof are to be purchased pursuanttoSection 4.01 or
4.02 hereof by the Tnistee, acting as Tender Agent, the Tnistee, acting as Tender Agent, shaU
purchase, but onlyfromthe fimds listed bdow, such Bonds or portions thereof (in Authorized
Denominations)fromthe Owners thereof at a purchase price equaltothe prindpal amount thereof
plus accrued interest,ffany.tothe date of purchase. Funds for the payment of such purchase
price shafi be derivedfiomthe foUowing sources in the order of priority indicated:
(i)
proceeds of the remarketing of such Bonds pursuanttoSection 4.04 hereof
to any purchaser; and
(ii)

moneysfitmishedby the Issuer to the Trustee, acting as Tender Agent.

Under no circumstances shall the Trustee be required to advance its own fiinds for
the purchase of any Bonds, and the Trustee shall have no liabUity for its failure to purchase any
Bonds if it shall not have been provided with sufficient funds in a timely manner to permit such
purchase.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

(b)

83203

The Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, shall:

(I)
hold aU Bonds delivered to it pursuant to Section 4.01 or 4.02 hereof in
trust for the benefit of the respective Bondholders which shaU have so defivered such
Bonds iintU moneys representing the purchase, price of .such Bonds shaU have been
delivered to or for the account of or to the order of such Bondholders; and
(II)
hold all moneys defivered to it hereunder for the purchase of such Bonds
in trust for the benefit of the person or entity which shaU have so delivered such moneys
in a separate and segregated fiind, and not commingle such funds with any other fimds or
invest such fimds, untU the Bonds purchased with such moneys shaU have been defivered
or deemed defivered.toor for the account of such person or entity; provided, that any
moneys so deposited with and held by the Tnistee not so appfied to the purchase of Bonds
within two (2) years after the date of purchase sbaU be paid by the Trustee to the Issuer
upon the -written direction of the- Authorized Issuer Representative and thereafter the
former Bondholders shaU be entided to look only to the Issuer for payment of such
purchase price, and then onlyfromSubordinate Lien Revenues and only to the extent of
the amount so rqpald,- and the Issuer shaU not be liable for any Interest thereon and shaU
not be regarded as a tnistee of such moneys, and the Trustee shaU have no fiirther
responsibUity with respea to such moneys. To the extent any moneys are held by the
Tnistee for the payment of the purchase price of Bonds which have not been presented for
payment, such moneys shafi not be invested.
' . Section 4.06. Defivery of Purchased Bonds, (a) Bonds sold by the Remarketmg
Agent pursuant to Section 4.04 hereof shall be defivered to the Remarketing Agent, as specffied
in Section 4.04(e) hereof.
(b)
Bonds purchased by the Trustee, actipg as Tender Agent, hereunder with
moneys described in clause (u) of Section 4.05(a) hereof shaU be canceled.
Section 4.07. No Sales After Default. Anything in this Indenmre to the contraty
notwithstanding, at the direction of the Remarketing Agent there shafi be no remarketing of Bonds
pursuant to this Article IVffthere shall have occurred and be continuing an event of default under
Section 9.01 hereof; proyided, that nothing in this Section 4.07 shaU be construed as prohibiting
purchases of Bonds pursuant to Section 4.01 or 4.02 hereof.
Section 4.08,
Remarketing Agent. The Remarketing Agent shaU be
;
; provided, however, that the Issuer may remove
the Remarketing Agent and appoint a successor Remarketing Agent for the Bonds. The
appointment of a successor Remarketing Agent shall be subject to the approval of the Bond
Insurer. The Remarketing Agent shaU signify its acceptance of the duties and obligations.imposed
upon it hereunder by a written instrument of acceptance delivered to the Trustee and the Issuer.
Section 4.09. Qualifications of Remarketing Agent; Resignation and Removal.
The Remarketing Agent shall be a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers. Inc.
and authorized by law to perform all the duties imposed upon it by this Indenture. The

 83204

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Remarketing Agent may at any time resign and be discharged of its diities and obfigations created
by this Indenture by gi"vlng at least twenty Business Days' notice to the Issuer and the Trustee.
The Remarketing Agent may be removed at any time,.at the direction of the Issuer, upon at least
five Buskiess Days' notice by an Insfrumem signed by the Issuer andfiledwith the Remarketing
Agent and tbe Tnistee. No removal of the Remarketing Agent shafi become effective untU a
successor Remarketing Agent has defivered a written acceptance of appointment.
Section 4.10. Tender and Purchase of Book-Entry Bonds. Notwithstanding any
provisions of this Indenture to the contraty, at any time whUe die Bonds axe Book-Enhy Bonds,
the provisions of this Article rv are modified as follows:
(a)
Any notice pursuanttoSection 4.01(a)(i) or 4.01(b)(i) hereof may be given
by any direct participant in the Securities Depositoty acting on behalf of either any owner of a
beneficial interest In the Bonds or any indirect participant in the Securities Depositoty acting on
behalf of such an owner, provided that any such notice shaU not be required to contain the bond
number of Bonds'to be tendered for purdiase and the Tnistee may conclusively rely on any
written certification or representation by a person, firm, corpoi:ation or other entity that It is acting
as a direa partidpant in the Securities Depositoty for tbe Bonds for tbe purposes of giving any
such notice.
(b)
Delivety of Bonds to the Trustee, as provided in Sections 4.01(a)(ii),
4.01 (b)(u) and 4.02(b) hereof, shafi be effected by book-entty credittothe account of the Trustee
on tbe records of the.Securities Depositoty, at or prior to 1:00 p.m., New York time, on the date
Bonds or portions thereof are required to be tenderedtothe Trustee for purchase, of a beneficial
Interest in tbe Boiids to be purcliased on siich date.
(c)
The Remarketing Agent shall give the information required by Section
4.04(c) hereof to the Securities Depositoty Instead of to the Trustee, but shafi at the same time
give facsimUe or telephonic notice to the Trustee specifying the principal amount of such Bonds
which it has been unable to remarket (ff such be the case).
. (d)
The Remarketing Agent shall deliver remarketing proceeds in accordance
with the provisions of Section 4.04(d) hereof to the Securities Depositoty instead of to the
Trustee, acting as Tender Agent.
(e)

Section 4.04(e) hereof shafi be Inapplicable.

(0
The provisions of Sections 4.05 and 4.06 hereof shall apply only if Bonds
are purchased with moneys described in clause (11) of Section 4.05(a) hereof; the beneficial
interests in Bonds purchased with moneys described in clause (i) of Section 4.05(a) shall be
transferred in accordance with the procedures of the Securities Depositoty.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83205

ARTICLE V
Payment; Further Assurances
Section 5.01. Payment of Prindpal or Redemption Price of and Interest On
Bonds. The Issuer shaU prompdy pay or cause to be paid the prindpal of and premium,ffany,
and Interest on, evety Bond Issued hereunder according to the terms thereof and hereof. The
Issuer hereby appoints the Trustee to aa as the Pay rug Agent for the Bonds, and designates the
Designated Office of the Tnistee as the place of payment for the Bonds, such appointment and
designation to remain In effect untU notice of change Isfiledwith the Tnistee.Section 5.02. T.tmifprt Tax General Obligations. The Bonds shall be direa and
general obfigations of the Issuer, and i^hall be secured by a pledge of, lien on and security interest
in all amoimts in the fiinds and accounts created or maintairipd pursuant to this Indenture..
including earnings on such amounts, subjea only to the provisions of this Indenture permitting
the appfication thereof for the purposes and on the terms and conditions set forth herein and
therein. The obfigation of the Issuer to make payments of die principal of, [the redemption
premium on.] and the interest on the Bonds shall be payablefromany funds legaUy available for
such purpose. The Issuer covenants and agreestotake aU necessaty action to amiuaUy appropriate
fimds in a timely manner so as to provide for the making of aU such payments with respea to the
Bonds; provided however, that in no event shall the Issuer be obfigated to levy any separate ad
valorem or other tax in addition to other City taxes or any special ad valorem or other tax
unlimited astorate or amoimt to pay such prindpal, [redemption premium] or interest.
Section 5.03. Extension or Funding of Claims for Interest. In order to prevent
any accumulation of claims for interest after maturity, the Issuer shafi not, directiy. or indirecdy,
extend or assent to the extension of the time for the payment of any claim for interest on any of
the Bonds, and shaU not, directiy or indirecdy, be a party to or approve any such arrangement by
purchasing or fimding such claims or in any other manner. In case any such claim for interest
shall be extended or fiinded. v/beibex or not with the consent of the Issuer, such claim for interest
so extended or fimded shaU not be entided. in case of default hereunder, to the benefits of this
Indenture, except subject to the prior payment in fidl of the principal of aU of the Bonds then
outstanding and of aU claims for interest which shall not have been so extended or fiinded.
Section 5.04. Performance of Covenants; the Issuer. The Issuer covenants that
it wiU faithhUly perform at all times any and all covenants, undertakings, stipulations and
provisions contained in this Indenture, in any and evety Bond executed, authenticated and
delivered hereunder and in all of its proceedings pertaining thereto.
Section 5.05. Instruments of Further Assurance. The Issuer covenants that it
will do, execute, acknowledge and deliver or cause to be done, executed, acknowledged and
delivered, such indentures supplemental hereto and such further acts, instruments and transfers
as the Trustee may reasonably requfre for the better assuring, transferring, conveying, pledging,
assigning and confinning unto the Trustee all and singular therightsassigned hereby and the

 83206

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

amounts pledged hereto, to the payment of the principal of and premium, tf any. and interest on
the Bonds.
Section 5.06. Tax Covenants: The Issuer shaU not talce, or omit to take, any
action lawfiU and within its power to take, which action or omission would cause interest on any
Bond to become subjea to federal income taxes in addition to federal income taxes to which
interest on such Bond Is subject on the date of original .Issuance thereof.
Tbe Issuer shaU not permit any of the proceeds of the Bonds, or any fecUities
financed with such proceeds, to be used in any manner that would cause any Bond to constitute
a "private activity bond" within the meaning of Section 141 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986. ..
.
' The Issuer shaU not permit any of the proceeds of the Bonds or other moneys to
be Invested in any manner that would cause any Bondtoconstitute an ."arbitrage bond" within the
meaning of Section 148 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or a "hedge bond" within-the
meaning of Section 149(g) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
•The Issuer shaU comply with tbe provisions of Section 148(f) of the Interna]
Revenue Code of 1986relatingto therebateof certain investment eamingg at periodic intervals
to the United States of America.
Section 5.07. Indenture to Constitute Contract. In consideration of the purchase
and acceptance of tbe Bonds by those who shaU hold the samefromtimetotime, the provisions
of this Indenture shall be a part of the contract of the Issuer with the Owners of the Bonds and
shaU be deemed to be and sbaU constimte a contract between the Issuer, the Trustee and the
Owners from time to time of the Bonds.

ARTICLE VI
Funds
Section 6.01. Creation of the Bond Fund. There is hereby created by the Issuer
and ordered established with the Tnistee. a trust fiind to be designated "City of Chicago, lUlnols
Auction Rate Bonds, Series
- Bond Fund," which shaU be used to pay the principal of and
premium, if any, and the interest on the Bonds.
Section 6.02. Payments Into the Bond Fund. There shall be deposited into the
Bond Fundfromtime to time the foUowing:
(a)

all accrued interest, ff any. paid by the initial purchasers of the Bonds;

(b)
on the first Business Day of each month, the Issuer shall pay to the Trustee
for deposit into the Bond Fund, the amount required so that the sum then held in the Bond
Fund wUl equal the Bond Fund Requirement; and

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83207

(c)
all other moneys received by the Tnistee under and. pursuant, to the
provisions of this Indenture, when accompanied by directions from the person depositing
such moneys that such moneys are to be paid into the Bond Fund.
The Issuer hereby covenants and agrees that so long as any of the Bonds issued
hereunder are outstanding it wiU cause to be deposited in the Bond Fund sufficient amounts
prompdy to meet and pay the principal of and premium, ff any, and interest on the Bonds as the
same become due and payable. Nothing Iierein shall be construedtorequire the Issuer to levy any
separate ad valorem or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to pay the. principal of and
ptemiuffl,ffany, and interest on the Bonds as the same become due and payable.
Section 6.03. Use of Moneys I n the Bond Fund and Certain Other Moneys.
Except as provided In Sections 6.07, .6.10 and 10.03 hereof, moneys in the Bond Fund shafi be
used solely for the payment of the principal of .and premium, ff any, and interest on the Bonds as
the same shafi become due and payable at maturity, upon redemption or otherwise. FUnds for
such payments of the principal of and premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds shall be derived
from the fofiowing sources in the order of priority Indicated:
.. . ..
- - (1) from moneys paid into the Bond Fund pursuant to Section 6.02(a) hereof
which shafi be applied to the payinent of interest on the Bonds;
(u) from moneys held by the Trustee pursuant to Article V m hereof, such
moneys to be appfied only to the payment of the principal of and premium, ff any, and
interest on Bonds which are deemedtobe paid in accordance with Article YIQ hereof; and
(iu)
from afi other amounts on deposit in the Bond Fund, and proceedsfromthe
investment thereof.
Section 6.04. Custody of the Bond Fund. The Bond Fund shafi be in the custody
of the Trustee but in the name of the Issuer and the Issuer hereby authorizes and dfrects the
Trustee to withdraw in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.03 of this Indenture sufficient
fiinds from the Bond Fundto'pay the principal of, premium, ff any, and interest on the Bonds as
the same become due and payable, which authorization and direction the Trustee hereby accepts.
Section 6.05. Available Moneys To Be Paid Over To Trustee. The Issuer wUl
cause moneys legaUy avaUable for the payment of the Bonds to be paid to the Trustee for deposit
in the Bond Fund in accordance with the terms of this Indenture to effect payment of the principal
of and premium, ff any, and interest on the Bonds as die same become due.
Section 6.06. Payments of Prindpal and Interest. The Trustee shall pay from
moneys timely received by the Tnistee, in the order of priority indicated in Section 6.03 hereof,
the principal of and premium, ff any, and interest on, the Bonds as the same become due and
payable. If, prior to the maturity of any Bond, the Issuer surrenders such Bond to the Trustee for
cancellation, the Trustee shall cancel such Bond.

 83208

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 6.07. Non-Presentment of Bonds. In the event any Bond shall not be
presented for payment when the principal thereof becomes due, either at maturity or otherwise,
or at the date fixed for redemption thereof or in the event any Interest payment thereon is
undaimed, if moneys sufficienttopay such Bond or interest shaU have been deposited in the Bond
Fund, it shafi be the duty of the Tnistee to hold such moneys, without liabifity for interest
thereon, for the benefit of the Owner of such Bond who shafi thereafter be restricted exclusively
to such moneys, for any claim of whatever nanire on his pan under this Indenture or on, or widi
respect to, said Bond. Aiiy moneys so deposited with and held by the Trustee not so appfied to
the payment of Bonds or such'interest, ff any, within two (2) years after the date on which the
same shaU have become due shaU be paid aiitomaticaUy by the Trustee to the Issuer and thereafter
Bondholders shaU be entided to look only to the Issuer for payment, and then only to the extent.
of the amount so repaid, and the Issuer shaU not be liable for any interest thereon and sbaU not
be regarded as a tnistee of such moneys and the Tnistee shaU have no fiirther responsibUity with
respea to such moneys.
Section 6.08. Funds To Be Hdd For AU Bondholders; Certain Exceptions.
Moneys in the Bond Fimd shafi, until applied as provided In this Indenture, be held by the Tnistee
for the benefit of the Owners of aU Outstanding Bonds, except as provided by Sections 6.07 and
6.10 hereof and except that any portion of the Bond Fund representing' principal of and premium,
ff any, and Interest on, any Bonds previously caUed for redemption in accordance with Article III
of this Indenmre or previously matured or representing unclaimed Interest on the Bonds shaU be
held for the benefit of the Owners of such Bonds only and shaU not be deposited or invested
pursuant to Article 'VII hereof, notwithstanding any pro"vision of Article Vn.
Section 6.09. Moneys To Be Hdd In Trust. AU moneysrequiredto be deposited
"widi or paidtothe Trustee for deposit into tbe Bond Fund under any provision hereof. aU moneys
withdrawnfromthe Bond Fund and held by the Trustee sbaU be held by the Trustee in trust, and
such moneys (other than moneys held pursuant to Section 6.07 hereof) shaU. whUe so held,
constimte part of the Trust Estate and be subjea to thefienhereof. Moneys held for the payment
of the purchase price of Bonds pursuant to Article IV hereof shafi not constimte part of tbe Trust
Estate.
Section 6.10. Repayment To the Issuer from the Bond Fund. Any amounts
remaining in the Bond Fund after payment in fidl of the principal of and premium, ff any. and
interest on the Bonds (or provision for payment thereof as provided in this Indenture), the fees,
charges and expenses of the Trustee, the Remarketing Agent and afi other amounts required to be
paid under this Indenture shall be paid to the Issuer.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83209

ARTICLE v n
Investinent of Moneys
The Tnistee shaU invest and reinvest any moneys held as part of the Bond Fund in
accordance with the specific written dfrection (or the specific oral direction prompdy confinned
in writing) of an Authorized Issuer Representative in Investment Securities. Any such investments
SbaU be held by or under the confrol of the Trustee and shaU be deemed at aU times a part of the
fiind for which they were made. The interest accruing thereon, any profit realizedfromsuch
investments and any loss resultingfrom'such Investments shaU be credited or charged to the Fund
in which such moneys are dqxislted. The Trustee shaU seU and reduce to cash a suffident amoimt .
of such investments of the Bond Fund in accordance with written dfrections (or oral dfrections
prompdy confirmed bytelecopyor other writing) of an-Authorized Issuer Representative,
whenever the cash balance in the Bond Fund is insufficienttopay the principal of and premium,
ff any, and interest on the Bonds when due. The Tnistee may make any and aU such investments
through its and its affiliates' own bond departments. As and when aity amount invested pursuant
to this Article may be needed for disbursement, the Trustee may cause a suffidem amount of such
investments to be sold and reduced to cash to die credit of such fiinds. Moneys held for the
payinent of die purchase price of Bonds pursuanttoArticle IV hereof, or the payment of Bonds
pursuanttoSection 6.08 hereof, shaU not be invested except in overnight Government Obfigations
- in accordance "with the specific written dfrection (or the specific oral direction prompdy confirmed
in writing) of an Authorized Issuer Representative. Any. proceeds under the Bond Insurance
Poficy shaU be held uninvested.

ARTICLE v m
Defeasance
If the Issuer shall pay or cause to be paid, or there shaU be otherwise paid or
provision for payment made to or for the Owners of the Bondis the principal, premium,ffany. and
interest due ortobecome due thereon at the times and in the manner stipulated therein, and ff the
Issuer shaU keep, perform and observe aU the covenants and promises in the Bonds and in this
Indenture expressed as to be kept, performed and observed by it or on its part, and shall pay or
cause to be paid to the Trustee aU sums of money due or to become due according to the
provisions hereof, then this Indenture and thefien,rightsand interests created hereby shaU cease,
determine and become nuU and void (except as to any survivingrightsof payment, registration,
fransfer or exchange of Bonds herein provided for), whereupon the Tnistee upon written request
of an Authorized Issuer Representative shaU cancel and discharge this Indenture, and execute and
deliver to the Issuer such instruments in "writing as shall be requested by an Authorized Issuer
Represeniaiive and requisite to discharge this Indenture, andrelease,assign and deUver unto the
Issuer any and all the estate, right, tide and interest in and to any and allrightsassigned or
pledged to the Trustee or otherwise subject to this Indenture, except moneys or securities held by
the Tnistee for the payment of the principal of and premium, if any, and interest on, and purchase
prices of, the Bonds.

 83210

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

Any Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof shafi be deemed to be paid within
the meaning of this Indenture (provided that the unpaid portion of such Bond is also an Authorized
Denomination) when (a) payinent of the princqial of and premium, ff any, on such Bond or
Authorized Denomination thereof, plus interest thereontothe due date thereof (whether such due
date Is by reason of maturity or upon redemption as provided herein) either (i) shafi have been
made or caused to be made in accordance with thetermsthereof, (U) shaU have been provided for
by Irrevocably depositing sufficient moneys for such payment with the Trustee and the due date
of such prindpal, interest and premium, ff any, has occurred, or (111) in the case of a Bond which
bears Interest at a Flexible Rate or a Term Rate or an Auction Rate, shaU have been pro"vided for
by irrevocably depositing wldi the Tnistee in trust and irrevocably setting aside exclusively for
such payment on such due date (which due date shaU be in the case of a Bond bearing interest at
a Flexible Rate no later than the Interest Payment Date for the then current Flexible Segment for
such Bond and In the case of a Bond bearing interest at a Tenn Rate or an Auction Rate no later
than the last Interest Payment Date for the then current Term Ram Period or Auction Period for
such Bond) (1) moneys sufficient to make such payment and/or (2) non-callable Government
Obfigations provided that the Issuer delivers to the Trustee, at the Issuer's expense, (A) an
opinion of Bond Counsel upon which the Trustee mayrelytotbe effea that aU conditions with
respect to such deposit spedfied ia this Article Vm has been satisfied or provision therefor made
and that such dq>osit wifi not cause the interest on any of the Bonds to be includable for federal
income tax purposes in the gross Income of any Owner or Beneficial .Owner thereof and- OB) a
verification report of a certified public accountant as to the adequacy of such moneys and
Govermnent Obfigations) maturing as to prindpal and interest in such amount and at such time
as wUl insure the availabUity of sufficient moneystomake such payment, and (b) aU necessaty
and proper fees, con^pensation and expenses of the Trustee pertaining to any such deposit shaU
have b^n paid or the payment thereof provided for to the satisfaction of the Trustee. At such
times as a Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof shaU be deemedtobe paid hereunder, as
aforesaid, such Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof shaU no longer be secured by or
entided to the benefits of this Indenmre (other dian Sections 2.04 and 2.08 hereof in the case of
a deposit under clause (a)(iu) above), except for the purposes of any such payment from such
moneys or Government Obfigations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraph, in the case of a Bond or Authorized
Denomination thereof which by itstermsmay be redeemed prior to the stated maturity thereof,
no deposit under clause (aXiii) of the immediately preceding paragraph shafi be deemed a payment
of such Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof as aforesaid untU: (a) proper notice of
redemption of such Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof sball have been previously given
in accordance with Article UI of this Indenture, or in the event said Bond or Authorized
Denomination thereof is not to be redeemed within the next succeeding sbcty (60) days, until the
Issuer shall have given the Trustee, in form satisfactoty to the Trustee, irrevocable instructions
to notify, as soon as practicable, the Owner of such Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof
in accordance with Article HI hereof, that the deposit requfred by (a)(ui) above has been made
with the Trustee and that said Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof is deemed to have been
paid in accordance with this Article and stating the maturity or redemption date upon which
moneys are to be avaUable for the payment of the principal of and the appUcable premium, if any,
on said Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof, plus interest thereon to the due date thereof,
or (b) the maturity of such Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof.

 5/ 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83211

Notwithstanding any provision of any other Article of this Indenmre which may
be contratytothe provisions of this Article, aU moneys or Government Obligations set aside and
held in trust pursuant to tbe provisions of this Artide for tbe payinent of Bonds or Authorized
Denominations thereof (including interest and premium thereon, ff any) shaU be appfiedtoand
used solely for the payment of the particular Bonds or Aiithorized.Denominations thereof
(including interest and premium thereon, ff any) with respea to "which such moneys and
Government Obligations have been so set aside in trust.
Anything in Article XI hereof to the contraty notwithstanding, ff moneys or
Govemmem Obfigations have been deposited or set aside widi the Tnistee pursuanttothis Article
for the payment of Bonds or Authorized Denominations thereof and the interest and premium, if
any, thereon and such Bonds or Authorized Denominations thereof and the interest and premium,
ff any, thereon sbaU not have In fact been actuaUy paid in fiiU, no amendment to the provisions
of diis Article sbaU be made without the consent of the Owner of each of die Bonds affected
thereby.
ARTICLE IX
Default Provisions and Remedies
of Trustee and Bondholders
Section 9.01. Etefaults; Events of Default If any of the foUowing events occurs.
It is hereby defined as and declared to be and to constimte a default or an Evem of Default:
(a)
FaUure to make payment of any instalhnent of interest upon any Bond after
such payment has become due and payable;
(b)
FaUure to make payment of the principal of and premium, ff any, on any
Bond at the stated maturity thereof or upon the unconditional redemption thereof;
(c)
A faUure by the Issuer to pay an amount due pursuanttoArticle IV hereof
when the same sbaU have become due and payable;
(d)
The occurrence of an "event of default" under Section 10.01 of the Master
Bond Ordinance; and
(e) . FaUure on the part of the Issuer to perform or observe any of its covenants,
agreements or conditions in this Indenture or in the Bonds contained and failure to remedy
the same after notice thereof pursuant to Section 9.02 hereof.
Section 9.02. Notice of Event of Default Under Seaion 9.01(e) Hereof;
Opportunity of Issuer To Cure Defaults. No default described in Section 9.01(e) hereof shall
constimte an Event of Default untU actual notice of such default,requiringthat it be remedied and
stating that such notice is a "Notice of Default" hereunder, by registered or certified mail shall
be given to the Issuer by the Trustee or to the Issuer and the Trustee by the Owners of a majority

 83212

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

In aggregate principal amount of afi Bonds Outstanding, and the Issuer shaU have had thirty days
after receipt of such notice to correct said default or cause said default to be corrected, and shaU
not have corrected said default or caused said default to be corrected "within the applicable period;
provided, however, ff said default be such that it cannot be corrected within the appUcable period,
it shafi not constitute .an event of default ff corrective action is instituted within the appUcable
period and dUigendy pursued untU the default is corrected and the fact of such non-correction,
corrective action and difigent pursuit is evidenced to the Trustee and tbe Bond Insurer by a
certificate of an Authorized Issuer Representative.
Section 9.03. Remedies; Rights of Bondholders. Upon the occurrence and
continuation of an Event of Default under Section 9.01 hereof,- the Trustee may with the written
consent of the Bond Insurer, or shafi at the dfrection of the Bond Insurer, pursue any available
remedy at law or In equity by suit, action, mandamus or other proceeding to enforce the payment
of the principal of and premium,ffany, and interest on the Bonds then outstanding and to enforce
and compel the performance of the duties and obfigations of the Issuer as herein set forth.
If an Evem of Default under Section 9.01 hereof shall have occurred and be
continuing and ff requested so to do by tbe Owners of not less than a majority in aggregate
principal amount of Bonds then Outstanding, and indemnified as provided in Section 10.01(1)
hereof, the Tnistee shafi be obliged to exerdse such one or more of therightsand powers
conferred by this Section 9.03 as the Trustee being advised by Counsel shafi deem most e;^>edient
in tbe interests of the Bondholders.
No remedy by thetermsof diis Indenture conferred upon or reservedtothe Trustee
(or to the Bondholders) is intended to be exclusive of any other reinedy, but each and evety such
remedy shafi be cumulative and shaU be in addition to any other rem«ly given to the Tnistee or
to the Bondholders hereunder or now or hereafter existing at law or in iequity or by stamte.
No delay or omission to exercise anyright,power orreinedyaccruing upon any
Event of Default shaU impafr any suchright,power orremedyor shaU be construed to be a
waiver of any such Event of Default or acquiescence therein; and evety suchright,power or
remedy may be exercised firomtimeto time and as often as may be deemed expedient.
No waiver of any Event of Default hereunder, whether by the Trustee or by the
Bondholders, shaU extend to or shall affect any subsequent Event of Default or shaU impafr any
rights or remedies consequent thereon.
Section 9.04. Right of Bondholders To Dfrect Proceedings. Anything in this
Indenture to the contraty notwithstanding and subject to the provisions of Section 9.10 hereof, the
Owners of not less than a majority in aggregate principal amoimt of Bonds then Outstanding stiaU
have theright,at any time, by an instrument or instruments in writing executed and delivered to
the Trustee, to dfrect the time, method and place of conducting aU proceedings to be taken in
connection with the enforcement of the terms and conditions of this Indenmre, or for the
appointment of a receiver or any other proceedings hereunder; provided, that such direction shaU
not be otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of law and of this Indenture and could not
involve the Trustee in personal liabUity.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COM MITTEES .

83213

Section 9.05. Appfication of Moneys. AU moneys received by the Tnistee
pursuant to anyrightgiven or action taken under the provisions of this Article shaU, after payment
of, or thereservationof fiinds sufficienttopay.aU costs and expenses of the proceedings resulting
in tbe coUection of such moneys and of the expenses, .liabifities and advances incurred or made
by the Tnistee and its Counsel, be deposited in the Bond Fund and afi such moneys in the Bond
Fund shall be appfied as foUows:
FIRST - To the payment to the persons entided thereto of all interest dien due on
the Bonds (other than interest due on Bonds for the payment of which moneys are held pursuant
to the provisions of this Indenture), and, ff the amount a'vailable shaU not be sufficient to pay said
amount In fiiU, thentothe payment ratably, accordingtothe amounts due, to the persons entided
thereto, without any discrimination or priyUege;.
SECOND - To the paymenttothe persons entitied thereto of the unpaid principal of
and premium,, ff any, on any of the Bonds which shaU have become due (other than Bonds
matured , or called for redenq>tion for the payment of which montys are hdd pursuant ,tothe
provisions of this Indenture), and, ff the amoimt avaUable sbaU not be sufficient to pay in fidl such
unpaid principal and premium, dien to the payment ratably to the persons entided therao without
any discrimination or privUege; and

TtURD - To the payment to the persons entided thereto of interest on overdue
principal of and premium, ff any. on any Bonds without preference or priority as between
principal or premium or interest one over the others, or any inCTallnipnf of interest over any other
installment of Interest, or of any Bond over any other Bond, and ff the amount avaUable shaU not
be sufficienttopay siich amounts in fiiU, then ratably, "without any discrimination or privUege.
"Whenever moneys are to be applied pursuanttothe provisions of this Section, such
moneys shafi be applied at such times, andfromtime to time, as the Trustee shafi determine.
Whenever the Trustee shaU apply such moneys, it shaUfixthe date upon which such appfication
is to be made and upon such date interest on the amounts of principal to be paid on such date shafi
cease to accrue. The Tnistee shafi give such notice as It may deem appropriate of the deposit with
it of any such moneys and of the fixing of any such date.
Whenever aU principal of and premium. If any, and Interest on aU Bonds have been
paid under the provisions of this Section 9.05 and aU expenses and charges' of the Trustee have
been paid, any balanceremainingin the Bond Fund shaU be paidtothe Issuer.
Section 9.06. Remedies Vested In Trustee. Allrightsof action (including the
right to fde proofs of claims) under this Indenture or under any of the Bonds may be enforced by
the Trustee without the possession of any of the Bonds or the production thereof in any trial or
other proceedings relating thereto and any such suit or proceeding instimted by the Trustee shall
be brought in its name as Trustee without the necessity of joining as plaintiffs or defendants any
Owners of the Bonds, and any recovety of judgment shaU be for the equal and ratable benefit of
the Owners of the outstanding Bonds.

 83214

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 9.07. Rights and Remedies of Bondholders. No Owner of any Bond
shaU have any right to instimte any suit, action or proceeding in equity or at law for the
enforcement of this Indenture or for the execution of any trust thereof or for the appointment of
a receiver or any otherremedyhereunder, unless Q) a default has occurred of -which a Responsible
Officer of the Trustee has acmal knowledge or has been notified as proyided in Section 10.01(g)
hereof, (11) such default shaU have become an Event of Default hereunder and be continuing,
(ill) the Owners of more dian a majority in aggregate principal amount of Bonds then Outstanding
shafi have made written request to the Trustee, either to proceed to exercise die powers herein
granted or to institote such action, suit or prticeeding in its own name.- and shaU have offered to
die Trustee indemnity as provided in Section 10.01(1); and (iv) the Trustee shaU for sixty (60)
days after such notice, request and offer of indemnity faU orrefuseto exercise the powers herein
granted, or to Institute such action, suit or proceeding in its own name; and such notification,
request and offer of indemnity are hereby declared in evety case at the option of the Tnistee to
be conditions precedent to the execution of the powers and trusts of this Indenture, andtoany
action or cause of action for the enforcement of this Indenture, or for the appointment of a
receiver or for any other remedy hereunder. No one or more Owners of die Bonds sbaU have any
right in any manner whatsoever to enforce anyrighthereunder except in the manner herein
provided, and aU proceedings at law or in equity shaU be instimted, had and maintained in the
manner herein provided and . for the equal and ratable benefit of the Owners of aU Bonds then
outstanding. Nothing in this Indenture shaU, however, affect or impair the right of any
Bondholder to enforce the payment of the principal of and premium, if any. and interest on any
Bond at and after-the maturity thereof.
Section 9.08. Termination of Proceedings. In case the Iriistee shaU have
proceeded to enforce anyrightunder this Indenture by the appointment of a receiver or otherwise,
and such proceedings sbaU have been discontinued or abandoned for any reason, or shaU have
been determined adversdy, then and in evety such case the Issuer, the Tnistee, the Bond Insurer
and the Bondholders shaU be restored to thefr former positions andrightshereunder, respectively,
and aUrights,remediesand powers of the Tnistee shaU continue as if no such proceedings had
been taken. .
Section 9.09- Waiversof Events of Default. The Trustee may in its discretion,
but with the prior written consent of the Bond Insurer, waive any Event of Default hereunder and
rescind its consequences and shaU do so upon the written request of the Owners of not less than
a majority in aggregate principal amount of aU Bonds then Outstanding; provided, however, tbat
there shall not be waived any Evem of Default in the payment of the principal of, or premium on,
any Outstanding Bonds when due (whether at maturity or by redemption), or any Event of Default
in the payment when due of the Interest on any such Bonds, unless prior to such waiver and
rescission, all arrears of principal of and interest upon such Bonds, and interest on overdue
principal at the rate borne by the Bonds on the date on which such principal became due and
payable, and aU arrears of premium, ff any, when due, together with the reasonable expenses of
the Trustee and of the Owners of such Bonds, including reasonable attorneys* fees and expenses
paid or incurred, shall have been paid or provided for; provided further, there shall not be waived
any Event of Default in the payment when due of any purchase prices of any Bonds pursuant to
Article IV hereof unless prior to such waiver and rescission all arrears of such purchase prices,
together with reasonable expenses of the Trustee and of the Owners of such Bonds, including

 5 /1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83215

reasonable attorneys' fees and expenses paid or incurred, shall have been paid or provision
therefor made. In the case of any such waiver and rescission, or in case any proceeding taken by
the Tnistee on account of any such default shaU have been discontinued or- abandoned or
determined adversely, then and in evety such case the Issuer, the Tnistee and the Bondholders
shaU berestoredto thefr former positions andrightshereunder, respectively, but no such waiver
and rescission shaU extend to any subsequent or other default, or impafr anyrightconsequent
thereon. AU waivers under this Indenmre shaU be In writing and a copy thereof shaU be delivered
to die Issuer and the Remarketing Agent.
Section 9.10. Rights of Bond Insurer ControUing. Anything In the Indenture
to the contraty notwithstanding, ff the Bond Insurance Policy Is in effea and the Bond Insurer Is
not in default of its obfigationtomake payments thereunder, the Bond Insurer shall be deemed
to be the Owner of afi Bonds then Outstanding, for aU purposes (including, without limitation, afi
approvals, consents, requests, waivers; authorizations, directions, inspections and the Instimtion
of any action), provided that nothing in this Section 9.10 shafi in4>afr therightsof the Bondowners
to receive aU payments due under the Bonds, and the Bond Insurer shafi have the exchislve right
to exercise or dfrect the exercise of remedies on behaff of the Owners of the Bonds in accordance
with thetermsof the Indenture foUowing an Event of Default thereunder. The principal of all
Bonds Outstanding may not be declared to be immediately due and-payable witbom the- prior
written consem of the Bond Insurer.

ARTICLE X
The Trustee
Section 10.01. Acceptance ofthe Trusts By Trustee. The Trustee hereby accepts
the crusts imposed upon it by this Indenture, represents and covenants that it is fidly empowered
under the applicable laws andregulationsof the State to accept said trusts, and agreestoperform
said trusts, but only upon and subject to the following expresstermsand conditions, and no
implied covenants or obligations shafi be read into this Indenture against the Trustee: .
(a)
The Tnistee may execute any of the trusts or powers hereof and perform
any of its duties by or through attorneys, agents, affUiates, custodians, nominees, receivers
or employees and shall not be responsible for the supervision of, or the acts of any
attorneys, agents orreceiversappointed by it in good faith and without negligence, and
shaU be entided to advice of Counsel chosen by it concerning all matters of trusts hereof
and the duties hereunder, and may in aU cases pay such reasonable compensation to aU
such attorneys, agents and receivers as may reasonably be employed in connection with
die trusts hereof. The Tnistee may aa upon the opinion or advice of Counsel. The
Trustee shaU not be responsible for any loss or damage resultingfromany action or nonaction in good faith in reliance upon such opinion or advice.
(b)
Except for its certfficate of authentication on the Bonds and the other
information the Trustee is required to set forth on the Bonds pursuant to Section 2.06
hereof, the Trustee shall not beresponsiblefor anyrecitalherein or in the Bonds, or the

 83216

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCILS-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

vafidity, priority,recording,or rerecording, fUing, orrefUingof this Indenture or any
financing statement, amendments to this Indenture, or continuation statements, or for
reviewing any annual reports,financialstatements or audits, or for the vafidity of the
execution by the Issuer of this Indenture or for any supplements hereto or instruments of
fiirther assurance, or for the sufficiency ofthe security for the Bonds Issued hereunder or
Intended to be secured hereby, or the tax-exempt status of the Bonds or the use or
- application of any money paid over by the Trustee in accordance with tins Indenture. The
Trustee shaU not be bound to ascertain or inquire as to the performance or observance of
any covenants, conditions or agreements on the part of the Issuer, except as hereinafter
expressly set fortb, but the Trustee may require of die Issuer fiiU Information and advice
as to the performance of the covenants, conditions and agreements .aforesaid. The Trustee
shafi not be responsible or liable for the selection of any investment or for any loss
suffered, or any fee, tax or other charge incurred. In connection with any investment of
funds made by it in accordance with Article 'VQ hereof including, without limitation, any
loss suffered in connection with the sale of any investment pursuant to Article "VII hereof.
(c)
The Tnistee shafi not be accountable for the use of any Bonds authenticated
or defivered hereunder. The Trustee (or any affiliate of the Tnistee) may become the
Owner of Bonds and otherwise transact banking and trustee business with the Issuer with
the samerightswhich it would have ff It were not Trustee.
(d)
The Trustee shaU be fiiUy protected in acting in good faith upon any notice,
request,resolution,consent, certificate, affidavit, letter, telegram or other paper or
documem, or oral communication or drrection, befieved to be genuine and correct and to
haye been signed or sent or given by the proper person or persons. Any action taken by
the Trustee pursuant to this Indenture upon the request or authority or consent of any
person who at the time of making such request or giving such authority or consent Is the
owner of any Bond shafi be conclusive and binding upon aU fiiture owners of the same
Bond and upon Bonds issued in exchange therefor or upon transfer or in place thereof.
(e)
As to the existence or non-existence of any fact or as to the sufficiency or
vafidity of any instrument, paper or proceeding, the Trustee shafi be entided to
conclusivelyrelyupon a certificate signed on behaff of the Issuer by an Authorized Issuer
Representative as sufficient evidence of the facts therein contained, and prior to the
occurrence of a default of which the Trustee has been notified as provided in
subsection (g) of this Section, or subsequent to the waiver, rescission or annulmem of a
default as provided in Article IX hereof; shall also be at liberty to accept a similar
certificate to the effea that any particular dealing, transaction or action is necessaty or
expedient, but may at its discretion secure such further evidence deemed, necessaty or
advisable, but shall in no case be boimd to secure the same. The Trustee may accept a
certificate signed on behalf of the Issuer by an Authorized Issuer Representative to the
effect that a resolution in the form therein set forth has been adopted by the Issuer as
conclusive evidence that such resolution has been duly adopted, and is in full force and
effect.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83217

(f)
The permissive right of the Trustee to do things enumerated in this
Indenture shaU not be construed as a duty and the Trustee shall not be liable in the
performance of its obligations hereunder, except for its negligence or wlUfid mlscondua.
(g)
The Trustee shaU not be required to take notice or be deemedtohave notice
of any default or Event of Default hereunder, except faUure by the Issuer to cause to be
made any of the payments to the Trustee requiredtobe made by Article IV hereof and afi
defaults under Section 9.01(a), (b) or (c) hereof, unless a Responsible Officer shall be
specifically notified in writing of such default by the Issuer or by the Owners of at least
twenty-five per cent (25%) in aggregate principal amount of aU Bonds then outstanding
or by tbe Remariceting Agent, and in the absence of any such notice may conclusively
assume that no such default or Event of Default exists.
(h)
The Trustee shaU not be required to give any bonds or surety in respea of
the execution of its trusts and powers hereunder.
(1)
Before taking any action under Article IX- hereof at therequestor direction
of the Bondholders, the Trustee may require that an indemnity bond satisfactoty to the
Tnistee befiimishedby tbe Bondholders, for thereimbursementof aU expenses to which
it may be put and to protect it against aU liabifity, except liabifity which Is adjudicated to
have resultedfromits negUgence or willfiil default in conneaion with any action so taken:
• 0)
AU moneys recdved by the Trustee or any Paying Agent shaU, iintU used
or applied or Invested as herein provided, be held m trust for the purposes for which they
were received and shall not be commingled with the general fiinds of the Tnistee but need
not be segregatedfromother fimds except to the extent required or permitted by law.
Neither the Trustee nor any Paying Agem shaU be under any liabifity for interest on any
moneys received hereunder except such as may be agreed upon.
(k)
The Tnistee, prior to the occurrence of an Event of Defaidt specified in
Section 9.01 of this Indenture and after the curing or "waiving of all Events of Default
which may have occurred, undertakestoperform such duties and only such duties as are
specificafiy set forth in this Indenture and, in the absence of bad faith on its part, the
Tnistee may conclusively rely, as to the truth of the statements and correcmess of the
opinions expressed therein, upon certificates or opinions fiimished to the Trustee and
conforming to the requirements of this Indenture; but in the case of any such certificates
or opinions which by any provision hereof are specifically requfred to be fiimished to the
Trustee, the Trustee shall be under a duty to examine the same to determine whether or
not they conform to the requirements of this Indenture. In case an event of default has
occurred (which has not been cured or waived) the Trustee shall exercise such ofthe rights
and powers vested in it by this Indenture, and use the same degree of care and skill in their
exercise, as a pmdent person would exerdse or use under the circumstances in the conduct
of his own affairs.

 83218

JOURNAIs-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

0)
No provision of this Indenture shaU be construed torelievethe Triisiee fi^om
fiabifity for its own negligent action, its o"wn negligent failure to ad, or its own wiUfiil
-misconduct, except that:
(i) This subsection shall not be construed to limit the effea of
subsection (k) of this Section;'
(u) The Trustee shaU not be liable for any error of judgment made in
good faldi by an officer of the Tnistee, unless It sbaU be proved that the Trustee
was negligent in ascertaining tbe pertinent facts;
(iu) The Trustee shaU not be liable with respea to any action taken or
omitted to be taken by It In good faith in accordance with the direction of the
Owners of a majority in aggregate prindpal amount of the Bonds outstanding
relating to tbe time, method and place of conducting any proceeding or any remedy
available to the Tnistee, or exercising any trust or power conferred upon the
Tnistee, under this Indenture; and
(iv) No provision of this Indenture shall requfre tbe Tnistee to expend
or risk its own fiinds or otherwise incur anyfinancialliabifity In the performance
of any of its duties hereunder, or in tbe exercise of any of itsrightsor powers, tf
it shafi have, reasonable grounds for beUeving that repayment of such fimds or
adequate Indemnity against such risk or liability Is not reasonably assured to It
provided, however, that norightof the Tnistee to indemnification shafirelievethe
Trustee from responsibUity for making payments on the Bonds when due from
moneys avaUable to it, or from making any claim under the Bond Insurance Poficy.
(m) Notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this Indenture contained, the Trustee
shaU have theright,but sbaU not be requfred, to demand, inrespectof the authentication
of any Bonds, the wididrawal of any cash, the release of any property, or any action
whatsoever within the purview of this Indenture, any showings, certificates, opinions,
appraisals or other information, or corporate action or evidence thereof, in addition to that
by the terms hereof requfred as a condition of such action by the Tnistee, deemed
desirable for the purpose of establishing therightof the Issuer to the authentication of any
Bonds, the withdrawal of any cash, or as a condition to the taking of any action by the
- Tnistee.
(n)
In the event the Tmstee incurs expenses or renders services in conneaion
with an event of bankmptcy, reorganization or insolvency, such expenses (including the
fees and expenses of its counsel) and the compensation for such services are intended to
constitute expenses of adminisfration under any bankmptcy, reorganization or insolvency.
(o)
To the extent that the Trustee is also acting as Paying Agent. Registrar or
Tender Agent hereunder, therightsand protections afforded to the Tmstee pursuant to this
Article X shall also be afforded to such Paying Agent, Registrar and Tender Agent.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83219

Section 10.02. Corporate Trustee Required; EUgibiUty. There shafi at all times
be a Tnistee hereunder which shaU be a corporation organized and doing business as a commercial
bank or trust company under the laws of the United States of America or of one of the states of
the United States, be authorized under such lawstoexercise corporate trust powers, be authorized
to accept and exercise the trusts herein provided, have a combined capital and surplus of at least
$25,000,000. be subjecttosupervision or examination by federal or state authority and have such
offices and agencies in such locations as are required to enable It to perform the fimctions herein
contemplated. So long as DTC is the Securities Depositoty for the Bonds, the Trustee must be
a Direct Participant In DTC. ff, and at aU times when, the Bonds are not Book Entty Bonds, the
Designated Office of the Tnistee for purposes of tender must be located in New York City, ff
such corporation publishes reports of condition at least anmiaUy, pursuant to' law or to the
requirements of the aforesaid supervising or examining authority, then for the purposes of this
Section 10.02, the combined capital and surplus of such corporation shaU be deemed to be its
combined capital and surplus as set forth in Its most recent report of condition so published.
Section 10.03. Fees/charges And Expenses of Trustee. Tbe Tnistee shall be
entided to payment and/or reimbursement from the Issuer for such fees as shafi be agreed upon
by the Issuer and the Tnistee for its Ordinaty Services rendered hereunder and afi advances.
Counsel fees and other Ordinaty Expenses reasonably , and necessarily made or incurred by the
Tnistee in connection with such Ordinaty Services hereunder, and, subsequent to default, in
accordance with the Trustee's then-current fee schedule for de&ult administration (the entirety of
which coiiq)eii5ation shafi not be limited by any provision of law regarding compensation of a
trustee of an express trust); and, in the event that it should become necessaty that the Tmstee
perform Extraordinaty Services, it sbaU be entided to reasonable extra conqiensation therefor from
the Issuer, and to reimbursement from die Issuer for reasonable and necessaty Extraordinaty
Expenses (including fees of Counsel) in connection therewith; provided, thatffsuch Extraordinaty
Services or Extraordinaty Expenses are occasioned by the negfigence or wiUfiU misconduct of the
Tnistee it shafi not be entitied to compensation orreimbursementtherefor. The Trustee shaU have
a first lien with right of payment prior to payment on accoimt of principal of or premium, ff any,
or interest on any Bond upon afi moneys in its possession under any provisions hereof for the
foregoing advances, fees, costs and expenses incurred; provided, however, that the Tmstee's lien
with right of payment prior to payment on account of principal of or premium, ff any, or interest
on any Bond with respect to moneys in the Bond Fund held for the payment of the principal of
and premium, ff any. and interest on particular Bonds or moneys held for the paymem of the
purchase price of particular Bonds shafi be subordinate to that of the Bondholders. The Trustee's
rights under this Section 10.03 shall survive theterminationor expiration of this Indenture; the
resignation orremovalof the Trustee and the payment in fiifi of the Bonds. The Issuer agrees to
indemnify, defend and hold the Trustee harmless from and against any loss. liabUity or expense
incurred without negUgence or bad faith on its part, arising out of or in connection with the
acceptance or administration of the office ofTrustee under this Indenture, including the costs of
defending itself against'any claim or liabifity in connection with the exercise or performance of
any of its powers or duties hereunder or thereunder.
Section 10.04. Notice to Bondholders if Default Occurs. If a default occurs of
which the Tmstee is by Section 10.01(g) hereof required to take notice or if notice of default be
given as in said subsection (g) provided, the Tmstee shall (i) promptly give notice of default to

 83220

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

the Bond Insurer and (n) within sixty (60) days thereafter (unless such default Is cured or waived),
give notice of such defaidttoeach Owner of Bonds then outstanding, pro'vided that, except in the
case of a default in the payment of the principal of or premium, ff any, or Interest on any Bond,
the Trustee may withhold such notice to the Bondholders ff and so long as a trust committee of
Responsible Officers ofthe Trustee in good faith determine that the withholding of such notice
is in the interests of the Bondholders and providedfiirtherthat nothing in this Section 10.04 shaU
be deemed to limit the notice required by the second paragraph of Section 9.05 hereof.
Section 10.05. Intervention by Tkiistee. Inany judicial proceeding to which the
Issuer is a party and which in the opinion of the Tmstee and its Counsel has a substantial bearing
on the interests of Owners of the Bonds, the Trustee may intervene on behalf of Bondholders and,
subjecttothe provisions of Section lO.OlQ), shaU do soffrequested in writing by the Ownen of
a majority In aggregate principal amount of aU Bonds then outstanding.
Section 10.06. Successor Trustee. Any corporation or association into which the
Tnistee may be merged or converted, or wldi which It may be consofidated, ortowhich It may
seU, lease or transfer its corporate trust business and assets as a whole or substantially as a whole,
shaU be and become successor Tnistee hereunder and shaU be vested with all the trusts, powers,
rights, obligations, duties, remedies. Immunities and privUeges hereunder as was its predecessor,
without tbe execution orfilingof any instmment on the part'of any of the parties hereto.
Section 10.07. Resignation by the Trustee. The Tnistee may at any time resign
from the trusts hereby created by giving sixty (60) days written notice byregisteredor certified
maU to the Issuer, the Owner of each Bond, the Remarketing Agent and the Auction Agent, and
such resignation shaU not take effect untU the appointment of a successor Trustee pursuanttothe
provisions of Section 10.09 hereof and acceptance by the successor Trustee of the trusts created
hereby. Upon receiving such notice of resignation, the Issuer shaU prompdy appoint a successor
Tnistee. ff no successor Trustee shaU have been so apppinted and have accepted appointment
within forty-five (45) days of the giving of written notice by theresigningTrustee as aforesaid,
theresigningTnistee may petition, at the expense of the Issuer, any court of competent
jurisdiction for the appointment of a successor Trustee or any Bondholder who. has been a bona
fide holder of a Bond for at least six months may, on behalf of itsdf and others similarly situated,
petition any such court for the appointment of a successor tnistee. Such court may thereupon,
after such notice, ff any, as it may deem proper and may prescribe, appoint a successor trustee.
Section 10.08. Removal of the Tnistee. (a) In case at any time either of the
following shaU occur:
(1)
the Trustee shaU cease to be eligible in accordance "with the provisions of
Section 10.02 hereof and shall fail to resign after written request therefor by the Issuer or
by any Bondholder who has been a bonafideholder of a Bond for at least six months, or
(2)
the Tmstee shafi become incapable of acting, or shall be adjudged a
banJarupt or insolvent, or areceiverof the Trustee or of its property shafi be appointed,
or any public officer shall take charge or control of the Tmstee or of its property or affafrs
for the purpose ofrehabUitation,conservation or liquidation.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83221

then, in any such case, the Issuer mayremovethe Trustee and appoint a successor tmstee by an
instrument in writing defiveredtothe Tnistee, the Bond Insurer and the Remarketing Agent, or
any such Bondholder may^ on behalf of Itself and all others similarly situated, petition any court
of competent jurisdiction for the removal of the Trustee and the appointment of a successor
trustee. Such court may thereupon, after such notice ff any, as.it may deem proper and may
prescribe, remove the Tnistee and appoint a successor tnistee.
If no successor Trustee shafi have been so appointed and have accepted appointmeu
within forty-five (45) days after the giving of such notice of removal, the Tnistee being removed
. may .petition, at the expense of the Issuer, any court of conqietent jurisdiction for the appointment
of a successor Tnistee.
(b)
The Issuer (except during the occurrence and continuation of an Event of
Default), in its sole discretion, or the Owners of a majority in aggregate principal amount ofthe
Bonds at the time outstanding may at any time, with or without cause, remove the Trustee and
appoint a successor trustee by an Instrument or concurrent instruments in writing signed by the
Issuer or such Bondholders, as the case may be.
(c)
Any resignation or removal of the Tnistee and appointment of a successor
trustee, pursuant to any of the provisions of this Section sbaU not become effective untU the
acceptance of appointment by the successor Trustee as provided in Section 10.09 and acceptance
by the successor Trustee of the trusts created hereby.
Section 10.09. Appointment of Successor Trustee. In case the Tnistee hereunder
sbaU:
(a)

resign pursuant to Section 10.02 or 10.07 hereof;

(b)

be removed pursuant to Section 10.08 hereof; or

(c)
be dissolved, taken under the control of any. public officer or officers or of
a receiver appointed by a court, or otherwise become Incapable of acting hereunder,
a successor shaU be appointed by the Issuer; provided, that ff a successor Tnistee is not so
appointed withinten(10) days after notice of resignation is maUed or instrumem of removal Is
delivered as provided under Sections 10.02, 10.07 and 10.08 hereof, respectively, or within ten
(10) days of the Issuer's knowledge of any of the events specified in (c) hereinabove, then the
Owners of a majority in aggregate principal amount of Bonds then outstanding, by fUing with the
Issuer, the Bond Insurer and the Remarketing Agent an instrument or concurrent instruments in
writing signed by or on behalf of such Owners, may designate a successor Tmstee. The
appointment of a successor Tmstee shall be subject to the approval of the Bond Insurer.
In case at any time the Trustee shall resign and no appointment of a successor
Trustee shall be made pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this Anicle X prior to the date
specified in the notice of resignation as the date when such resignation shall take effect, the Owner
of any Bond may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction to appoint a successor Tmstee. Such

 83222

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

court may thereupon, after such notice, if any. as it may deem proper and prescribe, appoint a
successor Tnistee.
Section 10.10. Concerning Any Successor Trustees. Evety successor Tnistee
appointed hereunder shaU execute, acknowledge and defiver to its predecessor and also to the
Issuer, an instrument in writing accepting such appointment hereunder, and thereupon such
successor shaU become fiiUy vested with all the trusts, powers, rights, obligations, duties,
remedies, immunities and privUeges of its predecessor; but, nevertheless, and upon payment of
its cliarges'(l) such predecessor shaU, on the written request of the Issuer^ execute and defiver an
instniment transferring to such successor Tnistee aU the trusts, powers,rights,obligations, duties,
remedies, immunities and privUeges of such predecessor hereunder and (2) such predecessor shaU
deliver afi securities and moneys held by it as Tnistee hereunder to its successor. Should any
instrument in "writing from the Issuer be required by any successor Tnistee for more fiiUy and
certainly vesting in such successor the trusts, powers,rights;obligations, duties, remedies,
immunities and privUeges hereby vested in the predecessor any and aU such instruments in writing
shafi, on "written request, be executed, acknowledged and defivered by the Issuer. The resignation
of any Tnistee and the instrument or Instruments remo"vlng any Tnistee and appomting a successor
hereunder, together with aU other instnunents provided for In this Article, shaU be filed or
recorded by the successor Trustee in each recording office, ff any, where the Indenture or a
financing statement relating thereto shaU have been fUed or recorded. No tnistee hereunder shaU
be liable for die acts or omissions of any successor tnistee.
Section 10.11. Tnistee Protected In Relying Upon Resolntion, E t c Tbe
resolutions, opinions, certificates and other instruments provided for in this Indenture may be
accepted by the Tnistee as conclusive evidence of the facts and conclusions stated therein and shafi
be fiiU warrant, protection to the Trustee for thereleaseof property and the withdrawal of cash
hereunder.
•
Section 10.12. Successor Trustee As the Trustee of Bond Fund, Faying Agent,
Tender Agent and Re^strar. In the event of a change in the office of the Trustee, the
predecessor Tnistee which has resigned or been removed shaU cease to be Tnistee of die Bond
Fund, Tender Agent and Registrar and a Paying Agent for principal of and premimn.ffany, and
interest on tbe Bonds, and the successor Tmstee shafi become such Tmstee. Tender Agent,
Registrar and a Paying Agent.
Section 10.13. Trust Estate May Be Vested in Co-Tnistee. It is the purpose Of
this Indenture that there shall be no violation of any law of any jurisdiction (including particularly
the laws of the State) denying orrestrictingtherightof banking corporations or associations to
transact business as tmstee in such jurisdiction. It is recognized that in case of litigation under
this Indenture, and in particular in case of the enforcement of this Indenture upon the occurrence
of an event of default, it may be necessaty that the Trustee appoint an additional individual or
instimtion as a separate Tmstee or Co-Tmstee. The following provisions of this Seaion 10.13
are adapted to these ends.
In the event of the incapacity or lack of authority of the Trustee, by reason of any
present or fiiture law of any jurisdiction, to exercise any of the rights, powers and tmsts herein

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83223

granted to the Tnistee or to holdtideto the Trust Estate or to take any other action which may
be nebessaty or desirable in connection dierewith. each and evetyremedy,power,right,claim,
demand, cause of action. Immunity, estate, tide, interest and lien expressed or intended by this
Indenture to be exercised by or vested in or conveyed to the Tnistee with respect thereto shaU be
exercisable by and vest in such separate Tnistee or Co-Trustee but only to the extern necessaty
to enable the separate Trustee or Co-Trustee to exercise suchrights,powers and trusts, and evety
covenant and obligation necessaty to the exercise Uiereof by such separate Trustee or Co-Trustee
shaU run to and be enforceable by either of them.
Should any deed, conveyance or instrument in writing from the Issuer be required
by the separate Trustee or Co-Trustee so appointed by the Trustee In order to morefiiUyand
certainly vest in and confixm to him or it such properties,rights,powers, trusts, duties and
obligations, any and aU such deeds, conveyances and instruments shaU, on request, be executed,
acknowledged and defivered by the Issuer. In case any separate Trustee or Co-Trustee, or a
successortoeither, shaU die, become incapable of acting, resign or be removed. aU the estates,
properties,rights,powers, trusts, duties and obligations of such separate Trustee or Co-Trustee,
so &r as permitted by law, shaU vest in and be exercised by the Tnistee until the appointment of
a new Tnistee or successor to such separate Trustee or Co-Trustee.
No Trustee shafi be liable for any aa or omission of any other Trustee.

ARTICLE XI
Supplemental Indentures
SectiiHi 11.01.
Supplemental Indentures Not Requiring Consent of
Bondholders. The Issuer and tbe Tnistee may without the consent of, or notice to. any of the
Bondholders, enter into an indenture or indentures supplemental to this Indenture for any one or
more of tbe fofiowing purposes: (i) to add to the covenants and agreements of, and limitations
and restrictions upon, the Esuer in this Indenture, other covenants, agreements, limitations and
restrictions to be observed by the Issuer which are not contraty to or inconsistent with this
Indenture as therttofore in effea; (u) to grant to or confer or impose upon the Trastee for the
benefit of the Bondholders any additionalrights,remedies, powers, authority, security, liabUities
or duties which may lawfiiUy be granted, conferred or lnqiosed and which are not contraty to or
inconsistent with this Indenture as heretofore in effea; Gil) to cure any ambiguity or omission or
to cure, correct or supplement any defective provision of this Indenture in each case in such
manner as shaU not adversely affect the Bondholders; (iv) to evidence the appointment of a
separate trustee or a cotrustee ortoevidence the succession of a new trustee or a new co-trustee
hereunder; (v) to comply with the requirements of the Tmst Indenture Act of 1939, asfromtime
to time amended; (vi) lo obtain or Tnainrain an appropriate rating or ratings on the Bonds; (vii) to
provide for the use of an uncertificated book entry system; (viii) to authorize different Authorized
Denominations of the Bonds and to make correlative amendments and modifications to this
Indenmre regarding exchangeabifity of Bonds of different Authorized Denominations, redemptions
of portions of Bonds of particular Authorized Etenominations and similar amendments and
modifications of a technical nature; (ix) subject to the prior written consent of the Bond Insurer,

 83224

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

to provide for a liquidity facifity prior to the initial adjustment to a DaUy Rate, Weekly Rate,
Term Rate or Flexible Rate; (x) subject to the prior written consent of die Bond Insurer, to
provide additional security, including, "without limitation, a letter of credit, to the Trustee for the
benefit of the Bondholders upon receipt by the Issuer and the Trustee of an opinion of Bond
Counsel to the effect that the provision of such additional security is permitted by applicable law
and wlU not have an adverse effect on the exclusion of the Interest on tbe Bonds from the gross
Income of the Owners or Beneficial Owners thereof for federal income tax purposes and to
conform to or permit compliance with the terms and provisions of such additional security; or
(xi) to preserve the tax-exeii9>t status of interest on the Bonds.
No supplenoental indenmre entered into pursuant to this Section 11.01 shaU take
effea untU ten Business Days after the Bond Insurer shall have been given "written notice of such
supplemental indenture, llie Tnistee Is directed to file with the Bond Insurer a copy of each
supplemental indenture.
Section 11.02. Supplemental Indentures Requiring Consent of Bondholders
and Bond Insurer. Exclusive of supplemental indentures covered by Section 11.01 hereof and
subjea to the terms and provisions contained in this Section aiid Seaion 9.10, and not otherwise,
the holders of not less than a majority in aggregate principal amount of the Bonds then
Outstaixling shaU have the right, from time to time, to consent to and approve the execution by
the Issuer and the Trustee of such other indenture or indentures supplemental herao for the
purpose of modifying, amending, adding to orrescinding,in any particular manner, any of the
terms or provisions cooiained in this Indentuie. As long as the Bond Insurance Policy is in effect
with respea to aU Outstanding Bonds, no consem of Bondholders under this Section 11.02 shall
be required; provided, however, that nothing in tills Section contained shaU permit or'be constmed
as permitting amendments of this Indenture, without the consent of the holders of 100% of the
Bonds then Outstanding affected by such amendment, to effea (a) an extension of the maturity
date of the principal of or the interest on any Bond issued hereunder, or (b) a reduction in the
principal amount of, premium, if any. on aiiy Bond or tbe rate of interest thereon, or (c) an
adverse change in the rights of the Owners of the Bonds to the purdiase thereof pursuant to'
Article IV hereof, or (d) a privUege or priority of any Bond or Bonds over any other Bond or
Bonds, or (e) a reduction in the aggregate principal amount of the Bonds the Owners of which are
required to consent to such supplemental indenture.
If at any time the Issuer shaU request the Tnistee to enter imo any such
supplemental Indenture for any of the purposes aUowed by this Section, the Trustee shaU, at the
writtenrequestof the Issuer and upon being satisfactorUy indemnified with respea to expenses
and upon receiving from the Issuer forms of notices and any otherrelatedsolicitation materials,
cause notice of the proposed execution of such supplemental indenture to be maUed in
substantially the manner provided in Section 3.02 hereof with respect to redemption of Bonds.
Such notice shall be prepared by the Issuer and shall briefly set forth the nature of the proposed
supplemental indenmre and shall state that copies thereof are on file at the Principal Office of the
Trustee for inspection by all Bondholders, ff, within sixty (60) days or such longer period of time
as shall be prescribed by the Issuer following the mailing of such notice, the Owners of not less
than a majority or 100%, as the case may be. in aggregate principal amount of the Bonds
Outstanding at the time of the execution of any such supplemental indenmre shall have consented

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83225

to and approved the execution thereof as herein provided, no Owner of any Bond shall have any
right to object to any of thetermsand provisions contained therein, or the operation thereof, or
In any manner to question the propriety of the execution thereof, or to enjoin or restrain, the
Trustee or the Issuer from executing the same orfromtaking any action pursuanttothe provisions
thereof. Tbe Issuer shaU have therighttoextend, from time to time the period within which such
consent and approval may be obtained from Bondholders. Upon the execution of any such
supplemental Indenture as In Oils Section permitted and provided, this Indenture shall be and be
deemed to be modified and amended in accordance therewith.
A supplemental indenture under this Seaion 11.02 shaU not become effective unless
and untU the Bond Insurer shaU have consented to the execution and defivety of such supplemental
indenture. The TrusteiB shaUfilewith Standard & Poor's Corporation a copy of each supplemental
indenture consentedtoby the Bond Insurer.
Section 11.03. Consentof Remarketing Agent. A supplemental indenture under
this Article XI which affects any rights, duties or obligations of the Ronarketmg Agent shall not
become effective unless and untU the Remarketing Agent shaU have consented to the execution
and delivety of such supplemental Indenture. .
Section 11.04. Opinion of Bond Counsel. Tbe Tnistee may require that the
Issuer delivertodie Trustee at the Issuer's expense an opinion of Bond Counsel upon which the
Tnistee may conclusively rely to the effect that a supplemental indenture is permitted by
applicable law and wUl not adversely affect the tax-exempt status of the interest on the Bonds and
that such supplemental indenture compfies with the terms and provisions of this Indenture.

ARTICLE X n
Miscellaneous
Section 12.01. Consents, Etc. of Bondholders. Any consent, approval, direction
or other instrument required by this Indenturetobe signed and executed by the Bondholders may
be in any number of concurrent writings of similartenorand may be signed or executed by such
Bondholders in person or by agent appointed in writing. Proof of the execution of any such
consent, approval, direction or other instniment or of the writing appointing any such agent, if
made in the following manner, shall be sufficient for any of the purposes of this Indenmre, and
shaU be conclusive in favor of the Trustee with regard to any action taken under such request or
other instrument, namely:
(a)
The fact and date of the execution by any Person of any such instrument or
writing may be proved by the certificate of any officer in any jurisdiction who by law has
power to take acknowledgments widiin such jurisdiction that the Person signmg such
instmment or writing acknowledged before him the execution thereof, or by affidavit of
any wimess to such execution or in any other maimer satisfactoty to the Tmstee; or

 83226

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(b)
The fact of ownership of Bonds and the ambtmt or amounts, numbers and
other Identification of such Bonds, and the date of acquiring the same shafi be proved by
theregistrationbooks of the Issuer maintained by the Trustee pursuant to Section 2.04
hereof.
Any request, demand, authorization, direction, notice, consent, waiver or other
action by any Bondholder shaU bind evety fiiture holder of the same Bond In respect of anything
done or suffered to be done by the Trustee or tbe Issuer inreliancethereon, whether or not
notation of such action Is made upon such Bond.
Section 12.02. Limitation of Rights. With the exception of rights herein.
expressly conferred, nothing expressed or mentioned in or to be iiEq>Iled fiom this Indenmre or
the Bonds is intended or shaU be construed to give to any person other than the parties hereto, tbe
Remarketing Agent, the Auction Agent, the Bond Insurer and the Owners of the Bonds any legal
or equitable right, reinedy or claim under or in respect to this Indenture: This Indenture and aU
of the covenants, conditions and provisions hereof are intended to be and being for the sole and
exclusive benefit of the parties hereto, the Owners of the Bonds, the Remarketing Agent, the Bond
Insurer and the Auction Agent as herein provided.
Section 12.03.. Wsiiver of Notice. 'Whenever in this Indenmre the giving of notice
by mafl or otherwise is required, the giving of such notice may be waived in writing by the person
entitied to receive such notice and In any such case the giving or receipt of such notice sbaU not
be a condition precedenttothe'vafidity of any action taken inrelianceupon such waiver.
Section 12.04. Severabifity. ff any provision of this Indenture shafi be invafid,
inoperative or unenforceable as appfied in any particular case in any jurisdiction or jurisdictions
or In afi jurisdictions, or in all cases because it confUcts with any other provision or provisions
hereof or any constimtion or stamte or rule of public policy, or for any other reason, such
circumstances shafi not have the effect ofrenderingthe provision in question inoperative or
unenforceable In any other case or circumstance, or ofrenderingany other provision or provisions
herein contained InvaUd, Inoperative, or unenforceable to any extent whatever. The Invafidlty of
any one or more phrases, sentences, clauses or Sections in tlus Indenture contained, shall not
affea the remaining portions of this Indenture, or any part thereof.
Section 12.05. Notices. Except as otherwise provided herein, aU notices,
certificates or other communications hereunder shall be sufficiendy givenffin writing and shaU
be deemed given when maUed byregistered,certified or first class maU. postage prepaid, or by
qualified overnight courier service mutually acceptable to the delivering and recipient parties,
courier charges prepaid, addressed as foUows:
If to the Issuer:

City of Chicago, Illinois
33 North LaSaUe Sfreet. Sixdi Floor
Chicago, niinois 60602
Attention:

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83227

ff to the Tnistee, the Paying
Agent or the Tender Agent:
Attention:
Telephone:
Telecopy:
If to the Auction Agent:

Attention:
Telephone:
Telecopy:
If to the Remarketing Agent:

Attention:
Telephone:
Telecopy:
Unless specificaUy odterwise requfred by thetermsof this Indenture, any notice
required to be given pursuant to any provision of this Indenture may be gi"ven by any form of
electronic transmission that is capable of producing a written record, induding, without limitation,
telecopy transmissions, provided that the defiverer of any such notice given by electronic
transmission shafi verify recdpt of such notice prompdy upon thefransmissionthereof and. such
notice shafi not be deemed duly given unless fiiU and legible receipt thereof has been verified by
the recipient of such notice. The Issuer, the Tnistee and the RemarketiDg Agent may, by notice
pursuant to this Section 13.05, designate any different addresses to which subsequem notices,
certificates or other communications shaU be sent. A dupUcate copy of each notice, approval,
consent,request,complaint, demand or other communication given hereunder by the Issuer or the
Trusteetoany one of the others shaU also be given to each one of the others.
Any notice to a party shall also be given to the Bond Insurer at the following
addiess:
(To Come]
Section 12.06. Hofidays. If die date for making any payment or the last date for
performance of any act or the exercising of any right, as pro'vided in this Indenmre, is not a
Business Day, such payment may be made or a a performed or right exercised on the next
succeeding Business Day with the same force and effect astfdone on the nominal date provided
in this Indenture and no interest shall accme on the payment so deferred during the inteni'ening
period.

 83228

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 12.07. Action by Issuer. 'Whenever it is herein provided or permitted for
any action to be taken by the Issuer, such action may be taken by an Authorized Issuer
Representative under the Agreement unless the context clearly Indicates otherwise.
Section 12.08. Counterparts. This Indenture may be simultaneously executed
in several counterparts, each of which shafi be an original and aU of which shaU constimte but one
and the same instrument.
Section 12.09. AppUcable Law. This Indenture shaU be governed exclusively by
and constmed in accordance with the applicable laws of the State withoutregardtothe princqiles
of confficts of laws thereof.
Section 12.10. Dealing In Bonds. The Trustee, or the Remarketing Agent, in its
individual capacity, may in good faith buy, sell. own. hold and deal in any of the Bonds, and may'
join In any action which any Bondholder may be entitied to take "with IDce effixt as ff It did not
act in any capacity hereunder. The Tnistee or the Remarketing Agent, m Its individual capacity,
either as principal or agent, may also engage in or be interested in any financial or other
transaction widi the Issuer, and may aa as depositoty, tnistee or agent for any committee or body
of Bondholders secured hereby or other obfigations of the Issuer as freely as ff it did not aa in
any capacity hereunder.
Section 12.11. Bond Insurance. Tbe payment ofthe principal of and Interest on
the Bonds when due b to be Insured under, and to the extent provided in, the Bond Insurance
Poficy, Including the endorsements thereto, to be issued by tbe Bond Insurer.[Section 12.12. Bond Insurer's Auction Rate FroTisions. Any conversion into
an Auction Rate or from one Auction Period to a differem Auction. Period (other than from an
Auction Period of 35 days or less to another Auction Period of 35 days or less) shafi be
conditioned upon receipt of a firm underwriting commitment or contract of purchase from an
Investment bank or other purchaser, acceptable to the Bond Insurer. ff conversion falls for any reason, the Bonds (1) sbaU remain In the Auction Rate
Period from which the conversion was attempted if such Auction Rate Period is an Auction Rate
Period of 35 days or less or (u) shall automaticaUy be converted to an Auction Rate Period of 35
days.
In the event that the Issuer is in default under any of its obfigations relating to tbe
Bonds, the Bond Insurer wUl succeed to anyrightsof the Issuer to direct a conversion ofthe Rate
Period on the Bonds.
The Auction Procedures may only be terminated for the following .reasons: (i)
upon a successfid conversion from the Auction Rate Period to another Rate Period; or (u) upon
a faUure by the Bond Insurer to pay amounts due under the Bond Insurance Policy. There may
be no termination of the Auction Procedures for any other reason, including defaults by the Issuer.
If the Issuer has faUed to pay fees due to the Auction Agent or to any Broker-Dealer, the Bond

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83229

Insurer shall be given 45 days to cure the missed payments during which time the Auction
Procedures may not be suspended.
Any change in the Maximum Auction Rate or any default rate or the method of
calculating either must be approved by the Bond Insurer.
Any change in die Rate Period for the Bonds, other than a change in the Auction
Period from an Auction Period of 35 days or less to another Auction Period of 35 days or less,
shall not take effect until such change shall have been consented to by the Bond Insurer.]
Section 12.13. Payments Under the Bond Insurance Poficy.
[To Come]
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Chicago, has caused these presents to be signed
in its name and behalf by its City Comptroller and its corporate seal to be hereunto affixed and
attested by its City Clerk, and to evidence its acceptance of the tmsts hereby created [Name of
Trustee] has caused these presents to be signed and sealed in its name and behalf by its duly
authorized officers, all as of the datefirstabove written.
CITY OF CHICAGO
(SEAL)

Attest:
By City Comptroller
City Clerk

[NAME OF TRUSTEE] ,
(SEAL)

Attest:

. By

as Tmstee

 83230

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Appendix "A".
(To Indenture Of Trust)
[Form Of Bond]
United States Of America
State Of Ilfinois
City Of Chicago "
Auction Rate Bond,
Series
.
Registered Number
R-

Registered
$
For Flexible Rate Periods Only

Interest
Rate
%
Dated Date:

Number Of
Days In Flexible
Segment

Mauidatoty Purchase
And Interest
Payment Date
"

"

Amount Of
Interest Due For
Flexible Segment
$
C.U.S.I.P.:

Maturity Date:
Registered Owner:
Principal Amount:
The City of Chicago (the "Issuer"), a municipal corporation and a home rule unit of the
State of Illinois, for value received, hereby p'romises to pay to the Registered Owner
identified above, or registered assigns as hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date
identified above, the Principal Amount identified above, and to pay interest on the
balance of said Principal Amount from time to time remaining unpaid untU payment

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

. 83231

of said Principal Amount has been made or duly provided for,' at the rates and on the
dates determined as described herein and in the Indenture as hereinafter defined, and
to pay interest on overdue prindpal at the rate home by this Bond on the date on
which such principal became due and.payable, except as the provisions set forth in the
Indenture with respect to redemption may become appficable hereto, the principal of
and premium, if any, and interest on this Bond being payable in lawful money of the
United States of America at the Prindpal Office of
\
, as Paying
Agent (the "Paying Agent"); provided, however, payment of interest on any Interest
Payment Date shaU be made to the registered owner hereof as of the close of business
on the Record Date with respect to such Interest Payment Date and shafi be (i) paid by
check of the Paying Agent maUed to such registered owner hereof at his address as it
appears on the regisfration books ofthe Issuer maintained by [Name ofTrustee], as
Trustee (the "Trustee") or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such
registered owner to the Trustee not later than the close of business on the Record Date
or (u) except with respect to interest in respect of any Term Rate, fransmitted by wfre
transfer to the accounts "with members of the Federal Reserve System located within
the continental United States of America of those owners which own.at least One
MUlion DoUars ($ 1,000,000) in aggregate prindpal amount of the Bonds and which
shaU have provided written wfrefransferinstructions to the Trustee prior to the close
of business on such Record Date, but, in the case of interest payable in respect of a
Flexible Segment, only upon presentation of such Bond (ff such Bond is not a Book
Entry Bond) at the Prindpal Office of the Trustee for exchange orfransferas pro"vided
in the Indenture. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, for so long as this Bond
is restricted to being registered on the regisfration books of the Issuer kept by the
Trustee in the name of a Securities Depositoty, the provisions' of the Indenture
governing Book Entty Bonds shafi govem the manner of the payment ofthe prindpal
and purchase price of, and premium, ff any, and interest on, this Bond.
This Bond is one of an authorized issue of bonds limited in aggregate prindpal
amount to $
(the "Bonds") issued pursuant to Section 6 of Article 'VII of
the Illinois Constitution of 1970, and an ordinance adopted by the City Council ofthe
Issuer on
, 2002 (the "Bond Ordinance") and is issued pursuzint to and
secured under an Indenture of Trust (the "Indenture"), dated as of
, 2002,
between the Issuer and the Trustee.
This bond is a direct and general obfigation of the Issuer. Reference to the Indenture
and the Bond Ordinance is made for a description of the nature and extent of the
security for this Bond, the revenues arid monies pledged, the nature and extent and
manner of enforcement of the pledge and the rights and remedies of the registered
owners of Bonds with respect thereto. In no event shafi the Issuer be obfigated to levy
any sepcuate ad valorem or other tax in addition to other City taxes or any spedal ad
valorem or other tcix unlimited as to rate or amount to pay the prindpal of, redemption
premium on or interest on this bond.

 83232

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

This Bond may befransferredor exchanged by the registered owner hereof in person
or by his attorney duly authorized in writing at the Prindpal Office of the Trustee but
only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment of the charges
pro-vided in the Indenture, and upon surrender and canceUation of this Bond. Upon
such transfer or exchange a newregistered Bond or Bonds, of authorized denomination
or denominations, for the same aggregate principal amount wiU be issued to the
fransferee in exchimge herefor.
. In The Manner l>rovided And Subject To The Provisions Of The Indenture, The Term
Of The Bonds WiU Be Divided Into Consecutive Rate Periods During Each Of Which The
Bonds ShaU Bear Interest At Either A DaUy Rate, A Weekly Rate, A Term Rate, Flexible
Rates Or Auction Rates, Each Of Which ShaU Be Determined In The Manner Provided
In The Indenture. In No Eivent Shall The Interest Rate On Any Bond Exceed The Lesser
Of [Eighteen (18)) Percent Per Annum And The Maximum Rate Per Annum Then
Permitted By Applicable Law.
Interest on this Bond shaU be payable on each.Interest Payment Date for the period
commencing on the next preceding Interest Payment Date (or.ff no interest has been
paid hereon, commencing on the Dated Date) and ending on the day next preceding
such Interest Payment Date; provided, however, that ff, as shown by the records ofthe
Trustee, interest on the Bonds shaU be in default. Bonds shaU bear interest from the
last date to which interest has been paid in fuU or duly provided for on the Bonds, or
ff no interest has been paid or duly provided for" on the Bonds, from the Dated Date.
Interest shaU be computed (1) in the case of a Term Rate Period; on the basis of a three
hundred sixty (360) day year consisting of twelve (12) thirty (30) day months, (2) in the
case of a DaUy Rate Period, Weekly Rate Period or Flexible Rate Period on the basis of
a three hundred sixty-five (365) or three hundred sixty-six (366) day year, as
appropriate, and the actual number of days elapsed and (3) in the case of an Auction
Rate Period, on the basis of a three hundred sixty (360) day year and the actual number
of days elapsed.
The term "Interest Payment Date" means (1) with respea to any DaUy Rate Period or
Weekly Rate Period, the ffrst (1") Business Day of each calendar month, (2) with respect
to any Term Rate Period, the first (1") day ofthe sixth (6*^) calendar month foUo"wing the
effective date of such Term Rate Period, and the first (1") day of each successive sixth
calendar month, ff any, of such Term liate Period, (3) with respect to any Flexible
Segment, the Business Day next succeeding the last day thereof, (4) with respect to the
Auction Rate Period (i) for an Auction Period nominaUy of less than seven (7) days, the
first {!*') Business Day ofthe first (1") calendar month commencing after the end of
such Auction Period, (ii) for an Auction Period of ninety-one (91) days or less (other
thcui an Auction Period described in clause (i)), the Business Day next succeeding the
last day of such Auction Period and (iii) for an Auction Period of more than ninety-one
(91) da3rs, on each thfrteenth (13*) Thursday after the ffrst (1") day of such Auction
Period (or if such Thursday shall not be a Business Day, the next succeeding Business
Day) and on the Business Day next succeeding the last day of such Auction Period, and
(5) with respect to each Rate Period, the Business Day next succeeding the last day

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83233

thereof.
The term "Record Date" means with respect to any Interest Payment Date in respect
of a DaUy Rate Period, a Weekly Rate Period, a Flexible Segment or an Auction Period,
the Business Day next preceding such Interest Payment Date and, with respect to any
Interest Payment Date in resi>ect of a Term Rate Period, the fifteenth (15'*') day ofthe
calendar month next preceding such Interest Payment Date.
The Bonds shaU be deliverable in the form of registered Bonds "without coupons in the
denominations of Five Thousand DoUars ($5,000) and any integral multiple thereof
during any Term Rate Period; in the denominations of One Hundred Thousand DoUars
($100,000) and any integral multiple of Five Thousand DoUars ($5,000) excess thereof
during any DaUy Rate Period or Weekly. Rate Period; in the denominations of One
Hundred Thousand DoUars ($100,000) and any integral multiple of Five Thousand
DoUars. ($5,000) in excess thereof during any Flexible Rate Period; and in. the
denominations. of Twenty-five Thousand DoUars ($25,000) and integral multiples
thereof during any Auction Rate Period.
The Bonds Are Subject To Optional And Mandatoty Tender And I*urchase As Provided
In the Indenture.
The Bonds Are Subject To Optional [And Mandatoty] Redemption A s Provided In The
Indenture.
The owner of this Bond shaU have no right to enforce the provisions of the Indenture
or to institute action to enforce the covenants therein, or to take any action with
respect to any event of default under the Indenture, or to institute, appear in or defend
any suit or other proceedings with respect thereto, except as provided in the Indenture.
The Issuer, the Trustee, the Paying Agent, the Tender Agent, the Regisfrar, the
Remarketing Agent, the Bond Insurer, the Auction Agent and any other agent of the
Issuer or the Trustee may freat the person in whose name this Bond is registered as
the owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment as herein provided and for aU
other purposes, whether or not this Bond be overdue, and neither the Issuer, the
Trustee, the Paying Agent, the Tender Agent, the Regisfrar, the Remarketing Agent, the
Bond Insurer, the Auction Agent nor any such agent shaU be affected by notice to the
confraty.
The Indenture prescribes the manner in which it may be discharged and after which
the Bonds shaU no longer be secured by or entitied to the benefits of the Indenture,
except for the purposes of payment, regisfration, fransfer or exchange of Bonds,
including a provision that under certain cfrcumstances the Bonds shaU be deemed to
be paid if Government Obfigations, maturing as to principal and interest in such
amounts and at such times as to insure the avaUabifity of suffident monies to pay the
principal of and premium, ff any, and interest on the Bonds and aU necessary and
proper fees, compensation and expenses of the Trustee shaU have been deposited with

 83234

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

the Trustee.
Modifications or alterations of the Indenture, or any supplements thereto, may be
made only to the extent and in the cfrcumstances pennitted by the Indenture.
Terms which are used herein as defined terms and which are not otherwise defined
shaU have the meanings assigned to them in the Indenture.
This Bond shcdl not be vafid or become obUgatoty for any purpose or be entitied to
any security or benefit under the Indenture unless and untU the certificate of
authentication hereon shafi have been duly executed by the Trustee.
It Is Hereby Certified, Redted And Declared that afi ofthe conditions, things and acts
requfred to exist, to have happened and to have been performed precedent to and in the
issuance of this Bond do exist, have happened and have been performed in due time,
form and maimer as requfred by the Constitution ctnd laws of the State of Illinois and
that the.amount of this Bond, together with all other indebtedness ofthe Issuer, does
not exceed any limit prescribed by the Constitution or laws ofthe State of Illinois. •
In Witness 'Whereof, The City of Chicago has caused this Bond to be executed in its
name by the mzuiual or facsimUe signature of its Mayor its corporate seal to be impressed
or imprinted hereon and attested by the manual or facsimile signature of its City Clerk,
aU as of the Dated Date.
City of Chicago
By:

:
Mayor

[Seal]
Attest:
City Clerk

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83235

[Form Of Trustee's Certificate Of Authentication]
This Bond is one ofthe Bonds described in the within-mentioned Indenture of Trust.
[Name ofTrustee), as Trustee
By:

.
Authorized Signatoty

Date of Authentication:

- .

(Form Of Assignment)
Assignment.
For

value

received

the

undersigned

sells, assigns and fransfers .unto
the within bond and hereby irrevocably
constitutes and appoints
:
, attorney, to fransfer
the said bond on the books kept for regisfration thereof, -with fuU power of substitution
in the premises.
Dated

Signature Guarantee:

[End Of Form Of Bond]

 83236

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Appendix "B".
(To Indenture Of Trust)

Auction

Procedures.

Section 1. Definitions.
E^ch of the terms defined in Article I of the Indenture shaU have the meaning
specified therein. In addition, each of the foUowing terms shsdl have the meaning
spedfied below, unless the context requfres otherwise.
"Agent Member" means a member of, or a dfrect partidpant in, D.T.C. or any
successor Securities Depositoty under the Indenture.
"After-Tax Equivalent Rate" means, as of any date of determination, the interest rate
per annum equal to the product of (x) the commercial paper/freasiury rate on such
date and (y) an amount equal to 1.00 minus'the statutoty corporate tax rate on such
date.
"Appficable Percentage" means, as of any date of determination, the percentage
determined as set forth below (as such percentage may be adjusted pursuant to
Section 6 of these auction procedures) based on the prevaUing rating of the Bonds in
effect at the dose of business on the Business Day immediately preceding such date
of determination:
Prevailing Rating

Appficable Percentage

"AAA"/"Aaa-

175%

"AA"/"Aa"

175%

"A"/"A"

175%

"BBB"/"Baa"

200%

Below "BBB"/"Baa"

265%

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83237

For purposes of this definition, the "prevailing-rating" ofthe Bonds wifi be:
(a) "AAA"I"Aaa", if the Bonds have a rating of "AAA" or better by Fitch and a rating
of "Aaa" by Moody's, or the equivalent of such ratings by a substitute rating agency
or agendes selected as provided below;
(b) ff not "AAA"/"Aaa.", then "AA"/"Aa"ffthe Bonds have a rating of "AA-" or better
by Fitch and a rating of "Aa3" or better by Moody's, or the equivalent of such ratings
by a substitute rating agency or agencies selected as provided below,
(c) ff not "AAA"/"Aaa" or "AA"/"Aa", then "A"/"A"ffthe Bonds have a ratmg of "A-"
or better by Fitch and a rating of ''A3" or better by Moody's, or the equivalent of
such ratings by a substitute rating agency or agencies sselected as provided below,
(d) ff not "AAA"/"Aaa", "AA"/"Aa" or "A"/"A^ then "BBB"/"Baa",fftiie.Bondshave
a rating of "BBB-" or better by Fitch and a rating of "Baa3" or better by Moody's, or
the equivalent of such ratings by a substitute rating agency or agendes selected as
provided below, and • •
(e) ff not "AAA"/"Aaa", "AA"/"A&", "A"/"A" or -BBB"/"Baa'', tiien below "BBB"/
. "Baa", whether or not the Bonds during an Auction Rate Period are rated by any
securities rating agency.
ff (x) the Bonds are rated .by a rating agency or agencies other than Moody's or Fitch
and (y) the Issuer has defivered to the Trustee and the Auction Agent an instrument
designating one or two of such rating agendes to replace Moody's or Fitch, or both,
then for purposes of the definition of "prevailing rating" Moody's or Fitch, or-both, wiU
be deemed to have been replaced in accordance with such instrument; provided,
however, that such instrument must be accompanied by the consent of the market
agent.
For purposes of this definition of "Applicable Percentage," Fitch's rating categories
of AAA, AA-, A- and BBB- and Moody's rating categories of "Aaa", "Aa3", "A3" and
''Baa3," refer to and indude the respective rating categories correlative thereto in the
event that either or both of such rating agencies have changed or modified thefr
generic rating categories, ff the prevailing ratings for the Bonds are split between the
categories set forth above, the lower rating "wiU determine the prevaUihg rating.
"Auction" means each periodic implementation of these Auction Procedures -with
respect to the Bonds.
"Auction Agent" means any entity appointed as such pursuant to Section 2.03(e)(iv)
ofthe Indenture and its successors in such capacity.

 83238

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Auction Date" means, with respect to each auction period during an auction rate
period, the last Wednesday of the immediately preceding auction period, ff any;
provided, however, that ff such day is not a Business Day, the auction date with
respect to such auction period shaU be the next preceding Business Day; and
provided, further, that in the case of an auction period nominally of less than seven
(7) days, the auction date in respect thereof shaU be the ffrst (l**) day of such auction
period.
"Auction Period" means a p>eriod within an auction rate period (i) during which the
Bonds bear interest at a single auction rate and (u) which is estabfished as provided
in Section 2.03(e) of the Indenture; it being understood that
(x) each auction period shall commence on, and indude, (1) the first (1") Business
Day foUowing the end of the next preceding auction period or (2) in the case of the
first (1^) auction period in any auction rate period, the date of the initial
authentication and defivety ofthe Bonds (ff an auction rate period shafi be specified
as the first (1**) rate period upon such initial authentication and defivety) or the
effective date of an adjustment to an auction rate period, as the case may be;
(y) each auction period shafi end on, and include, the date estabfished as the last
day of such auction period as provided in Section 2.03(e) ofthe Indenture, whether
or not such day shaU be a Business Day; provided, however, that ff such day shafi
not be immediately fofiowed by a Business Day, then the last day of such auction
period shafi be the liext succeeding day that is immediately foUowed by a Business
Day; and
(z) any auction period may consist of any number of days from one (1) to three
hundred sixty-five (365) or three hundred sixty-six (366) ff the date of
February 29 is induded in such auction period.
"Auction Procedures" means the procedures set forth in this Appendix B to the
Indenture;
"Auction Rate" means the rate of interest per annum determined for the Bonds
pursuant to Section 2.03 (e)(i) ofthe Indenture and these Auction Procedures.
"Auction Rate Period" shaU mean any period during which the Bonds bear interest
at an Auction Rate.
"Authorized Auction Denomination" shafi mean, during an Auction Rate Period,
Twenty-five Thousand DoUars ($25,000) or any integral multiple thereof
"AvaUable Bonds" has the meaning set forth in Section 4 of these Auction
Procedures.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83239

"Bid" has the meaning set forth in Section 2 of these Auction Procedures.
"Bidder" has the meaning set forth in Section 2 of these Auction Procedures.
"BMA Index" meeuis the Bond Market Association Munidpal Swap Index as of the
most recent date for which such index was pubfished or such other weekly, highgrade index comprised of seven (7) day, tax-exempt variable rate demand notes as
may be produced by Municipal Market Data, or its successor, or as otherwise
designated by the Bond Market Assodation.
"Broker-Dealer" means any entity permitted by law to perform the functions
requfred of a broker-dealer set forth in these Auction Procedures (i) that is an Agent
Member (or an aflifiate of an Agent Member), (u) that has been selected by the Issuer
and (iu) that has entered into a broker-dealer agreement with the Auction Agent that
remains effective.
"Broker-Dealer Agreement" means each agreement between a-Broker-Dealer and the
Auction Agent pursuEuit to which the Broker-Dealer, among other things, agrees to
participate in Auctions as set forth in these Auction Procedures, as from time to time
cunended and supplemented.
"Change of Preference Law" means any amendment to the Code or other existing
statute enacted by the Congress of the United States, or the enactment by the
Congress of a new statute, or the promulgation by the United States Treasuty of any
temporary, proposed orfinalregulation, after the date of the iiutial authentication and
defivety of the Bonds which (a) changes or would change any deduction, credit or
other allowance aUowable in computingfiabifityfor any federal tax with respect to or
(b) imposes, or would impose, reduces or would reduce, or increases or would
increase any federal tax (including, but not limited to, preference or exdse taxes)
upon, any interest earned by any holder of Bonds the interest on which is exduded
from federal gross income under Section 103 ofthe Code.
"Commerdal Paper Dealer" means
. or any other
commerdal paper dealer appointed in writing by the Issuer, provided that any such
entity is a commerdal paper dealer.
"Commerdal Paper/Treasuty Rate" means, as of any date of determination (i) in the
case of any Auction Period of less than forty-nine (49) days, the interest equivedent
ofthe thirty (30) day rate, (u) in the case of any Auction Period of forty-nine (49) days
or more but less than seventy (70) days, the interest equivalent of the sixty (60) day
rate, (ui) in the case of any Auction Period of seventy (70) days or more but less than
eighty-five (85) days, the arithmetic average ofthe interest equivalents ofthe sixty (60)
day and ninety (90) day rates, (iv) in the case of any Auction Period of eighty-Gve (85)
days or more but less than ninety-nine (99) days, the interest equivalent of tJie ninety
(90) day rate, (v) in the case of any Auction Period of ninety-rune (99) days or more but
less than one hundred twenty (120) days, the arithmetic average of the interest

 83240

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCILS-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

equivalents ofthe ninety (90) day and one hundred twenty (120) day rates, (vi) in the
case of any Auction Period of one hiindred twenty (120) days or more but less than
one hundred forty-one (141) days, the interest, equivalent ofthe one hundred twenty
(120) day rate, (vu) in the case of aiiy Auction Period of one hundred forty-one (141)
days or more but less than one hundred sixty-two (162) days, the arithmetic.average
of the interest equivalents of the one hundred twenty (120) day and one hundred
eighty (180) day rates, (viu) in the case of any Auction Period of one hundred sixty-two
(162) days or more but less than one hundred eighty-three (183) days, the interest
equivalent ofthe one hundred eight (180) day rate, and (ix) in the Ccise of any Auction
Period oi; one hundred eighty-three (183) days or more, the Treasury Rate with respect
to such Auction Period. The foregoing rates (other than the Treasuty Rate) shall in
aU cases be rates on commerdal paper placed on behaff of issuers whose corporate
bonds are rated "AA" by Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, or the equivalent of such
rating by Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, as made avaUable on a discount basis
or otherwise by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for the Business Day
immediately preceding such date of determination, or in the event that the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York does not make avaUable any such rate, then the arithmetic
average of such rates, as quoted on a discount basis or otherwise, by the Commerdal
Paper Dealer, to the Auction Agent for the close of business on the Business Day
immediately preceding such date of determination.
ff the Commerdal Paper Dealer does not quote a commerdal paper rate required to
determine the Commerdad Paper/Treasuty Rate, the Commerdal Paper/Treasuty
Rate sh£dl be determined on the basis of such quotation or quotations furnished by
any substitute commerdal paper dealer selected by the Issuer to provide such
quotation or quotations not being suppfied by the Commercial Paper Dealer. For
purposes of this defirution, the "interest equivalent" of a rate stated on a discount
basis (a "discount rate") for commcrded paper of a given day's maturity shafi be equal
to the product of (A) 100 and (B) the quotient (rounded upwards to the next h i ^ c r
one-thousandth (.001) of one percent (1%) of (x) the discount rate (expressed in
decimals) di'vided by (y) the difference between (1) one and zero hundredths (1.00) and
(2) a fraction the numerator of which shaU be the product of the discount rate
(expressed in decimals) times the number of days in which such commerdal paper
matures and the denominator of which shall be three hundred sixty-five (365).
"Existing Holder" means a person who is listed as the benefidzd o"wner of Bonds in
the records of the Auction Agent.
"Hold Order" has the meaning set forth in Section 2 of these Auction Procedures.
"Index" means, as of any date of determination (i) the tax-exempt money market rate
index for thirty (30) day variable rate obfigations prepared by the Market Agent
provided through Bloomberg.Finsincial Markets of Bloomberg L.P., or on Dalcomp
system on such date of determination or (ii) ff such rate is not pubfished by 9:00 A.M.
(New York City time) on such date of determination, the interest index published by
the market agent representing the weighted average of the yield on tax-exempt

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83241

commercial paper, or tax-exempt bonds bearing interest at a commercial paper rate
or pursuant to a commercial paper mode, having a range of maturities or mandatory
purchase dates between twenty-five (25) and thirty-six (36) days fraded during the
immediately precedingfive Business Days or (iii)ffno such interest indexis pubfished
by the market agent, then the BMA Index.
"Market Agent" means any entity appointed as such under Section 2.03(e)(v) ofthe
Indenture and its successors in such capadty.
"Maximum Auction Rate" mccuis, as of any date of determination (i) ff such
determination is in respect of an Auction vnth respect to a standard auction period
and is made during a standard auction period, the interest rate per annum equal to
the lesser of (A) [eighteen (18)) percent and (B) the AppUcable Percentage of the
greater of (a) the After-Tax Equivalent Rate, as determined as of such date with
respect, to a standard auction period £md (b) the Index as of such date or (ii) ff
otherwise, the interest rate per annum equal to the lesser of (A) [eighteen (18)] percent
and (B) the Appficable Percentage of the greatest of (a) the After-Tax Equivalent Rate,
as determined as of such date "with respect to a standcurd auction period, (b) the AfterTax Equivalent Rate, as determined as of such date with respect to the Auction
Period,ffany, which is proposed to be estabfished, (c) the After-Tax Equivalent Rate,
as determined as of sudi date with respect to the Auction Period then ending and (d)
the Index as of such date.
"Minimum Auction Rate" means, as of any date of determination, the rate per
annum equed to the lesser of (i) ninety percent (90%) (as such percentage may be
adjusted pursuant to Section 6 of these Auction Procedures) of the After-Tax
Equivalent Rate, as.determined as of such date with respect to the Auction Period in
respect of which such determination is made and (u) ninety percent (90%) ofthe Index
as of such date.
"No Auction Rate" means, as of any date of determination, the appficable
Commercial Paper/Treasuty Rate for the Auction Period multipfied by the appficable
percentage set forth in the foUowing table:
Prevailing Rating

Applicable Percentage

"AAA"/"Aaa"

65%

"AA"/"Aa"

70%

"A"/"A"

85%

Below "A''/"A''

100%

 83242

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO .

5/1/2002

For the purposes of this defmition. the term "prevailing rating" shafi have the
meaning ascribed to such term in the defined term "Appficable Percentage".
"Potential Holder" means any person, including any Existing Holder, who may be
interested in acquiring the benefidal ownership of Bonds during an Auction Rate
Period or, in the case of an Ebdsting Holder thereof, the beneficial o"wnership of an
additionad prindpal amount of Bonds during an Auction Rate Period."
"Sell Order" has the meaning set forth in Section 2 of these Auction Procedures.
"Standard Auction Period" initiaUy means an Auction Period of thirty-five (35) days
and, after the estabUshment of a -different Auction Period pursuant to Section
2.03(e)(i) ofthe Indenture, mesuis such different Auction Period; provided that, so long
as the standard auction period is.thirty-five (35) days and ends initiaUy on a
Wednesday, in the event the last Wednesday ofthe Auction Period is not immediately
foUowed by a Business Day, with the result that the last day of such Auction Period
is the next succeeding day that is immediately foUowed by a Business Day, the
standard auction period following such Auction Period shaU be reduced to a shorter
number of days so that the last day of the Auction Period foUowing such Auction
Period is thefifth(5"*) Wednesday foUowing such Auction Period, aU subject, however,
to the provisions contained in the definition ofthe term Auction Period."
"Statutory Corporate Tax Rate" means, as of any date of determination, the highest
tax rate bracket (expressed in decimals and currently thirty-five percent (35%)) now
or hereafter appficable in the then current taxable year on the taxable income of every
corporation £is set forth in Section 11 of the Code or any successor section -without
regcud to any minimum additional tax provision or provisions regarding changes in
rates during such taxable year.
"Submission Deadline" means 1:00 P.M., New York City time, on any Auction Date
or such other time on any Auction Date by which Broker-Dealers are requfred to
submit Orders to the Auction Agent as specified by the Auction Agent from time to
time.
"Submitted Bid" has the meaning set forth in Section 4 of these Auction Procedures.
"Submitted Hold Order" has the meaning set forth in Section 4 of these Auction
Procedures.
"Submitted Order" has the meaning set forth in Section 4 of these Auction
Procedures.
"Submitted Sell Order" has the meaning set forth in Section 4 of these Auction
Procedures.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83243

"Substitute Commercial Paper Dealer" means a Commerdal Paper Dealer appointed
in writing by the Issuer, or its successors and thefr respective assigns, provided that
neither such entity nor any of its edfiliates shaU be the Corhmerdal Paper Dealer.
"Suflicient Clearing Bids" has the meaning set forth in Section 4 of these Auction
r^ocedures.
"Treasuty Rate" shaU mean on any date of determination for any Auction Period, (i)
the bond equivalent yield calculated in accordance "with prevaifing industry
convention ofthe rate on the most recentiy auctioned dfrect obfigations ofthe United
States Government having a maturity at the time of issuance of three hundred sixtyfour (364) days or less with a remaining maturity closest to the length of such Auction
Period as quoted in The Wall Street Journal on such date for the Business Day next
preceding such date; or (ii) in the event that any such rate is not pubfished by The
Wall Street Journal, then the bond equivalent yield calculated in accordance with
prevculing industty convention as calculated by reference to the arithmetic average
of the bid price quotations of the most recentiy auctioned dfrect obfigations of the
United States Government having a maturity at the time of issuance of three hundred
sixty-four (364) days or less "with a remaining maturity closest to the length of such
Auction Period, based on bid price quotations on such date obtained by the Auction
Agent from the United States government securities dealer; provided, that, ff the
United States government securities dealer does not provide a bid price quotation
required to determine the freasury rate, the freasuty rate shaU be determined on the
basis of" the quotation or quotations furnished by a substitute United States
Government securities dealer seleaed by the Issuer to provide such rate or rates not
being suppfied by the United States Government securities dealer.
"United

States

Government Securities Dealer" shaU mean
.
, or any other United States Government
securities dealer appointed in writing by the Issuer, its successors and thefr
respective assigns, provided that any such entity is a United States Government
securities dealer.
."Winning Bid Rate" has the meaning set forth in Section 4 of these Auction
Procedures.
Section 2. Orders By Existing Holders And Potential Holders.
(a) Auctions shafi be conducted on each Auction Date in the manner described in this
Section 2 and in Sections 3, 4 and 5 of these Auction Procedures. Prior to the
Submission Deadline on each Auction Date during an Auction Rate Period:
(i) each Existing Holder may submit to the Broker-Dealer information as to:

 83244

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(A) the prindpal amount of Bonds, if any, held by such Existing Holder which
such Existing Holder desfres to continue to hold without regard to the Auction Rate
for the next succeeding Auction Period;
(B) the prindpal amount of Bonds, if any, held by such Existing Holder which
such Existing Holder (1) offers to continue to hold ff the Auction Rate for the next
succeeding Auction Period shaU not be less than the rate per annum specified by
such Existing Holder and (2) if such offer to hold shaU not be accepted in whole,
offers to seU as and to the extent pro"vided in subsection (b)(i) of this Seaion 2;
and/or
(C) the prindpal amount of Bonds, ff any, held by such Existing Holder which
such Existing Holder offers to seU without regard to the Auction Rate for the next
succeeding Auction Period;
(u) one (1) or more Broker-Dealers may contact Potential Holders to determine the
prindpal amount of Bonds which each such Potential Holder offers to purchase if the
Auction Rate for the next succeeding Auction Period shaU not be less than the
interest rate per armum specified by such Potential Holder.
For the purposes hereof, the commuiucation to a Broker-Dealer of iifformation referred
to in clause (i)(A), (i)(B) or (i](C) or clause (u) above is hereinafter referred to as an
"Order" and each Existing Holder and Potential Holder placing an Order is hereinafter
referred to as a "Bidder" an Order containing the information referred to in clause (i)(A)
above is hereinafter referred to as a "Hold Order"; an Order containing the information
referred to in dause (i)(B) or clause (U) above is hereinafter referred to as a "Bid"; and
an Order containing the information referred to in clause (i)(C) above is hereinafter
referred to as a "SeU Order".
(b) (i) Subject to the provisions of Section 3 of these Auction Procedures, a Bid by an
Existing Holder, to the extent not accepted under subsection (a)(i)(B)(l) above, shall be
deemed to have been rejected and, thereupon, to constitute an irrevocable offer to seU:
(A) the principal amount of Bonds specified in such Bid ff the Auction Rate
determined pursuant to these Auction Procedures on such Auction Date shaU be less
thcUi the interest rate per annum specified therein; or
(B) such principal amount or a lesser principal amoiint of Bonds to be determined
as set forth in subsection (a)(iv) of Section 5 of these Auction Procedures ff the
Auction Rate determined pursuant to these Auction Procedures on such Auction Date
shaU be equal to the interest rate per annum specified therein; or

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83245

(C) such principal amount ff the interest rate per annum specified therein shaU be
higher than the Maximum Auction Rate or such principal amount or a lesser principal
amount of Bonds to be determined as set forth in subsection (b)(iii) of Section 5 of
these Auction Procedures ff such specified rate shall be higher than the Maximum
Auction Rate and Sufficient Clearing Bids do not exist.
(u) Subject to the provisions of Section 3 of these Auction Procedures, a SeU Order
by an Existing Holder shall constitute an irrevocable offer to seU:
(A) the principal amount of Bonds specified in such SeU Order; or
(B) such prindpal amount or a lesser principal amount of Bonds as set forth in
subsection {b)(iu) of Section 5 of these Auction Procedures if Suflident Clearing Bids
do not exist.
(iu). Subject to the provisions of Section 3 of these Auction Procedures, a Bid by. a
Potential Holder shaU constitute an irrevocable offer to purchase: .
(A) the principal amount of Bonds specified in such Bid ff the Auction Rate
determined on such Auction Date shaU be higher than the rate specified therein; or
(B) such principal amount or a lesser principal amount of Bonds as set forth in
subsection (a)(v) of Section 5 of these Auction Procedures ff the Auction Rate
determined on such Auction Date shaU be equal to such specified rate.
Section 3. Submission Of Orders By Broker-Dealers To Auction -Agent.
(a) During an Auction Rate Period, each Broker-Dealer shaU submit in writing to the
Auction Agent prior to the Submission Deadline on each Auction Date during the
Auction Rate Period, afi Orders obtained by such Broker-Dealer and shafi specify with
respect to each such Order:
(i) the aggregate principal amount of Auction Bonds that are subject to such Order;
(ii) to the extent that such Bidder is an Elxisting Holder:
(A) the principal amount of Bonds, if any, subject to any Hold Order placed by
such Existing Holder;
(B) the principal amount of Bonds, ff any, subject to any Bid placed by such
Existing Holder and the rate specified in such Bid; and

 83246

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(C) the principal amount of Bonds, ff any, subject to any SeU Order placed by
such Existing Holder.
(iu) to the extent such Bidder is a Potential Holder, the rate spedfied in such
Potential Holder's Bid.
(b) If any rate specified in any Bid contztins more than three (3) figures to the right
of the decimal point, the Auction Agent shaU round such rate up to the next highest
one thousandth (.001) of one percent (1%).
(c) ff an Order or Orders covering all Bonds held by an Existing Holder is not
submitted to the Auction Agent prior to the Submission Deadfine, the Auction Agent
shaU deem a Hold Order to have been submitted on behalf of such Existing Holder
covering the prindpal amount of Bonds held by such Existing Holder and not subject
to Orders submitted to the Auction Agent. None of the Issuer, the Trustee and the
Auction Agent shaU be responsible for any failure of a Broker-Dealer to submit an
Order to the Auction Agent on behaff of any Existing Holder or Potential Holder.
(d) ff any Existing Holder submits through a Broker-Dealer to the' Auction Agent one
(1) or more Orders covering in the aggregate more than the prindpal amount of Bonds
held by such Existing Holder, such Orders shaU be considered vafid as foUows and in
the following order of priority:
(i) ail Hold Orders shaU be considered v£did, but only up to and including the
principzd amount of Bonds held by such Existing Holder, and, ff the aggregate
prindpal amount of Bonds subject to such Hold Orders exceeds the aggregate
prindpal amount of Bonds held by such Existing Holder, the aggregate principal
amount of Bonds subject to each such Hold Order shaU be reduced pro rata to cover
the aggregate principal amount of Bonds, held by such Existing Holder;
(u)(A) any Bid shaU be considered vafid up to and induding the: excess of the
prindpal amount of Bonds held by such Existing Holder over the aggregate principal
amount of Bonds subject to any Hold Orders referred to in paragraph (i) above;
(B) subject to clause (A) above, ff more than one (1) Bid with the same rate is
submitted on behalf of such Existing Holder and the aggregate prindpal amount of
Bonds subject to such Bids is greater than such excess, such Bids shaU be
considered vafid up to and including the amount of such excess, and, the prindpal
amount of Bonds subject to each Bid with the same rate shaU be reduced pro rata to
cover the principal amount of Bonds equal to such excess;
(C) subject to clauses (A) and (B) above, ff more than one (1) Bid with different
rates is submitted on behaff of such Existing Holder, such Bids shadl be considered
vafid in the ascending order of thefr respective rates until the highest rate is reached

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83247

at which such excess exists and then at such rate up to and including the amount
of such excess; and
(D) in any such event, the aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds, ff any, subjert to
Bids not vafid under this paragraph (u) shaU be treated as subject to a Bid by a
Potential Holder at the rate therein specified; and
(iii) aU SeU Orders shaU be considered vafid up to and including a principal amount
of Bonds equal to the excess of (A) the principal eunount of Bonds held by such
Existing Holder over (B) the sum of the principal amount of Bonds subject to vafid
Hold Orders referred to in paragraph (i) above and the principal amount of Bonds
subject to vafid Bids referred to in paragraph (u) above.
(e) ff more than one (1) Bid for Bonds is submitted on behaff of any Potential Holder,
each Bid submitted shafi be a sepaurate Bid for Bonds with the rate and principal
amount therein spedfied.
(f) Any Bid or SeU Order submitted by an Ebdsting Holder covering an aggregate
prindpal amount of Bonds not equal to an Authorized Auction Denomination shaU be
rejected and shaU be deemed a Hold Order. Any Bid submitted by a Potential Holder
covering an aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds not equal to an Authorized Auction
Denomination shaU be rejected.
(g) Any Bid submitted by an Ebdsting Holder or Potential Holder specifying a rate
lower than the Minimum Au ction Rate shaU be treated as a Bid specifying the Minimum
Auction Rate.
(h) Any Order submitted by a Broker-Dealer to the Auction Agent prior to the
Subnussion Deadline on any Auction Date shaU be irrevocable.
Section 4. Determination Of Suflicient Clearing. Bids, Winning Bid Rate And
Auction Rate.
(a) Not earfier than the Submission Deadline on each Auction Date during the
Auction Rate Period, the Auction Agent shall assemble aU vafid Orders submitted or
deemed submitted to it by the Broker-Dealers (each such Order as submitted or
deemed submitted by a Broker-Dealer being hereinafter referred to as a "Submitted
Hold Order", a "Submitted Bid" or a "Submitted SeU Order", as the case may be or as
a "Submitted Order") and shaU determine:
(i) the excess, if any, of the total principal eunount of Bonds over the aggregate
principal amount of Bonds subject to Submitted Hold Orders (such excess being
hereinafter referred to as the "AvaUable Bonds"); and

 83248

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(u) from the Submitted Orders whether or not the aggregate prindpal amount of
Bonds subject to Submitted Bids by Potential Holders specifying one (1) or more rates
not higher than the Maximum Auction Rate exceeds or is equal to the sum of:
(A) the aggregate principal amount of Bonds subject to Submitted Bids by
Existing Holders specifying one (1) or more rates higher than the Maximum Auction
Rate; and
(B) the aggregate principal eunount of Bonds .subject to Submitted SeU Orders
(it being understood that, in the" event of such excess or such equality (other than
because the sum ofthe prindpal amounts of Bonds in clauses (A) and (B) above is
zero (0) because afi ofthe Bonds are subject to Submitted Hold Orders), there shaU
be deemed to exist, and such Subnutted Bids by Potential Holders shaU be hereinafter
caUed, coUectively, "Sufficient Cleeuring Bids"); emd
(iu) if Sufficient Clearing Bids exist, the lowest rate spedfied in the Submitted Bids
(the "Winning.Bid Rate") which ff:
(A) (I) each Submitted Bid from Existing Holders specifying such lowest rate and
(II) aU other Submitted Bids from Easting Holders specifying lower rates were
accepted, thus entitling such Existing Holders to continue to hold the Bonds that
are the subject of such Submitted Bids; and
(B) (I) each Submitted Bid from Potential Holders specifying such lowest rate and
(II) afi other Subnutted Bids from.Potential Holders specifying lower rates were
accepted, thus entitfing and requiring such Potential Holders to purchase the Bonds
that are the subject of such Subnutted Bids,
would result in such Existing Holders described in clause (A) above continuing to hold
an aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds which, when added to the aggregate prindped
eunount of Bonds to be purchased by such Potential Holders described in clause (B)
above, would equal not less than the AvaUable Bonds.
. (b) Promptiy after the Auction Agent has made the determinations pursuant to
subsection (a) of this Section 4 of these Auction Procedures, the Auction Agent by
facsimUe or elecfronic fransmission, or by telephone (promptiy confirmed by such
means), shall advise the Issuer and the Trustee ofthe Maximum Auction Rate and the
Minimum Auction Rate and the components thereof on the Auction Date and, based
on such determinations, the Auction Rate for the next succeeding Auction Period as
foUows:
(i) if Suffident Clearing Bids exist, that the Auction Rate for the next succeeding
Auction Period therefor shaU be equed to the Winning Bid Rate so determined;

 5 / I /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83249

(ii) ff Suffident Clearing Bids do not exist (other than because all of the Bonds are
the subject of Submitted Hold Orders), that the Auction Rate for the next succeeding
Auction Period therefor shall be equal to the Maximum Auction Rate; and
(iu) ff all of the Bonds are subject to Submitted Hold Orders, that the Auction Rate
for the next succeeding Auction Period therefor shaU be equal to the Minimum
Auction Rate.
Section 5. Acceptance And Rejection Of Submitted Bids And Submitted SeU
Orders And AUocation Of Auction Bonds. Ebdsting Holders shedl continue to hold the prindpal amounts of Bonds that are
subject to Submitted Hold Orders, andj based on the determinations made pursuant
to subsection (a) of Section 4 of these Auction Procedures, the Submitted Bids eind
Submitted SeU Orders shedl be accepted or rejected, and the Auction Agent shaU take
such other .actions, as set forth below:
<
. (a) ff Suffident Clearing Bids have been made,-all Submitted Sell Orders shaU be
accepted eind, subject to the provisions of paragraphs (e) emd (f) of this Section 5 of
these Auction Procedures, Submitted Bids shedl be accepted or rejected as foUo-ws in
the foUowing order of priority and afi other Submitted Bids shaU be rejected:
(i) existing Holders' Submitted Bids specifying any rate that is higher than the
•Winning Bid Rate shaU be rejected, thus requiring each such Existing Holder to seU
the aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds subject to such Submitted Bids;
(u) existing Holders* Submitted Bids specifying emy rate that is lower than the
Winning Bid Rate shaU be accepted, thus entitfing each such Existing Holder to
continue to hold, the aggregate prindped amount of Bonds subject to such
Subnutted Bids;
(iu) potential Holders' Subnutted Bids specifying any rate that is lower than the
Winning Bid Rate shall be accepted, thus entitfing emd requiring each such
Potential Holder to purchase the aggregate prindped amount of Bonds subject to
such Submitted Bids;
(iv) each Elxisting Holder's Submitted Bid specifying a rate that is equal to the
Winning Bid Rate shedl be accepted, thus entitling such Existing Holder to continue
to hold the aggregate principal eunount of Bonds subject to such Submitted Bid,
unless the aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds subject to aU such Submitted Bids
shaU be greater than the prindped amount of Bonds (the "Remeuning Prindpal
Amount") equal to the excess of the Aveulable Bonds over the aggregate principal
amount of the Bonds subject to Submitted Bids described in paragraphs (ii) and (iii)
of this subsection (a), in which event such Submitted Bid of such Existing Holder
shaU. be accepted in part only, and such Existing Holder shall be entitled to

 83250

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

continue to hold the Bonds subject to such Submitted Bid only in the principal
amount obtained by multiplying the Remaining Principal Amount by a fraction, the
numerator of which shaU be the principal eunount of Bonds held by such Existing
Holder subject to such Submitted Bid and the denominator of which shall be the
sum ofthe principal amounts of Bonds subject to such Submitted Bids made by aU
such Elxisting Holders that specified a rate equal to the Winning Bid Rate; and the
remainder of sudi Subnutted Bid shaU be rejected, thus requiring such Elxisting
Holder to seU the excess principal amount of Bonds as to which such Submitted Bid
shaU not have been accepted as aforesaid; and
(v) each Potentied Holder's Submitted Bid.specifying a rate that is equal to the
Winning Bid Rate shaU be accepted but only in an amount equal to the prindpal
amount of Bonds obtained by multiplying the excess ofthe Available Bonds over the
aggregate principed amount of Bonds subject to Submitted Bids described in
paragraphs (u), (iu) and (iv) of this subsection (a) by a fraction the numerator of
which shaU be the aggregate principed amount of Bonds subject to such Submitted
Bid of such Potential Holder and the denominator of which shall be the. sum ofthe
principal amount of Auction Bonds subject to Submitted Bids made by afi such
Potential Holders that spedfied a rate equed to the Winning Bid Rate; and the
remeunder of such Subnutted Bid shedl be rejected; and
(vi) each Potentied Holder's Submitted Bid specifying a rate that is higher than the
Winning Bid Rate shafi be rejected.
(b) If Sufficient Clearing Bids have not been made (other than because afi of the
Bonds are subject to Submitted Hold Orders), subjea to the provisions of subsection
(e) of this Section 5 of these Auction Procedures, Submitted Orders shafi be accepted
or rejerted as fofiows in the foUowing order of priority and aU other Submitted Bids
shedl be rejerted:
(i) Elxisting Holders' Submitted Bids spedfying any rate that.is equal to or lower
than the Meudmum Auction Rate shedl be accepted, thus entitling each such
Ebdsting Holder to continue to hold the aggregate prindped amount of Bonds subject
to such Submitted Bids;
(u) Potential Holders' Submitted Bids specifying any rate that is equal to or lower
than the Maximum Auction Rate shafi be accepted,, thus entitling and requiring
each such Potential Holder to purchase the aggregate principal amount of Bonds
subjea to such Submitted Bids;

 5/ 1 / 2002

REPORTS OF COMMITfEES

83251

(in) each Existing Holder's Submitted Bid specifying any rate that is higher than
the Maximum Auction Rate shedl be rejected, and each Existing Holder's Submitted
SeU Order shall.be accepted, thus requiring each.Existing Holder that submitted
any such Submitted Bid and/or Submitted SeU Order to seU the Bonds subject to
such Submitted Bid and/or Submitted SeU Order, but in both cases.only in an
amount equed to the aggregate principal eunount of Bonds obteuned by multiplyingthe aggregate principal amount of Bonds subject to Submitted Bids described in
paragraph (ii) of this subsection (b) by a fraction, the numerator of which shaU be
the aggregate principal amount of Bonds held by such Existing Holder subject to
such Submitted Bid and/or.Submitted SeU Order and the denominator of which
shall be the aggregate principal amount of Bonds subject to aU such Submitted Bids
and Submitted Sell Orders; and the remeunder of such Existing Holder's Submitted
Bid and/oT Submitted SeU Order shedl be deemed to be, and shaU be deemed to be
accepted as, a Hold Order thus entitfing such Ebdsting Holder to continue to hold
such excess prindpal amount of Bonds as to which such Submitted Bid shaU not
have been rejected, and/or such Submitted SeU Order shedl not have been accepted,
as aforesaid; emd
(iv) each Potential Holder's Submitted Bid specifying a rate that is higher than the
Maximum Auction Rate shaU be rejected.
(c) ff edi Bonds are subject to Submitted Hold Orders, aU Submitted Bids shedl be
rejected.
(d) If, as a result of the procedures described in subsection (a) or (b) of this
Section 5 of these Auction Procedures, euiy Existing Holder would be requfred to seU,.
or any Potential Holder would be requfred to purchase, a principal amount of Bonds
that is not equal to an Authorized Auction Denomination, the Auction Agent shaU, in
such meuiner as, in its sole discretion, it shaU determine, round up or down the
principal amount of such Bonds to be purchased or sold by any Existing Holder or
Potential Holder so that the prindped amount purchased or sold by each Existing
Holder or Potential Holder shaU be equal to an Authorized Auction Denomination.
(e) If, as a result of the procedures described in subsection (a) of this Section 5 of
these Auction Procedures, any Potential Holder would be requfred to purchase less
than Twenty-five Thousand DoUars ($25,000) in aggregate principal amount of Bonds,
the Auction Agent shaU, in such manner as, in its sole discretion, it shaU determine,
allocate Bonds for purchase among Potential Holders so that only Bonds in prindpal
amounts equed to an Authorized Auction Denomination are purchased by any
Potential Holder, even if such aUocation results in one (1) or more of such PotentiaJ
Holders not purchasing any Bonds.
(0 Based on the results of each Auction, the Auction Agent shaU determine the
aggregate principed amounts of Bonds to be purchased euid the aggregate principal
amounts of Bonds to be sold by Potential Holders and Existing Holders on whose

 83252

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

behaff each Broker-Deeder submitted Bids or Sell Orders emd, with respect to each
Broker-Deeder, to the extent that such amounts dfffer, determine to which other
Broker-Dealer or Broker-Dealers acting for one (1) or more purchasers of Bonds such
Broker-Dealer shedl defiver, or from which other Broker-Dealer or Broker-Dealers
acting for one (1) or more sellers of Bonds such Broker-Dealer shedl receive, as the
case may be. Bonds.
(g) The Issuer may not submit an Order in any Auction.
Section 6. Adjustment In Percentage.
(a) The Market Agent may with the prior "written consent ofthe Bond Insurer from
time to time adjust the percentages set forth in the defiiutions of the Appficable
Percenteige, the No Auction Rate, the Meiximum Auction Rate and/or the Minihium
Auction Rateffany such adjustment is necessaty, in the judgment ofthe Market Agent,
to reUect the effect of any Change of Preference Law. In making any such adjustment,
the Meurket Agent shafi take the foUowing factors, as in existence both before eind after
such Chemge of Preference Law: (i) short-term taxable and tax-exempt market rates
and indices of such short-term rates, (u) the market supply and demand for short-term
tax-exempt securities, (iu) yield curves for short-term and long-term tax-exempt
securities or obfigations having a credit rating that is comparable to the Bonds, (iv)
general economic conditions and (v) economic and finandal factors present in the
securities industry that may affect or that may be relevant to the Bonds.
(b) The Market Agent shaU communicate' its determination to adjust any of such
percentages pursuant to subsection 1 hereof by meeuis of a written notice delivered at
least ten (10) days prior to the Auction Date on which the Market Agent desfres to effea
the change to the Issuer, the Trustee and the Auction Agent. Such notice shaU be
effective only ff it is accompemied by the form of opinion that Bond Counsel expects to
be able to give on such Auction Date to the effect that such adjustment is authorized
by the Indenture and wifi not heive an adverse effect on the exdusion of interest on
such Bonds from gross income for federed income tax purposes.
(c) Any such adjustment shedl take effect on em Auction Date only ff (A) the Trustee
and the Auction Agent receive, by 11:00 A.M. (New York City time) on the Business Day
immediately preceding such Auction Date, a certificate from the Market Agent by
telecopy or simUar meems, (i) authorizing such adjustment which shaU be specified in
such authorization, and (u) confirming that Bond"Counsel expects to be able to give an
opinion on such Auction Date to the effect that such adjustment is authorized by the
Indenture, is permitted under the Act and "wUl not have an adverse effect on the
exclusion of interest on the Bondsfromgross income for federal income tax purposes,
and (B) the Trustee emd the Auction Agent receive by 9:30 A.M. (New York City time)
on such Auction Date, an opinion of Bond Counsel to such effect. If the condition
referred to in (A) above is not met, the existing percentages used in the defmitions of
Appficable Percentage and Minimum Auction Rate shafi remain in effect and the

I
'
 

 5/ 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83253

Auction Rate for the next succeeding Auction Period shedl be determined pursuant to
these Auction Procedures. If the condition referred to in (B) above is not met, such
percentages shaU remain in effect and the Auction Rate for the next succeeding Auction
Period sheill equal the Maximum Auction Rate as determined on such Auction Date.
Section 7. Modification.
ff there shaU have been defivered to the Trustee em instrument, executed by the
Issuer, the Auction Agent, each Broker-Deeder and the Bond Insurer, setting forth one
or more modifications to these Auction Procedures, together with a certificate of the
Market Agent to the effect that such modifications eire desfrable in order to minimize
the effective interest cost of the Bonds infightof preveufing finandal meirket conditions,
then these Auction Procedures shafi be deemed, without further action, to have been
modified and amended to the extent, and as of the effective date, set forth in such
instrument; provided, however, that no such certificate shedl be requfred ff such
niodification is solely for the purpose of curing or correcting any eunbiguity, omission
or defective provision; and provided, further, that there shedl also have been delivered
to the Trustee eui opiruon of Bond Counsel to the effect that such modification is
permitted by appficable law and wUl not have em adverse effect on the exclusion ofthe
interest on the Bondsfromthe gross income ofthe owners or beneficial o"wners thereof
for federal income tax purposes.

Exhibit ' E ' .
(To Ordinance)
City Of Chicago, Illinois
$
Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
_.

Auction Agreement
This auction agreement, dated as of
, 2002, between the City of Chicago,
a municipal corporation and a home rule unit of the State of Ilfinois (the "City") and
[Name of Auction Agent], a banking corporation organized and existing under and by
virtue ofthe laws ofthe State of New York (together "with its successors and assigns,
the "Auction Agent"), is entered into pursuemt to an Indenture of Trust, dated as of

 83254

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

^, 2002 (the "Indenture"), between the City and
trustee (the "Trustee").

5/1/2002

, as

Whereas; The City proposes to issue $
: aggregate prindpal amount of
its Auction Rate Bonds, Series
(hereinafter referred to as the "Bonds") pursuant
to the Indenture;
Now, Therefore, In consideration ofthe premises emd the mutual covenants contained
herein, the City emd the Auction Agent agree as follows:

J.
Definitions And Rules Of Construction
1.1 Terms Defined By Reference To The Indenture.
Capitafized terms not defined herein shaU have the respective meanings assigned
thereto in the Indenture (induding Appendix B thereto). •
1.2 Terms Defined Herein.
As used herein and in the Settiement Procedures (as defined below), the following
terms shaU have the foUowing meanings, unless the. context otherwise requfres:
(a) "Agent Member" shall mean a member of, or participant in. The Depository Trust
Company ("D.T.C").
(b) "Auction" shedl have the meeming spedfied in Section 2.1 hereof.
(c) "Auction Agent Acceptemce Fee" means an acceptance fee as set forth in a
written agreement signed by the Auction Agent and the City.
(d) "Auction Procedures" shall mean the auction procedures that eue set forth in
Appendix B to the Indenture.
(e) "Authorized Officer" shaU mean each vice president, assistant vice president and
assistantfreasurerof the Auction Agent eissigned to its Dealing and Trading Group
and every other officer or employee ofthe Auction Agent designated as an "Authorized
Officer" for purposes hereof in a communication to the City.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83255

(f) "Authorized City Representative" shedl mean the
and every other
oflicer or employee ofthe City designated as em "Authorized City Representative" for
purposes hereof in a communication to the Auction Agent.
(g) "Broker-Dealer Agreement" sheiU mean each agreement between the Auction
Agent emd a Broker-Deeder substantiedly in the form attached hereto as (Sub)Exhibit
A. .
(h) "D.T.C. Letter" shaU mean the letter agreement relating to the Bonds among the
City, the Trustee and the Remarketing Agent, and accepted by D.T.C, entered into
in connection with D.T.C.'s book-entty-only system.
(i) "Existing Holder Registry" shaU meem the register medntained by the Auction
Agent pursuant to Section 2.2 hereof.
(j) "Issue Date" shafi meem the date of original issuance of the Bonds.
(k) "Settiement Procedures" shaU mean the Settiement Procedures attached to the
Broker-Deeder Agreement as (Sub)Exhibit A thereto.
1.3 Rules Of Construction.
Unless the context or use indicates emother or different meaning or intent, the
foUowiiig rules shaU apply to the construction of this agreement:
(a) words importing the singular number shedl include the plured number and vice
versa;
(b) the captions and headings herein are solely for convenience of reference and
shedl not constitute a part of this agreement nor shedl they affect its meaning,
construction or effect;
(c) the words "hereor, "herein", "hereto" and other words of similar import refer to
this agreement as a whole; emd
(d) edl references herein to a peirticular time of day shaU be to New York City time.

 83256

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

2.
77ie Auction
2.1

Purpose; Incorporation
Settiement Procedures.

By

Reference

Of Auction

Procedures

And

(a) The Indenture provides that the interest rate on the Bonds for each Auction Period
after the initial Auction Period, except as provided in Section 2.03(e) thereof, shaU equal
the interiest rate per armum that an Auction Agent appointed by the City advises
resultsfromimplementation ofthe Auction Procedures; provided that such interest rate
shaU not exceed [eighteen (18)] percent per annum. The City has duly appointed (Neune
of Auction Agent], as Auction Agent for purposes of the Auction Procedures emd to
perform such other obfigations and duties as eire herein set forth. The Auction Agent
hereby accepts such appointment emd agrees that, on each Auction Date, it wifi foUow
the procedures set forth in this Section 2 and the Auction Procedures for the purpose
of, among other things, determining the Auction Rates for each Auction Period (other
than the initied Auction Period). Each periodic operation of such procedures is
hereineifter referred to as an "Auction".
(b) AU of the provisions contained in the Auction Procedures and the Settiement
Procedures are incorporated herein by reference in thefr entirety emd shaU be deemed
to be a part hereof to the same extent as ff such provisions were fuUy set forth herein.
2.2

Preparation For Each Auction; Maintenance
Holders.

Of Registry Of Existing

(a) (i) The Auction Agent shaU maintain a current registty of persons, compUed as
described below, that own Bonds that accrue interest at an Auction Rate (such registty
being herein caUed the "Existing Holder Registry"). Such persons shaU constitute the
Existing Holders for purposes of each Auction. The Auction Agent shedl indicate in the
Existing Holder Registty the identity of the respective Broker-Dealer of each Existing
Holder, if emy, on whose behedf such Broker-Dealer submitted the most recent Order
in any Auction which resulted in such Existing Holder continuing to hold or purchasing
a Bond.
, as an initial Broker-Dealer, shedl provide or
cause to be provided to the Auction Agent on the Issue Date a fist of the initial Existing
Holders. The Auction Agent may conclusively rely upon, as evidence of the identities
of the Existing Holders, such fist, the results of each Auction and notices from any
Existing Holder, the Agent Member of any Existing Holder or the Broker-Dealer of any
Existing Holder as described in the first (1" ) sentence of Section 2.2(a)(iu) hereof, and
notices from the Broker-Dealers as described in Section 2.2(a)(iii).
(ii) The City shafi notify the Auction Agent in writing when any notice of redemption

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83257

or mandatory tender is sent to D.T.C as Holder of Bonds not later than 11:00 A.M. on
the date such notice is sent. In the event the Auction Agent receives from the City
written notice of emy partial redemption or memdatoty tender of emy Bonds, the Auction
Agent shall, at least three (3) Business Days prior to the redemption date or tender date
with respect to such Bonds, request D.T.C. to notify the Auction Agent ofthe identities
of the Agent Members (and the respective principed amounts) from the accounts of
which Bonds have been caUed for redemption or mandatory tender emd the person or
department at such Agent Member to contact regeuding such redemption or mandatoty
tender and, at least two (2) Business Days prior to the redemption date or tender date
with respect to Bonds being partiaUy redeemed or caUed for tender, the Auction Agent
shall request each Agent Member so identified to disclose to the Auction Agent (upon
selection by such Agent Member of the Ebdsting Holders whose Bonds are to be
redeemed or tendered) the aggregate prindpal amount of such Bonds of each such
Ebdsting Holder, if any, to be redeemed by the City or tendered; provided the Auction
Agent has been fiimished "with the neune' emd telephone number of a person or
department at such Agent Memberfromwhich it is to request such information. In the
absence of receiving any such iifformation "with respect to an Easting Holder, from
such Existing Holder's Agent Member or otherwise, the Auction Agent may continue
to freat such Eixisting Holder as the beneficial owner ofthe principed amount of Bonds
shown in the Existing Holder Registty.
(iu) The Auction Agent shafi register in the Elxisting Holder Registty afremsferof
Bonds only if (A) such tremsfer is pursuant to an Auction or (B) ff such fransfer is made
• other them pursuant to an Auction, the Auction Agent has been notified in writing in
a notice substantiaUy in the form of (SubjEbdiibit C to the Broker-Dealer Agreement,
by the Elxisting Holder that is the transferor, the Agent Member of such Existing Holder
or the Broker-Dealer of such Existing Holder, of suchfransfer..The Auction Agent shaU
rescind a fransfer made on the Existing Holder Registty ff the Auction Agent has been
notified in writing in a notice substantiaUy in the form of (Sub)Exhibit D to the BrokerDealer Agreement, by the Agent Member or the Broker-Dealer of any person that (i)
purchased emy Bonds emd the seUer feuled to defiver such Bonds or (u) sold emy Bonds
emd the purchaser faUed to make payment to such person upon defivery to the
purchaser of such Bonds. The Auction Agent is not requfred to accept any notice of
transfer defivered prior to an Auction unless it is received by the Auction Agent by 3:00
P.M. on the Business Day next preceding the appUcable Auction Date.
(iv) Not later them 12:00 Noon on the Business Day preceding each Auction Date, the
Auction Agent shafi notify the Broker-Dealers of the aggregate principed amount of
Bonds by telecopy or other simUar means; provided that the Auction Agent shaU not
be requfred to defiver such notice if there is no chemge in the amount of such Bonds
from the immediately preceding notice.
. .
(v) The Auction Agent may request that the Broker-Dealers, as set forth in the
Broker-Dealer Agreement, provide the Auction Agent with a list of their respective
customers that such Broker-Dealers believe are Existing Holders of Bonds. The Auction
Agent shall keep confidential emy such information emd shedl not disclose any such

 83258

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

information so provided to any person other than the relevemt Broker-Dealer and the
City, provided that the Auction Agent reserves the right to disclose emy such
informationffit is advised by its counsel that its feulure to do so would be unlawful or
would impose upon the Auction Agent any actued or potentied loss, claim, damage,
fiabifity or expense for which it has not received indenmity satisfactory to it.
(vi) In the event that any day that is scheduled to be an Auction Date shafi be
changed after the Auction Agent shedl have given the notice referred to in clause (vii)
of paragraph (a) ofthe Settiement Procedures, the Auction Agent, by such means as the
Auction Agent deems practicable, shaU give notice of such change to the Broker-Dealer
not later them 9:15 A.M. on the earfier ofthe new Auction Date or the old Auction Date.
2.3 Minimum And Maximum Auction Rates.
(a) On the date hereof, the Appficable Percentage is
% and the ratings assigned
to the Bonds by Moody's and Fitch eure
and
, respectively. If there is any
chemge in-the ratings assigned to the Bonds by Moody's or Fitch (or substitute or
successor rating agendes) which results in a change tp the Appficable Percentage after
the date of this Agreement or ff the Appficable Percentage is adjusted by the Meirket
Agent in accordance with Section 6 of the Auction Procedures, the Market Agent shafi
notify the Auction Agent in writing of such change in the Appficable Percentage prior
to 9:00 A.M. on the Auction Date next succeeding such change. In determining the
Maximum Auction Rate on emy Auction Date as set forth in Section 2.3 (b)(i) hereof, the
Auction Agent shafi be entitied to condusively rely on the Appficable Percentage of
which it has most recentiy received notice from the Market Agent (or, in the absence
of such notice, the Appficable Percentage set forth in the first (1**) sentence of this
paragraph (a)).
(b) (i) On each Auction Date, the Auction Agent shall determine the Commercial
Paper/Treasuty Rate, the Minimum Auction Rate and the Meiximum Auction Rate.
Pursuant to the Indenture, not later than 9:00 A.M. on each Auction Date, the
Remarketing Agent shafi notify the Auction Agent by telephone of the Index for use by
the Auction Agent in connection with such determination. Not later than 9:30 A.M. on
each Auction Date, the Auction Agent shaU notify the City and the Broker-Deeilers of
the Minimum Auction Rate and the Maximum Auction Rate so determined and the
Commercial Paper Rate/Treasuty Rate or the Index, as the case may be, used to make
such determination.
(u) If the ownership of the Bonds is no longer maintained in book-entry form by
D.T.C, no further Auctions wiU be held and the interest rate on the Bonds for each
subsequent Auction Period commencing after defivety of Bond certificates "wiU equal the
Maximum Auction Rate as determined by the City on the Business Day immediately
preceding the first (I*') day of such Auction Period as provided in the Indenture.

 5/ 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83259

(iu) If the Commerdal Paper/Treasuty Rate is not quoted on em interest basis but is
quoted on a discount basis, the Auction Agent shaJl convert the quoted rate to an
interest equivalent, as set forth in the defmition of Commercial Paper/Treasuty Rate
in Appendix B to the Indenture; or, ff the rate obtained by the Auction Agent is not
quoted on an interest or discount basis, the Auction Agent shall convert the quoted rate
to em interest rate after consultation "with the City as to the method of such conversion.
(iv) If the Commerdal Paper/Treasuty Rate is to be based on rates supplied by the
Commercial Paper Dealer and the Commerdal Paper Dealer shaU not provide a
quotation for the determination ofthe Commercied Paper/Treasuty Rate, the Auction
Agent shaU immediately notify the City so that the City can deterimine whether to select
the Substitute Commercial Paper Dealer to provide the quotation or quotations not
being suppfied by the Commerdal Paper Dealer. The City shafi promptiy advise the
Auction Agent of any such selection.
2.4 Auction Schedule.
The Auction Agent shedl condurt Auctions in accordance with the schedule set forth
below. Such schedule may be changed by the Auction Agent with the consent of the
City, which consent shaU not be unreasonably -withheld or delayed. The Auction Agent
shaU give notice of any such change to each Broker-Deeder. Such notice sheiU be
received prior to the first (1") Auction Date on which any such change shedl be effective.
Time

EVent

By 9:00 A.M.

Market Agent provides the Auction Agent
with the Index.

By 9:30 A.M.

Auction Agent advises the City and the
Broker-Deeders of the Maximum Auction
Rate, the Minimum Auction Rate and the
Commerdal Paper/Treasuty Rate or the
Index, as the case may be, used in
determining the Meiximum Auction Rate and
the Minimum Auction Rate as set forth in
Section 2.3(b)(i) hereof

 5/1/2002

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

83260

Time

Event

9:30 A.M. - 1:00 P.M.

Auction Agent assembles information
communicated to it by Broker-Dealers as
provided in Section 3 of the Auction
Procedures. Submission Deadline is 1:00
P.M.

Not earfier than 1:00 P.M.

Auction Agent makes determination
pursuant, to Section 4(a) of the Auction
Procedures.

By approximately 3:00 P.M.

Auction Agent ad'vises City of the results of
Auction emd the Auction Rate for the next
Auction Period, as provided in Section 4(b)
of the Auction Procedures. Submitted Bids
emd Submitted Sefi Orders are accepted and
rejected in whole or in part and principal
amounts of Bonds are aUocated as provided
in Section 5 of the Auction Procedures.
Auction Agent gives notice of Auction results
as set forth in paragraph (a) of the
Settiement Procedures.

The Auction Agent shedl foUow the notification procedures set forth in paragraph (a)
of the Settiement Procedures.
2.5

Changes In Appficable Percentages
Auction Procedures.

Pursuemt To Section

6

Of The

(a) Auction Agent shafi maU emy notice defivered to it pursuemt to the Indenture to
the Existing Holders within two (2) Business Days of its receipt thereof.
(b) The Auction Agent shaU defiver any such notice defivered to it pursuant to Section
6 of the Auction Procedures to the Broker-Dealers not later than 3:00 P.M. on the
Business Day on which it receives such certificate.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83261

2.6 [Reserved].
2.7 Notices To Existing Holders.
The Auction Agent shaU be entitied to conclusively rely upon the address of each
Existing Holder as such address is defivered by such Existing Holder or such Existing
Holder's Broker-Dealer or Agent Member in connection with emy notice to Existing
Holders requfred to be given by the Auction Agent pursuemt to this Section 2.'
2.8 Events Of Default.
(a) If the Auction Agent shedl have received a notice froin the Trustee that an Event
of Default shaU have occurred, the Auction Agent shaU defiver a notice of such event
to the Broker-Deeders on the Business Day it receives the same by telecopy or other
simUar meems. •
.
(b) The Auction Agent shaU deUver a copy of emy notice received by it from the
Trustee to the effect that em Event of Default has been cured or waived to the BrokerDeeders on the Business Day foUowing its receipt thereof by telecopy or other simUar
means.
2.9 Broker-Dealers.
(a) The Auction Agent, on the Issue Date, shaU enter into a Broker-Dealer Agreement
with
;
, as initial Broker-Dealer. The Auction
Agent may, thereedter, with, the consent of the City, enter into a Broker-Dealer
Agreement with any person who requests to be selected to act as a Broker-Dealer in
accordemce with the pro"visions ofthe Indenture. The Auction Agent shaU have entered
into a Broker-Deeder Agreement with each Broker-Dealer prior to the partidpation of
any such Broker-Dealer in any Auction. The Auction Agent shaU not be requfred to
enter into a Broker-Deeder Agreement with any Broker-Dealer within seven (7) days of
any Auction Date unless prior thereto it shedl have received a manuaUy executed
Broker-Dealer Agreement from a Broker-Dealer reasonably acceptable to the Auction
Agent.
(b) The Auction Agent shaU terminate any Broker-Dealer Agreement as set forth
therein if so dfrected by the City.
2.10 Access To And Maintenance Of Auction Records.
The Auction Agent shedl afford to the City, its agents, independent pubfic accountants
and counsel, access at reasonable times during normal business hours to review and

 83262

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

make exfracts or copies (at the City's sole cost and expense) of edl books, records,
documents and other information concerning the conduct and results of Auctions,
provided that any such agent, accountant, or counsel shaU fiimish the Auction Agent
with a letterfromthe City requesting that the Auction Agent afford such person access.
The Auction Agent shedl maintain records relating to emy Auction for a period of two (2)
years after such Auction (unless requested by the City to maintain such records for
such longer period not in excess of four (4) yeeurs, then for such longer period), emd
such records shaU, in reasonable detaU, accurately and fairly reflect the actions teiken
by the Auction Agent hereunder. The City agrees to keep any information regarding the
customers of any Broker-Dealer received from the Auction Agent in connection with
this Agreement or emy Auction confidentied and shaU not disdose such information or
permit the disdosure of such information without the prior , written consent of the
appficable Broker-Deeder to emyone except such agent, accountemt or counsel engaged
to audit or review the results of Auctions as permitted by this Section 2.10. Any such
agent, accountant or counsel, before having access to such information, shaU agree to
keep such information confidential and not to disclose such information or permit
disclosure of such information without the prior written consent of the appficable
Broker-Dealer, except as may otherwise be requfred by law. The Auction Agent shedl
not be responsible or fiable for emy actions of the City or its respective agents,
accountants or counsel for disclosure of confidential information as a result of such
access.

3.
Membership In D.T.C.
As ofthe date hereof, the Auction Agent is a member of, or peirticipant in, D.T.C. The
Auction Agent will provide the City with notice at least ninety (90) days prior to the
date, ff emy, on which it shafi resign as a member of, or partidpemt in, D.T.C.

4.
Representations

And Warranties.

The City represents and weirremts that:
(i) this Agreement has been duly emd vedidly authorized, executed and defivered by
the City and constitutes the legal, valid emd binding obligation of the City;

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83263

(u) neither the execution emd defivety of this Agreement, the consummation ofthe
fransactions contemplated hereby nor the fuffillment of or compfiance with, the terms
and conditions of this Agreement wUl conffict with, violate or result in a breach of, the
terms, conditions or provisions of, or constitute a default under emy law or regulation,
any order or decree of any court or pubfic authority having jurisdiction over the City,
or, to the knowledge ofthe officer executing this Agreement, any mortgage, indenture,
confract, agreement or undertaking to which the City is a peirty or by which it is bound;
and
(iu) aU approvals, consents and orders of any governmental authority, legislative
body, board, agency or commission having jurisdiction over the City that would
constitute a condition precedent to or the absence of which would materiaUy adversely
affect the due pcrforinance by the City of its obfigations under this Agreement have
been obteiined.

5.
The Auction Agent.
5.1

Duties And Responsibifities.

(a) The Auction Agent is acting solely as agent for the City hereunder and owes no
fidudaty duties to emy person by reason of this Agreement and no impfied duties,
fiduciary or otherwise, shaU be read into this Agreement against the Auction Agent.
(b) The Auction Agent undertakes to perform such duties and only such duties as are
specificedly set forth in this Agreement and the Indenture, and no iinpfied covenants
or obfigations shedl be read' into this Agreement or the Indenture against the Auction
Agent by reason of any offering materials used in connection with the sale ofthe Bonds
or otherwise.
(c) In the absence of bad faith or negUgence on its part, the Auction Agent shedl not
be liable for any eiction taken, suffered or omitted or for any error of judgment made by
it in the performance of its duties under this Agreement. The Auction Agent shedl not
be liable for any error of judgment made in good faith unless the Auction Agent shedl
have been negligent in ascertaining (or failing to ascertain) the pertinent facts. In no
event shall the Auction Agent be fiable for special, indfrect or consequential loss or
damage of emy kind whatsoever (including but not limited to lost profit), even ff the
Auction Agent has been advised ofthe likelihood of such loss or deimage and regeirdless
of the form of action.

 83264

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(d) The Auction Agent shaU: (i) not be required to and shedl make no representations
and have no responsibifities as to the vafidity, accuracy, value or genuineness of any
signatures or endorsements, other them its own; (u) not be obligated to take any legal
action hereunder that might, in its judgment, involve any expense orfiabifity,unless
it has been furnished "with reasonable indenmity; and (iu) not be responsible for or
liable in any respect on account of identity, authority or rights of any person executing
or delivering or purporting to execute or deliver any document under this Agreement
unless the Authorized Officer of the Auction agent had actued knowledge that such
person was not authorized or entitied to execute or deliver such document.
5.2 Rights Of The Auction Agent.
(a) The Auction Agent may conclusively rely emd shafi be fuUy protected in acting or
refraining from acting upon any communication authorized hereby and upon emy
•written instruction, notice, request, dfrection, consent, report, certificate, bond
certificate or other instrument, paper or document reasonably befieved by it to be
genuine. The Auction Agent shall not be fiable for acting upon any telephone
communication authorized hereby which the Auction Agent believes in good feuth to
have been given by the City or by a Broker-Dealer. The Auction Agent may record
telephone communications with the City or \ylth the Broker-Deeders or both.
(b) The Auction Agent may consult with counsel of its choice, and the ad"vice of such
counsel shafi be fuU emd complete authorization and protection in respect of any action
taken, suffered or onutted by it hereunder in good feuth and in refiemce thereon.
(c) The Auction Agent shaU not be requfred to advance, expend or risk its own funds
or otherwise incur or become exposed to finandal fiabifity in the performance of its duties hereunder.
(d) The Auction Agent may perform its duties and exerdse itsrightshereunder either
dfrectiy or by or through ageiits or attorneys emd shafi not be responsible for emy
misconduct or negfigence on the part of emy agent or attorney appointed by it "with due
care hereunder.
(e) The Auction Agent shaU have no obfigation orfiabUityin respert of the regisfration
or exemption therefrom of the Bonds under federed or state securities laws in respect
of the sufficiency or the conformity of any fransfer of the Bonds to the terms of the
Auction Agreement, the Broker-Dealer Agreement, the Indenture or any other
document contemplated thereby.
5.3 Auction Agent's Discleumer.
The Auction Agent makes no representation as to the vafidity or adequacy of the
Bonds, the Indenture or emy offering materials used in connection with the sale ofthe

 5/ 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83265

Bonds.
5.4 Compensation, Expenses And Indemnification Of The Auction Agent.
The City shall pay (i) the Auction Agent Acceptance Fee on the date of payment for
emd delivery ofthe Bonds, (ii) the Auction Agent Fee for the Bonds on the initial Interest
Payment Date and emnually thereedter, and (iu) upon request of the Auction Agent,
reeisonable expenses, disbursements emd advances incurred or made by the Auction
Agent in accordance with this Agreement emd any Broker-Dealer Agreement (induding
the reasonable compensation, expenses and disbursements of its agents and counsel).
The Auction Agent Fee represents compensation for the services ofthe Auction Agent
in conducting Auctions for the benefit of the beneficial owners of the Bonds. The
Auction Agent Fee may be adjusted from time to time with the approval of the City
upon a"written requestof the Auction Agent defivered to the City. To the extent,ffany,
that a court of competent jurisdiction would enforce such agreement as not contrary
to law or pubfic poficy, the City agrees that it ishaU indemnify the Auction Agent for,
and hold it harmless against any loss,fiabifityor expense incurred without negfigence
or bad faith on its part arising out of or in connection with its agency under the Auction
Agreement emd Broker-Dealer Agreement, including the costs and expenses of
defending itseff against any claim of fiabUity in connection with its exercise or
performance of any of its duties thereunder, except such as may result from its
negfigence or bad faith.
5.5 Compensation Of The Broker-Dealers.
(a) On the initied Interest Payment Date, the Broker-Dealers shaU be entitied to
receive a fee in an eunount equal to the product of (i)
of one percent (1%) per
annum times (u) a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of days in the initial
Auction Period and the denominator of which is [three hundred sixty (360)), times (in)
the aggregate prindpal amount of Outstanding Bonds on the Closing Date. This fee
shedl be payable by the City solely out of amounts received by the Auction Agent in
accordance with Section 5.5(c) hereof.
(b) After the initied Interest Payment Date, on the Interest Payment Date immediately
foUowing each Auction Date with respect to the immediately preceding Auction Period,
the Broker-Dealers shaU be entitied to receive a fee for aU services rendered by them
under the Broker-Dealer Agreements with respect to the Auction held on such Auction
Date in an amount equal to the product of (i) the Broker-Dealer Fee Rate times (ii) a
fraction, the numerator of which is the number of days in the Auction Period
immediately foUowing such Auction Date emd the denominator of which is (three
hundred sixty (360)], times (iii) the aggregate principed amount of Outstanding Bonds
at the dose of business on the Reguleu Record Date immediately preceding such
Auction Date (the "Broker-Dealer Fee. The Broker-Dealer Fee shall be payable by the
City solely out of eimounts received by the Auction Agent in accordance with Section

 83266

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

5.5(d) hereof The Broker-Dealer Fee Rate shaU be the prevaifing rate received by
broker-dealers for rendering comparable services to others. If the then current BrokerDeeder Fee Rate is not, in the opinion ofthe Auction Agent, the preveiUing rate, the City
shall change the Broker-Dealer Fee Rate so that it equals such prevailing rate. The
initial Broker-Dealer Fee Rate shedl be
of one percent (1%) per annum. If the City
changes the Broker-Dealer Fee Rate pursuemt to the terms hereof, the City shafi notify
the Auction Agent thereof. Any change in the Broker-Dealer Fee Rate shedl be effective
on the Auction Date next succeeding such change.
(c) On the initial Interest Payment Date, the City shall pay to the Auction'Agent an
aggregate amount equal to the eimounts payable to the Broker-Dealers pursuant to
Section 5.5(a) hereof. The Auction Agent shaU pay to the Broker-Dealers the amount
payable to each Broker-Dealer as set forth in Section 2.5(a) of any Broker-Dealer
Agreement. The City agrees to take such actions as the Auction Agent may reasonably
request to give effect to this Section 5.5(cj.
(d) After the uutial Interest Pajroent Date, on the Interest Payment Date immediately
foUowing each Auction Date with respect to the immediately preceding Auction Period,
the City- shaU pay to the Auction Agent an amount equal to the Broker-Dealer Fee
payable with respert to such Auction Date. The Auction Agent shaU pay to the BrokerDeeders the Broker-Dealer Fee appficable to emy Broker-Dealer as set forth in Section
2.5(b) of each Broker-Deeder Agreement. The City agrees to take such actions as the
Auction Agent may reasonably request to give effect to this Section 5.5(d).

6.
Misce/kmeous.
6.1 Term Of Agreement.
(a) This Agreement shafi terminate on the earfier of (i) the date when the Bonds are
no longer Outstanding and (u) the date on which this Agreement is terminated in
accordance with this Section 6.1. The City may terminate this Agreement in
accordance with Section 2.03(e)(iv) ofthe Indenture. The Aucti9n Agent may terminate
this Agreement upon written notice to the City, the Trustee, the Remarketing Agent and
the Market Agent on the date specified in such notice, which date sheiU be no earfier
than forty-five (45) days after the date of defivery of such notice. Notwithstemding the
foregoing, the provisions of Section 2 shafi terminate if the certificates representing the
Bonds sheiU no longer be held by a Securities Depositoty.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83267

(b) Except as otherwise provided in this Section 6.1(b), the respective rights and
duties of the City and the Auction Agent under this Agreement sheiU cease upon
termination of this Agreement. The representations, warranties, covenants and
obfigations of the City to the Auction Agent under Article 4 and Section 5.4 shafi
survive the termination of this Agreement. Upon termination of this Agreement, the
Auction Agent shedl at the City's request, (i) promptiy defiver to the City copies of aU
books and records maintained by it in connection "with its duties hereunder and (u)
promptiy fransfer to the City or any successor auction agent any funds deposited by
the City with the Auction Agent pursuant to this Agreement which have not previously
been distributed by the Auction Agent in accordance with this Agreement.

6.2 Communications.
Except for (i) communications authorized to be made by telephone pursuemt to this
Agreement or the Auction Procedures and (u) communications in cormection with
Auctions (other than those expressly requfred to be in writing), all notices, requests and
other communications to any party hereunder shaU be in .writing (including facsinule
or simUar writing) and shaU be given to such party addressed to it at its address or
facsimUe number set forth below: -

IfTo The City, Addressed:

City of Chicago, Illinois
33 North LaSaUe Sfreet, 6* Floor
ChicagOi Illinois 60602
Attention:
Telephone:
FacsimUe:

IfTo The Auction Agent,
Addressed:

Attention:
Telephone:
FacsimUe:

 83268

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

or such other address or facsimile number as such party may hereafter specify for such
purpose by notice to the other party. Each such notice, request or communication
shall be effective when defivered at the address specified hereiri. Coiiununications shaU
be given on behedf of the City by an Authorized City Representative emd on behaff of the
Auction Agent by an Authorized Oflicer.
6.3 Entfre Agreement.
This Agreement conteuns the entfre agreement between the parties relating to the
subject matter hereof, emd there are no other representations, endorsements, promises,
agreements or understandings, oral, written or inferred between the parties relating to
the subject matter hereof.
6.4 Benefits.
Nothing herein, express or impUed, shall give to any person, other than the City, the
Auction Agent and thefr respective successors and assigns, any benefit of any legal or
equitable right, remedy or claim hereunder.
6.5 Amendment; Waiver.
(a) This Agreement shaU not be deemed or construed to be modified, amended,
rescinded, canceled or weuved, in whole or in part, except by a written instrument
signed by a duly authorized representative of the party to be charged.
(b) FaUure of either party hereto to exerdse any right or remedy hereunder in the
event of a breach hereof by the other party shaU not constitute a waiver of any such
right or remedy with respect to any subsequent breach.
6.6

Successor And Assigns;

This Agreement shedl be binding upon, inure to the benefit of, and be enforceable by,
the respective successors and permitted assigns of each of the City and the Auction
Agent. This Agreement may not be assigned by either party hereto absent the prior
written consent ofthe other party, which consent shedl not be unreasonably withheld.
6.7 Severabifity.
If any clause, provision or section hereof shaU be ruled invafid or unenforceable by
any court of competent jurisdiction, the invafidity or unenforceabifity of such clause,
provision or section sheiU not affect any ofthe remaining clauses, provisions or sections

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83269

hereof
6.8 Execution In Counterparts.
This Agreement may be executed in several counterparts, each of which shall be em
original and edl of which shaU constitute but one emd the same instrument.
6,9 Governing Law.
This Agreement shedl be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of
the State of Illinois without regard to the confficts of laws prindples thereof.
In Witness Whereof, The parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly executed
and defivered by thefr proper and duly authorized officers as of the date ffrst above
written.
City of Chicago, lUinois
By:
Neime:

Titie: _

(Name of Auction Agent],
Auction Agent
By:
Name:
Titie:
(Sub)Exhibit "A" referred to in this Auction Agreement reads as foUows:

 83270

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(Sub)Exhibit "A".
(To Auction Agreement)

City Of Chicago, Illinois
$
Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
.
Form Of Broker-Dealer Agreement.
This Broker-Deeder Agreement, dated as of
, between [Name of Auction
Agent], a banking corporation organized and existing under and by virtue of the laws
of the State of New York, as auction agent (the "Auction Agent") under the Auction
Agreement with respect to the above-captioned bonds, dated as of
,
2002 (the "Auction Agreement"), between the City of Chicago, Illinois (the "Citjr"), the
Auction Agent and
(the "BD").
Whereas, The City has issued $
aggregate prindpal amount of its
Auction Rate Bonds, Series
(the "Bonds") pursuant to an Indenture of Trust, dated
as of.
, 2002, between the City and
, as trustee
(the "Indenture");
Whereas, The Indenture provides that the interest rate on the Bonds for each Auction
Period after the initial Auction Period shaU, except under certain conditions and subject
to a maximum interest rate of (eighteen (18)) percent per annum, equal the rate per
annum that the Auction Agent advises results from implementation of the Auction
Procedures and pursuant to Section 2.9(a) of the Auction Agreement, the City has
requested and directed the Auction Agent to execute and deliver this Broker-Dealer
Agreement; and
Whereas, The Auction Procedures require the participation of one (1) or more BrokerDealers;
Now, Therefore, In consideration ofthe mutual covenants contained herein emd other
good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby
acknowledged, the Auction Agent, as agent of the City, and BD agree as foUows:

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83271

Section I.
Definitions And Rules Of Construction.
1.1 Terms Defined By Reference To The Indenture.
Capitalized terms not defined herein shedl have the respective meeinings assigned
thereto in the Indenture or the Auction Agreement (as defined below), as appficable.
i.2 Terms Defined Herein.
•As used herein and in the Settiement Procedures (as defined below), the foUowing
terms shall have the foUowing meanings, unless the context otherwise requfres:
(a) "Auction" shaU have the meaning specified in Section 2.1 hereof.
(b)
_

"Auction Agreement" shaU mean the Auction Agreement dated as of
, 2002 between the City .and the Auction Agent relating to the Bonds.

(c) "Auction Procedures" shaU meem the Auction Procedures that are set forth in
Appendix B to the Indenture.
(d) "Authorized Oflicer" shaU mean each Senior Vice President, 'Vice President,
Assistant Vice President emd Assistemt Treasurer of the Auction Agent assigned to its
Capited Markets Fidudaty Services Group and evety other oflicer or employee ofthe
Auction Agent designated as an "Authorized Officer" for purposes of this Agreement
in a communication to BD.
(e) "BD Officer" shedl mean each officer or employee of BD designated as a "BD
Officer" for purposes of this Agreement in a communication to the Auction Agent.
(f) "Broker-Dealer Agreement" or "Agreement" shafi meem this Agreement and emy
substantiedly similar agreement between the Auction Agent and a Broker-Dealer.
(g) "Settlement Procedures" shall meem the Settlement Procedures attached hereto
as (Sub)Exhibit A.
1.3 Rules Of Construction.
Unless the context or use indicates emother or different meeining or intent, the
following rules shedl apply to the construction of this Agreement:

 83272

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(a) Words importing the singuleir number shaU include the plural number and vice
versa.
(b) The captions emd headings herein are solely for convenience of reference emd
shall not constitute a part of this Agreement nor shaU they affect its meaning,
construction or effect.
(c) The words 'hereoP, "herein", "hereto" and other words of simUar import refer to
this Agreement as a whole.
(d) AU references herein to a peuticuleir time of day shedl be to New York City time.

Section 2.
The Auction.
2.1

Purpose; Incorporation By
Settiement Procedures.

Reference

Of

Auction

Procedures

And

(a) On each Auction Date, the Auction Procedures wiU be foUowed by the Auction
Agent for the purpose of determining the Auction Rate for the next Auction Period.
Each' periodic implementation of such procedures is hereinafter referred to as an
"Auction".
(b) The Auction Procedures emd the Settiement Procedures are incorporated herein
by reference in thefr entfrety emd shaU be deemed to be a part of this Agreement to the
seime extent, as ff such provisions were friUy set forth herein.
(c) BD agrees to act as, emd assumes the obfigations of emd limitations and
restrictions placed upon, a Broker-Dealer under this Agreement. BD understands that
other persons meeting the requfrements specified in the definition of "Broker-Deeder"
contained in the Auction Procedures may execute a Broker-Dealer Agreement and
peirticipate as Broker-Dealers in Auctions.
(d) BD emd other Broker-Deeders may partidpate in Auctions for thefr own accounts.
However, the City may, by notice to BD and afi other Broker-Dealers, prohibit edl
Broker-Dealers from submitting Bids in Auctions for thefr own accounts, provided that
Broker-Dealers may continue to submit Hold Orders emd SeU Orders. If BD is
BD also agrees to act as, and assumes the obfigations of and
limitations emd restrictions placed upon, the initial Market Agent under the Indenture.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83273

2.2 Preparation For Each Auction.
(a) Not later than 9:30 A.M. on each Auction Date for the Bonds, the Auction Agent
. shall advise BD by telephone of the Minimum Auction Rate, the Maximum Auction Rate
and the Commerdal Paper/Treasury Rate or the Index, as the case may be, used in
determining such rates.
(b) In the event that the Auction Date for any Auction shedl be chemged after the
Auction Agent has given the notice referred to in clause (vU) of paragraph (a) of the
Settiement Procedures, the Auction Agent, by such meems as the Auction Agent deems
practicable, shedl give notice of such change to BD not later than the earfier of 9:15
A.M. on the new Auction Date emd 9:15 A.M. on the old Auction Date. Thereafter, BD
shafi promptiy notify customers of BD that BD believes are Existing Holders of such
change in the Auction Date.
(c) The Auction Agent from time to time may request BD to provide it "with afistofthe
respective customers BD befieves are Ebdsting Holders. BD shedl comply -with any such
request, and the Auction Agent sheifi keep confidential any such iifformation, including
informationreceivedas to the identity of Bidders in any Auction, and shedl not disdose
any-such information so provided to emy person other than the City and BD.
2.3 Auction Schedule; Method Of Submission Of Orders.
(a) The Auction Agent shafi conduct Auctions for the Bonds in accordemce with the
schedule set forth below. Such schedule may be changed at any time by the Auction
Agent with the consent ofthe City, which consent shedl not be unreasonably withheld
or delayed. The Auction Agent shaU give notice of emy such change to BD. Such notice
shedl be received prior to the ffrst (1") Auction Date on which any such change shaU be
effective. .
Time

EVent

By 9:00 A.M.

Market Agent provides Auction Agent with
the Index.

By 9:30 A.M.

Auction Agent advises the City and the
Broker-Dealers of the Minimum Auction
Rate, the Maximum Auction Rate emd the
Commercial Paper/Treasury Rate or Index,
as the case may be, used in determining
such rates as set forth in Section 2.2(a)
hereof.

 JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

83274

Time

5/1/2002

Event

9:30 A.M. - 1:00 P.M.

Auction Agent assembles information
communicated to it by Broker-Dealers as
pro-vided in Section 3 of the Auction
Procedures. Submission Deadline is 1:00
P.M.

Not earfier than 1:00 P;M.

Auction Agent makes determinations
pursuant to Section 4(a) of the Auction
Procedures.

By approximately 3:00 P.M,

Auction Agent advises the City of the results
of the Auction emd of the Auction Rate for
the next Auction Period, as provided in
Section 4(b) of the Auction I'tocedures.
Subnutted Bids and Submitted Sell Orders
eu-e accepted and rejected in whole or in part
emd Bonds are aUocated as provided in
Section 5 of the Auction Procedures. Auction
Agent gives notice of Auction results as set
forth in Section 2.4(a) hereof.

(b) BD shaU submit Orders to the Auction Agent in writing substemtiaUy in the form
attached heireto as (Sub)Ebdiibit B. BD shedl submit separate Order's to the Auction
Agent for each Potential Holder or Elxisting Holder on whose behedf BD is submitting
an Order emd shaU not net or aggregate the Orders of Potentied Holders or Existing
Holders on whose behaff BD is submitting Orders.
(c) BD shaU deliver to the Auction Agent (i) a "written notice, substemtiedly in the form
attached hereto as (Sub)Exhibit C, of fransfers of Bonds, made through BD by an
Existing Holder to another person other than pursuant to em Auction, emd (u) a written
notice, substantiaUy in the form attached Hereto as (Sub)Exhibit D, ofthe faUure of any
Bonds to befremsferredto or by any person that purchased or sold Bonds through BD
pursuant to an Auction. The Auction Agent is not requfred to accept any notice
defivered pursuant to the terms of the foregoing sentence with respect to an Auction
unless it is received by the Auction Agent by 3:00 P.M. on the Business Day next
preceding the applicable Auction Date.
(d) BD agrees to handle its customers' Orders in accordance with its duties under
appficable securities laws and rules.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS.OF COMMITTEES

83275

2.4 Notices.
(a) On each Auction Date, the Auction Agent shafi notify BD by. telephone of the
results ofthe Auction as set forth in paragraph (a) ofthe Settiement Procedures. The
Auction Agent shafi as promptiy as reasonably practicable thereafter notify BD in
writing of the disposition of eill Orders submitted by BD in the Auction held on such
Auction Date.
(b) BD shall notify each Existing Holder or Potential Holder on whose behaff BD has
submitted an Order as set forth in paragraph (b) of the Settiement Procedures and take
such other action as is requfred of BD pursuant to the Settiement Procedures.
(c) The Auction Agent shafi defiver to BD eifter receipt of afi notices emd certificates
which the Auction Agent is required to defiver to BD pursuant to Section 2 of the
Auction Agreement at the times emd in the memner set forth in the Auction Agent
Agreement.
2.5

Service Charge To Be Paid To BD.

(a) On the initial Interest Payment Date, the Auction Agent shaU pay to BD from
monies receivedfromthe City pursuant to Section 5.5(c) of the Auction Agreement em
amount equal to the product of (i) afraction,the numerator of which is the number of
days in the irutial Auction Period and the denominator of which is three hundred sixty
[360], times (ii)
of one percent (1%) per annum times (in) the aggregate prindpal
amount Of the Bonds placed by BD on the Issue Date as set forth in the fist of the
initial Existing Holders defivered to the Auction Agent pursuemt to Section 2.2 (a)(i) of
the Auction Agreement.
(b) After the initial Interest Payment Date, on the Interest Paynment Date immediately
foUowing each Auction Date with respect to the immediately preceding Auction Period,
.the Auction Agent shedl pay to BD from monies received from the City pursuant to
Section 5.5(d) ofthe Auction Agreement em amount equal to the product of (i) a fraction,
the numerator of which is the number of days in the Auction Period next succeeding
such Auction Date and the denominator of which is three hundred sixty [360]times(u)
the Broker-Dealer Fee Rate times (iu) (A) ff an Auction was held on such Auction Date,
the sum of (x) the aggregate principal amount of the Bonds placed by BD in such
Auction that were (1) the subject of Submitted Bids of Existing Holders submitted by
BD emd continued to be held as a result of such submission and (2) the subject of
Submitted Bids of Potentied Holders submitted by BD and purchased as a result of
such submission, (y) the aggregate prindpal amount ofthe Bonds subject to valid Hold
Orders (determined in accordemce with Section 3 ofthe Auction Procedures) submitted
to the Auction Agent by BD and (z) the aggregate principal amount of the Bonds
deemed to be subject to Hold Orders by Existing Holders pursuant to Section 3 of the
Auction Procedures that were acqufred by such Existing Holders through BD, or (B) if
an Auction was not held on such Auction Date, the aggregate prindped eunount ofthe

 83276

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Bonds that were acqufred by Existing Holders through BD. For purposes of subclauses
(ui)(A)(z) and (iu)(B) of the foregoing sentence, if any Existing Holder who acquired
Bonds through BD fransfers those Bonds to another person other than pursuant to an
Auction, then the Broker-Dealer for the Bonds sofransferredshaU.continue to be BD;
provided, however, that ff the tremsfer was effected by, or if the fransferee is, a BrokerDeeder other them BD, then such Broker-Deeder shedl be the Broker-Dealer for such
Bonds.
2.6

Settiement.

(a) If any Elxisting Holder on whose behedf BD has submitted a Bid or SeU Order for
Bonds that was accepted in whole or in part fails to instruct its Agent Member to
defiver the Bonds subject to such Bid or SeU Order ageunst payment therefor, BD shaU
instrurt such Agent Member to defiver such Bonds ageiinst payment therefor emd BD
may defiver to the Potential Holder on whose behalf BD submitted a Bid that was
accepted in whole or in part a prindpal amount of the Bonds that is less than the
principed amount of the Bonds specified in such Bid to be purchased by such Potentied
Holder. Notwithstemding the foregoing terms of this section, any defivety or nondefivety of Bonds which represents any departure from the results of an Auction, as
determined by the Auction Agent, shafi be of no effert uidess and untU the Auction
Agent shaU have been notified of such defivety or non-defivety in accordance with the
terms of Section 2.3(c) hereof. The Auction Agent shaU have no duty orfiabifity"with
respect to enforcement of this Section 2.6(a).
(b) NeithertheAuction Agent or the City shafi have emy responsibiUty orfiabifity"with
respect to the faUure of em Existing Holder, a Potentied Holder or em Agent Member or
any of them to defiver Bonds or to pay for Bonds sold or purchased pursuant to the
Auction F^rocedures or otherwise.

Section 3:
The Auction Agent.
3.1 Duties And Responsibifities.
(a) The Auction Agent is acting solely as agent for the City hereunder and owes no
fiduciaty duties to any other Person by reason of this Agreement.
(b) The Auction Agent undertakes to perform such duties and only such duties as are
spedficaUy set forth in this Agreement, and no impfied covenants or obfigations shedl
be read into this Agreement against the Auction Agent.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83277

(c) In the absence of bad feuth or negfigence on its part, the Auction Agent shall
not be liable for emy action taken, suffered, or omitted or for any error of judgment
made by it in the performance of its duties under this Agreement. The Auction
Agent shall not be fiable for any error of judgment made in good faith unless the
Auction Agent shafi have been negfigent in ascertaining (or failing to ascertain) the
pertinent facts.
3.2 Rights Of The Auction Agent.
(a) The Auction Agent may conclusively rely emd shaU be proterted in acting or
refraining from acting upon emy communication authorized by this Agreement and
upon any written instruction, notice, request, dfrection, consent, report, certificate,
share certificate oi^ other instrument,, paper or document befieved by it. to be
genuine. The Auction Agent shafi not be fiable for acting upon emy telephone
communication authorized by this Agreement which the Auction Agent believes in
good faith to have been given by the City or by a Broker-Dealer. The Auction Agent
may record telephone communications "with the Broker-Dealers and may consult
with counsel of its o"wn choice.
(b) The Auction Agent shedl not be requfred to advance, expend or risk its own
funds or otherwise incur or become exposed tofinandalfiabifityin the performance
of its duties hereunder.
(c) The Auction Agent may perform its duties emd exercise its rights hereunder
either dfrectiy or by or throu^ agents or attorneys.

Section 4.
Miscellaneous.
4.1 Termination.
Any party may terminate this Agreement at emy tiiiie uponfive(5) days prior notice
to the other party; provided, however, thatffBD is
, neither
BD nor the Auction Agent may terminate this Agreement without first obtaining
prior written consent of the City of such termination, which consent shaU not be
unreasonably withheld. This Agreement shaU automaticedly terminate upon the
termination of the Auction Agreement.

 83278

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

4.2 Agent Member.
BD is, and shaU remain for the term of this Agreement, a member of, or
participant in, D.T.C. (or an aflifiate of such a member or partidpemt). BD shall
promptiy notify the Auction Agent and the City ff BD ceases to be a member of, or
partidpant in, D.T.C. (or em affUiate of such a member or participant).
4.3

Communications.

Except for (i) communications authorized to be made by telephone pursuant to
this Agreement or the Auction Procedures emd (u) communications in connection
with the Auctions (other than those expressly requfred to be in "writing), afi notices,
requests and other communications to any peirty hereunder shafi be in writing
(including facsimile or simUar writing) and shaU be given to such party, addressed
to it, at its address or facsimUe number set forth below:
IfTo BD, Addressed:

(
Attention: [
FacsimUe Number: [
Telephone Number: [

IfTo The Auction Agent,
Addressed:

Attention:
FacsimUe Number: _
Telephone Number:.
IfTo The City, Addressed:

City of Chicago, Illinois 33 North LaSaUe Sfreet, Sixth (e*) Floor
Chicago, lUinois 60602
Attention:
.
Facsimile Number:
Telephone Number:

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83279

or such other address or facsimUe number as such party may hereafter specify for
such purpose by notice to the other party. Each such notice, request or
communication shall be effective when defivered at the address specified herein.
Communications shedl be given on behedf of BD by a BD Officer emd on behedf of the
Auction Agent by em Authorized Oflicer. BD may record telephone communications
with the Auction Agent.
4.4 Entfre Agreement.
This Agreement contains the entire agreement between the parties relating to the
subject matter hereof, emd there are no other representations, endorsements,
promises, agreements or understandings, oral, "written or inferred, between the
peirties relating to the subject matter hereof
4.5 Benefits.
Nothing in this Agreement, express or implied, sheifi give to any person, other than
the City, the Auction Agent and BD and their respective successors and assigns,
emy benefit of emy legal or equitable right, remedy or claim under this Agreement.
4.6 Amendment; Waiver.
(a) This Agreement sheifi not be deemed or construed to be modified, amended,
rescinded, canceled or waived, in whole or in part, except by a written instrument
signed by a duly authorized representative of the party to be charged.
(b) FeiUure of either party to this Agreement to exercise emy right or remedy
hereunder in the event of a breach of this Agreement by the other party shaU not
constitute a waiver of any such right or remedy with respect to any subsequent
breach.
4.7 Successors And Assigns.
This Agreement shaU be binding upon, inure to the benefit of, and be enforceable
by, the respective successors and permitted assigns of each of BD and the Auction
Agent. This Agreement may not be assigned by either party hereto absent the prior
written consentof the other party; provided, however, that this Agreement may be
assigned by the Auction Agent to a successor Auction Agent selerted by the City
without the consent of BD.

 83280

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

4.8 Severabifity.
If any clause, provision or section of this Agreement shafi be ruled invedid or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, the invafidity or
unenforceabifity of such clause, provision or section sheiU not affect any remeuning
clause, provision or section hereof.
4.9

Execution In Counterparts:

This Agreement may be executed in severed counterparts, each'of which shedl be
an original and afi of which shaU constitute but one emd the saihe instrument.

Section 5.
Governing Law.
This Agreement shaU be governed by emd construed in accordance "with the Ia"ws
of the State of [New York] without regard to the conflicts of la"ws prindples thereof
In Witness 'Whereof, The parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly
executed and defivered by thefr proper and duly authorized officers as ofthe date ffrst
above written.
[Name of Auction Agent),
as Auction Agent
By:

[
By:
Name:
Title:

 5 / 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83281

(Sub)Exhibits "A", "B", "C" and "D" referred to in this Broker-Dealer Agreement read
as follows:

(Sub)Exhibit 'A".
(To Broker-Dealer Agreement)
City Of Chicago, Illinois
$
Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
.
Settlement

Procedures.

(a) Not later than 3:00 P.M., New York City time, on each Auction Date, the
Auction Agent shaU notify by telephone each Broker-Dealer that pailidpated in the
Auction held on such Auction Date and submitted an Order on behalf of an Existing
Holder or Potential Holder of:
(ij the Auction Rate fixed for the next Auction Period or, in the case of Bonds in
em Auction Period nominaUy of less than seven (7) days, the Auction Rate for the
current Auction Period;
(u) whether there were Sufficient Clearing Bids in such Auction;
(iU) ff such Broker-Dealer (a "Seder's Broker-Dealer") submitted a Bid or a SeU
Order on behalf of an Existing Holder, whether such Bid or SeU Order was
accepted or rejected, in whole or in part, and the principed amount of Bonds, if
any, to be sold by such Elxisting Holder;
(iv) ff such Broker-Dealer (a "Buyer's Broker-Dealer") submitted a Bid on behedf
of a Potentied Holder, whether such Bid was accepted or rejected, in whole or in
part, and the principal amount of Bonds, if emy, to be purchased by such Potential
Holder;

 83282

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

.(v) if the aggregate principal amount of Bonds, to be sold by aU Existing Holders
on whose behaff such Broker-Dealer submitted a Bid or a Sell Order exceeds the
aggregate principal amount of Bonds to be purchased by edl Potential Holders on
whose behaff such Broker-Dealer submitted a Bid, the name or neunes of one (1)
or more Buyer's Broker-Deeders (and the name of the Agent Member, ff emy, of
each such Buyer's Broker-Deeder) acting for one (1) or more purchasers of such
excess principed eunount of Bonds and the prindpal eunount of Bonds to be
purchased from one (1) or more Existing Holders on whose behaff such BrokerDealer acted by one (1) or more Potential Holders on whose behaff each of such
Buyer's Broker-Dealers acted;
(vi) ff the prindped eunount of Bonds to be purchased by all Potential Holders on
whose behaff such Broker-Dealer submitted a Bid exceeds the principal amount
of Bonds to be sold by edl Existing Holders on whose behalf such Broker-Dealer
submitted a Bid or a Sefi Order, the name or names.of one (1) or more Sefier's
Brokcr-rDealers (emd the name ofthe Agent Member, ff any, of each such Seller's
Broker-Deeder) acting for one (1) or more seUers of such excess principed amount
of Bonds and the principal amount of Bonds to be sold to one (1) or more Potential
Holders on whose behaff such Broker-Dealer acted by one (1) or more Existing
Holders on whose behaff each of such Seder's Broker-Dealers acted; and
(vu) the Auction Date for the next succeeding Auction.
(b) On each Auction Date, each Broker-Dealer that submitted an Order on behedf
of any Eidsting Holder or Potential Holder shedl:
(i) advise each Ebdsting Holder and Potentied Holder on whose behaff such
Broker-Dealer submitted a Bid or SeU Order in the Auction on such Auction Date
whether such Bid or SeU Order was accepted or rejected, in whole or in part;
(u) in the case of a Broker-Dealer that is a Buyer's Broker-Dealer, advise each
Potential Holder on whose behaff such Broker-Dealer submitted a Bid that was
accepted, in whole or in part, to instruct such Potential Holder's Agent Member
to pay to such Broker-Dealer (or its Agent Member) through the Securities
Depository the amount necessary to purchase the principed aihount of Bonds to
be purchased pursuant to such Bid (including, with respert to Bonds in an
Auction Period nominaUy of less than seven (7) days, accrued interest if the
purchase date is not an Interest Payment Date) against receipt of such Bonds;
(iu) in the case of a Broker-Dealer that is a Seder's Broker-Deeder, instruct each
Ebdsting Holder on whose behedf such Broker-Deeder submitted a SeU Order that
was accepted, in whole or in part, or a Bid that was rejected, in whole or in part,
to instruct such Existing Holder's Agent Member to deUver to such Broker-Dealer
(or its Agent Member) through the Securities Depositoty the principed amount of
Bonds to be sold pursuant to such Order against payment therefor;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83283

(iv) advise each Existing Holder on whose behalf such Broker-Deeder submitted
an Order emd each Potential Holder on whose behaff such Broker-Dealer
submitted a Bid ofthe Auction Rate for the next Auction Period or, in the case of
Bonds in em Auction Period nominaUy of less than seven (7) days, the Auction
Rate for the current Auction Period;
(v) advise each Existing Holder on whose behaff such Broker-Dealer submitted
an Order of the next Auction Date; and
(vi) advise each Potential Holder on whose behaff such Broker-Deeder submitted
a Bid that was accepted, in whole or in part, of the next Auction Date.
(c) On the basis ofthe iifformation provided to it pursuant to.paragraph (a) above,
each Broker-Dealer that submitted a Bid or SeU Order in an Auction is requfred to
aUocate emy funds received by it in connection with such Auction pursuant to
paragraph (b)(u) above, and any Bonds received by it in cormection with such
Auction pursuant to paragraph (b)(iU) above among the Potential Holders, if any, on
whose behaff such Broker-Deeder submitted Bids, the Existing Holders, ff emy, on
whose behalf such Broker-Deeder submitted Bids or SeU Orders in such Auction,
and any Broker-Dealer identified to it by the Auction Agent foUo"wing such Auction
pursuant to paragraph (a)(v) or (a)(vi) above.
(d) On each Auction Date:
(ij each Potential Holder emd Existing Holder with an Order in the Auction on
such Auction Date shaU instruct its Agent Member as provided in peuagraph (b)(u)
or (iu) above, as the case may be;
(u) each SeUer's Broker-Dealer that is not an Agent Member of D.T.C. shaU
. instruct its Agent Member to (A) pay through D.T.C. to the Agent Member ofthe
Elxisting Holder defivering Bonds to such Broker-Dealer foUowing such Auction
pursuant to paragraph (b)(iu) above the eunount necesseiry to purchase such
Bonds against receipt of such Bonds, and (B) deUver such Bonds through D.T.C.
to a Buyer's Broker-Dealer (or its Agent Member) identified to such SeUer's
Broker-Dealer pursuant to paragraph (a)(v) above ageiinst payment therefor; and
(iu) each Buyer's Broker-Deeder that is not em Agent Member of D.T.C shedl
instruct its Agent Member to (A) pay through D.T.C. to a SeUer's Broker-Deeder (or
its Agent Member) identified foUowing such Auction pursuant to paragraph (a)(vi)
above the eimount necessaty to purchase the Bonds to be purchased pursuemt to
paragraph (b)(ii) above ageunst receipt of such Bonds, and (B) deliver such Bonds
through D.T.C. to the Agent Member of the purchaser thereof against payment
therefor.

 83284

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(e) On the Business Day foUowing each Auction Date:
(i) each Agent Member for a Bidder in the Auction on such Auction Date referred
to in paragraph (d)(i) above shaU instruct D.T.C. to execute the fransactions
described under paragraph (b)(ii) or (iii) above for such Auction, and D.T.C. shaU
execute such fransactions;
(u) each Seller's Broker-Dealer or its Agent Member shall instruct .D.T.C. to
execute thefremsactionsdescribed in paragraph (d)(u) above for such Auction, and
D.T.C shaU execute such fransactions;-and
(ui) each Buyer's Broker-Dealer or its Agent Member shaU instruct D.T.C. to
execute the transactions described in paragraph (d)(iu) above for such Auction,
and D.T.C. shaU execute such fransactions.
(f) If em Existing Holder selling Bonds in em Auction feiUs to defiver such Bonds (by
authorized book-entry), a Broker-Deeder may defiver to the Potential Holder on
behaff of which it submitted a Bid that was accepted a prindpal eimount of Bonds
that is less than the prindpal amount of Bonds that otherwise was to be purchased
by such Potential Holder. In such event, the principal eimount of Bonds to be
delivered shafi be determined solely by such Broker-Dealer. Defivety of such lesser
prindped eunount of Bonds sheiU constitute good defivery.
Notwithstanding the foregoing terms of this paragraph (f), any delivety or nondelivety of Bonds which shall represent emy departure from the results of em
Auction, as determined by the Auction Agent, shafi be of no effert unless emd.until
the Auction Agent shaU have been notified of such defiveiy or non-defiveiy in
accordemce with the pro-visions of the Auction Agreement and the Broker-Dealer
Agreements.

(Sub)Exhibit 'B".
(To Broker-Deeder Agreement)
City Of Chicago, Illinois
Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
.

Order Form.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83285

(Subnut Only One Order On This Order Form)
To:
Date of Auction:
The undersigned Broker-Dealer submits the foUowing Order on behaff of the
Bidder listed below: *
Name of Bidder:
Bidder placed the Order fisted below covering the prindpal amount indicated
(complete only one blemk):
$
principed amount now held by Bidder (an Elxisting Holder) and
the Order is a (check one):
•

Hold Order; or

•

Bid at a rate of

•

SeU Order;

%; or

— or —
$

principal amount not now held by Bidder (a Potentied Holder),

Name of Broker-Dealer:

By:

 83286

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Notes:
(1) If submitting more than one (1) Order for one (1) Bidder, use additional Order
Forms.
(2) If one (1) or more orders covering in the aggregate more than the outstanding
prindpal amount ofthe Bonds held by any Existing Holder eire subnutted, such
Orders shaU be considered vafid in the order of priority set forth in the Auction
Procedures.
(3) A Hold Order may be placed only by an Existing Holder covering a prindpal
amount of the Bonds not greater them the principal amount currentiy-held by
such Ebdsting Holder.
(4) Potential Holders may make Bids only, each of which must specify a rate, ff
more than one (1) Bid" is submitted on behaff of any Potential Holder, each Bid
submitted shedl be a separate Bid with the rate specified.
(5) Bids may contain no more them three (3)figuresto the right ofthe decimal point
(.001 of 1%).
(6) An Order must be submitted in whole units of Twenty-five Thousemd Dollars
($25,000).

(Sub)Exhibit "C".
(To Broker-Dealer Agreement)
City Of Chicago, Illinois

Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
.
Transfer Form.
(To Be Used Only for Transfers Made Other
Than Pursuant To An Auction)

 ^/1/2002

' REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83287

We eire (check one):
•

the Existing Holder named below; or

•

the Broker-Dealer for such Existing Holder; or

•

the Agent Member for such Existing Holder.

We hereby notify you that such Existing Holder has transferred
$

* of Bonds to _^

.

(Name of Ebdsting Holder)

(Ncime of Broker-Deeder)

• (Name of Agent Member)
By:

'.

:

Name:
Titie:

Bonds may only be transferred in units of Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000).

 83288

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(Sub)Exhibit 'D'.
(To Broker-Dealer Agreement)

City • Of Chicago, Illinois
$
Auction Rate Bonds,
• Series
.
Notice Of A Failure To Deliver.
(To Be Used Only For Feulures To Defiver
Bonds Sold F^ursuant To Aii Auction)
We hereby notify you that (check one):
Complete either I. or 11.
I. We are a Broker-Deeder for
.•
,
(the "Purchaser"),
which purchased $
of the Bonds** in the Auction held on
from the seUer of such Bonds, who feuled to defiver such Bonds to
the Purchaser.
II. We are a Broker-Dealer for
(the "SeUer"),
which sold $
to the purchaser of such Bonds, who failed to
make payment to the SeUer upon delivery of such Bonds.

I
By:.
Neime:
Titie:

Bonds may only be U-ansfcrrcd in units of Twenty-five Thousand DoUars ($25,000).

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83289

Exhibit "F".
(To Ordinance)
City Of Chicago
To
[Name Of Trustee],
As Trustee
Trust Indenture.
Securing
City of dhicago Variable Rate Bonds,
Series
.
Dated As Of

, 2002.

THIS TRUST INDENTURE, made and entered into as of
, 2002
(tills "Indenture"), from die CITY OF CHICAGO (die "City"), a municipal corporation and home
rule unit of local government duly organized and existing under the Constimtion and laws of the
State of Illinois, to [NAME OF TRUSTEE] (die "Trustee"), a national banking assodation duly
organized, existing and authorized to accept and execute trusts of the character herein set out
under and by virtue of the laws ofthe United States of America, with its principal corporate trust
office located at
,
,
'
, as Trustee,

 83290

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

WITNESSETH:

WHEREAS, by virme of Article Vn of die Ilfinois Constimuon of 1970 and
pursuant tO'an ordinance duly adopted by the City Coundl of the City on
, 2002, the
City is authorized to enter Into this Indenture and to do or cause to be done afi tbe acts and things
heiein provided or required to be done; and
'WHEREAS, the execution and delivety of this Indenture have been in all respects
duly and validly authorized by the City CouncU; and
'WHEREAS, in order to provide the fiinds for the puipose of (1) paying the costs
of certain capital projects of the City, and (U) paying the expenses of issuance of tl£ Bonds, the
Chy has duly authorized the issuance and sale of its 'Variable Rate Bonds, Series
(the
"Bonds"); and
WHEREAS, tbe execution and delivety of the Bonds and of this Indenture have in
aU respects been duly authorized and all things necessaty to make such Bonds, when executed by
the City and authendcated by the Trustee, tbe vafid and binding legal obligations of the City and
to make this Indenture a valid and binding agreement, have been done; and
WHEREAS, die Bonds, and die Trustee's Certfficate of Airthentication to be
endorsed on such Bonds, shall be substantiaUy in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A. with
necessaty and appropriate variations, omissions and insertions as permitted or requfred by this
Indenture;
NOW, THEREFORE, THIS TRUST INDENTURE WITNESSETH:
GRANTING CLAUSES
That the City, in consideration of the premises and the acceptance by die Trustee
of the trusts hereby created, and of the purchase and acceptance of the Bonds by the registered
owners thereof, and of the sum of one dollar, lawful money of the United States of America, to
it duly paid by the Trustee at or before the execution and delivety of these presents, and for other
good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83291

to secure the payment of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds according
to thefr tenor and effea, to secure therightsof the Bank (as hereinafter defmed) to the satisfaction
of the Bank Obligations (as hereinafter defined), and for payment ofthe purchase price of Bonds
as provided herein, and to secure tfie performance and observance by the City of aU the covenants
expressed or impfied herem. In the Bonds, in the Credit Agreement (as hereinafter defmed), does
hereby assign and grant a securify interest in and to the following to the Trustee, and its
successors in trust and assigns forever, for the securing ofthe performance of the obligations of
die City hereinafter set fortii (die "Trust Estate"):

GRANTING CLAUSE FIRST
AU moneys and securities from time to time held by the Tnistee under the terms
of this Indenture, except for moneys deposited with or paid to the Trustee and held in trust
hereunder for tbe redemption of Bonds, notice of the redenqition of which has been duly given;
and

GRANTING CLAUSE SECOND
Any and aU odier property,rightsand interests of evety kind and nature from time
to time hereafter by delivety or by writing of any kind granted, bargained, sold, alienated,
demised, released, conveyaJ, assigned, transferred, mortgaged, pledged, hypodiecated or
otherwise subjected hereto, as and for additional security hereunder by the City or by any other
person on its behalf or with its written consent to the Tnistee, and the Trustee is hereby authorized
to receive any and aU such property at any and all times and to hold and apply the same subject
to the terms hereof;
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD aU and singular die Trust Estate, wheUier now owned
or hereafter acqufred, unto the Tnistee and its successors In said trust and assigns forever;
IN TRUST, NEVERTHELESS, upon die terms and trusts herein set fordi for die
equal and proportionate benefit, security and protection of all present andfiitureregistered owners
of the Bonds and the Bank (to the extent of unsatisfied Bank Obligations), without privUege,
priority or distinction as to the lien or otherwise of any of the foregoing over any other of the
foregoing, except to the extent herein or in the Indenmre otherwise spedficaUy provided;
PROVIDED, HOWEVER, diat if die City, its successors or assigns shall well and
mily pay, or cause to be paid, the principal of, premium,ffany, and interest on the Bonds, and
shaU well and truly satisfy, or cause to be satisfied, the Bank Obligations, at the times and in the
manner set forth therein according to the true intent and meaning thereof, and shall cause the
payments to be made on the Bonds, the Bank Obligations asrequiredherein, or shall provide, as
permitted hereby, for the payment thereof, and shall well and truly cause to be kept, performed
and observed afi of its covenants and conditions pursuant to the terms of this Indenture and the
Credit Agreemeni and shall pay or cause lo be paid to the Tnistee and the Bank all sums of money

 83292

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

due or to become due to diem in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof and of the
Credit Agreement, dien upon the final payment thereof this Indenture and the rights hereby
granted shaU cease, determine and be void; otherwise this Indenture sbaU remain in fiiU force and
effea.
THIS INDENTURE FURTHER WITNESSETH, and it is e^qiressly declared, dial
all Bonds issued and secured hereunder are to be Issued, authenticated and delivered, and aU said
property,rightsand interests and any other amounts hereby assigned and pledged are to be dealt
with and disposed of, under, upon and subject to the terms, conditions, stipulations, covenants,
agreements, trusts, uses and purposes as herein expressed, and the City has agreed and
covenanted, and does hereby agree and covenant, with the Tnistee, therespectiveowners of the
Bonds and the Bank as foUow^:

ARTICLE I
Defmitions
Section 1.01. Definitions. AU capitalized terms used herein unless otherwise
defined shaU have the same meaning as used in Article I of tbe Indenture. In addition, the
foUowing words and phrases shaU have the foUowing meanings for purposes of this Indenture:
"Adjustable Long Mode" means any Adjustment Period during which the Rate
Determination Date and Rate Change Date for each Rate Period therein (which shaU have a
duration of 367 days or more and less than or equal to the remaining term of the Bonds) shall be
designated by the Remarketing Agent upon the request of the City pursuant to Section 4.01 hereof,
and during which the Bonds which bear Interest during such Adjustment Period bear interest at
tbe Adjustable Long Rate..
"Adjustable Long Rate" means, for each Rate Period within an Adjustable Long
Mode af^licable to a Bond, a fixed per annum Interest rate borne by such Bond established
pursuant to Section 2.02(e), 4.01(c) or 4.02(b) hereof equal to die lowest Interest rate which, in
the judgmem of the Remarketing Agent, would enable such Bond to be remarketed at the principal
amount thereof, plus accrued interest thereon, tf any, on the Rate Change Date for such Rate

Period.
"Adjustment Date" means (a) the Date of Issuance, (b) any date which is the first
day of an Adjustment Period designated in the maimer set forth in Section 4.01 hereof, (c) any
Substimte Adjustmem Date designated in the manner set forth in Section 4.02 hereof, and (d) any
proposed Fixed Rate Conversion Date designated in the manner set forth in Section 4.03 hereof.
"Adjustment Period" means, with respect to each Bond, each period commencing
on an Adjustment Date for such Bond to and including the day immediately preceding the
immediately succeeding Adjustment Date for such Bond (or the Maturity Date thereof), during
which period such Bond shall operate in one type of Interest Mode.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83293

"Alternate Bank Rate" means, with respea to any Bank Bond, such interest rate
or sequence of rates (which may be stated as a formula and may be determined by reference to
a specified index or mdices) as Is specffied in the Substitute Credit Agreemem or Substimte Letter
of Credit then in effect pursuant to which such Bank Bond was purchased, and which has been
approved In writing by the City in accordance with the Indenture.
.; "Authorized Denomination" means, prior to the Fixed Rate Conversion Date with
respect to a particular Bond. $100,000 and any multiple of $S,0(X) in excess thereof, and, after
the Fixed Rate Conversion Date with respea to a particular Bond, $5,000 and any integral
multiple diereof.
"Bank" means the Iiutial Bank for the period during which the initial Letter of
Credit and Initial Credit Agreement are In effea or any Bank Bonds .are outstanding, and
thereafter shafi mean the Substimte Bank then obligated under the Substitme Letter of Credit at
the time in effea.
. "Bank Approval" means the written approval of the Bank, which approval wifi not
be unreasonably withheld.
"Bank Bonds" means Tendered Bonds purchased with moneys drawn uiider the
Letter of Credit pursuant to Section 3.09(c) hereof, which are owned by tbe Bank or its permitted
assigns in accordance with the Credit Agreement or the Custody Agreement, ff any, untU such
Bonds ate rematioeted by the Remarketing Agent pursuant to the Remarketing Agreement or such
Bonds lose thefr characterization as Bank Bonds pursuant to the Credit Agreement.
"Bank Obligations" means the City's obligations under the Credit Agreement.
"Bank Rate" means (a) when die Initial Letter of Credit is in effea under the Initial
Credit Agreemem, the Bank Rate as defined in the Initial Credit Agreement, and (b) when any
Substitute Letter of Credit is in effect, the then current Alternate Bank Rate. The foregoing
notwithstanding, at no time sbaU tbe Bank Rate be higher than the Maximum Interest Rate.
"Bank Variable Rate" means such portion of the then appficable Bank Rate as is
determined by the Remarketing Agent to equal the rate of interest Bank Bonds bearing such Bank
Rate would have borne had they not been tendered and purchased by the Bank under the Credit
Agreement.
"BMA Municipal Index" means The Bond Market Association Municipal Swap
Index as of the most recent date for which such index was published or such other weekly, highgrade index comprised of seven-day. tax-exempt variable rate demand notes produced by
Municipal Market Data, Inc. or its successor, or as otherwise designated by Tbe Bond Market
Association; provided, however, that if such index is no longer produced by Municipal Market
Data, Inc. or its successor, then "BMA Municipal Index" means such other reasonably
comparable index selected by the City.

 83294

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Bondholder." "holder." "owner of the Bonds" or "repstered owner" means the
Registered Owner of any Bond.
"Bond Purchase Date" has the meaning assigned to such term in the Credit
Agreement.
"Bond Purchase Fund" means the trust fund so designated which Is created and
established pursuant to Section 5.02 hereof.
"Bond Register" means theregistrationbooks of die City kept by the Trustee (in
its capacity as Bond Registrar) to evidence theregistrationand transfer of Bonds.
"Bond Registrar" means the Trustee.
"Bonds" means the City of Ctucago Variable Rate Bonds, Series
to be issued pursuant to Section 2.01 hereof.
'
.

audiorized
.

"Bond Sale Date" has the meaning assigned to such term in the Credit Agreement:
"Business Day" means a day which Is not (a) a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday
on which banking instimtions in the State of Illinois, tbe State of New York or tbe state in which
the office of the Bank is located are authorized by law to close, or (b) a day on which the New
-York Stock Exchange is closed.
"Capitafized Interest Account" means the account of that name established in the
Proceeds Fund as described in Section 5.02 hereof.
"City" means the City of Chicago, a municipal corporation and home rule unit of
local government, organized and existing under the Constimtion and laws of the State.
"Code" means the United Stales Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
References to the Code and to Sections of the Code shall includerelevantfinal, temporaty or
proposedregulationsthereunder as in effectfromtinie totimeand as applicable to obfigations
issued on the Date of Issuance.
"Costs of Issuance Account" means the account of that name established in tbe
Proceeds Fund as described in Section 5.02 hereof.
"Credit Agreement" means the Initial Credit Agreemeni and any Substimte Credit
Agreement.
"Custody Apreement" means a custody agreement or a pledge and security
agreement (which may also be the Credit Agreement), if any, entered into by the Tmstee, as
custodian, and the Bank, and any and all amendments and supplements thereto, relating to Bank
Bonds.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83295

"DTC" means The Depositoty Trust Company, New York. New York, or its
nominee, and its successors and assigns, or any other depositoty performing simUar fimctions.
"Daily Mode" means any Adjustment Period during which Rate Determination
Dates and Rate Change Dates occur on each Business Day in the manner sa forth in
Section 2.02(b) hereof, and during which the Bonds which bear interest during such Adjustment
Period bear interest at the DaUy Rate.
"Daily Rate" means, for each Rate Period within a DaUy Mode applicable to a
Bond, a fixed per annum interest rate borne by such Bond established puisuant to Section 2.02(a),
2.02(b), 4.01(c) or 4.02(b) hereof equal to the lowest interest rate which, in die judgment of die
Remarketing Agent, would enable such Bond to be remarketed at the principal amount thereof,
plus accrued interest thereon. If any, on the Rate Change Date for such Rate Period.
"Date of Issuance" means the date of original issuance and delivety of the Bonds
hereunder.
"Debt Service Fund" means the fimd of that name established and described in
Section 5.02 hereof.
"Defaulted Interest" means Interest on any Bond which is payable but not duly paid
on tbe date due.
"Delivery Office" shafi mean the fofiowing offices ofthe Remarketiiig Agent and
the Trustee, respectively;
Remarketing Agent:'

•

Attention:
Trustee:

"Demand Date" means (i) with respea to any Bond during a DaUy Mode, the
Business Day on which the Trustee's Agent and the Remarketing Agent receive notice prior to
10:00 a.m., Chicago time,fromthe Registered Owner thereof demanding to have such Bond (or
any portion thereof in an Authorized Denomination) purchased (or the succeeding Business Day
if such notice is received after 10:00 a.m.. Chicago time), all as provided in Section 3.01 hereof,
and (ii) withrespectto any Bond during a Weekly Mode, the Business Day specified in the notice
received by the Trustee's Agent upon which the Registered Owner of such Bond intends to tender
such Bond (or any portion thereof in an Authorized Denomination) for purchase as provided in
Section 3.01 hereof, which Business Day shall be not less than seven calendar days after the date
such notice is received.

 83296

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Differential Interest Amount" means an amount equal to the excess of (a) interest
which has accmed and could actuaUy be paid on Bank Bonds at the Bank Rate up to but excluding
the Bond Sale Date, less (b) the Interest accrued on such Bank Bonds at the Bank Variable Rate
received by the Bank from the purchaser or purchasers of such Bank Bonds on the Bond Sale Date
as part of the purchase price thereof.
"Eligible Moneys" means (a) moneys (i) paid or deposited by the City to or widi
the Tnistee, (10 continuously held in anyfimd,account or subaccount established hereunder which
is subject to the fien of the Indenture and In which no . other moneys which are not Efigible
Moneys are held, and (lii).which have so been on deposit with the Trustee for at least 91 days
from diefr receipt by die Trustee, during and prior to which period no Event of Bankruptcy shall
have occurred, togedier with investment earnings on such montys; (b) moneys received by the
Tnistee pursuant to the Letter of Credit which are held in any fiind, account or subaccount
estabfished hereunder in which no other moneys which are not EUgible Moneys are held, together
with investment earnings on such moneys; (c) proceeds from theremarketingof any Bonds
pursuant to the provisions of the Indenture to any person other than the City; (d) proceeds from
the issuance and sale ofrefimdingbonds, together with the investment earnings on such proceeds,
if there is defivered to the Trustee at the time of issuance and sale .of suchrefundingbonds an
opinion of bankruptcy counsel acceptable to the Trustee and to each rating agency then
maintaining a rating on the Bonds bearing Interest at a Short Rate or an Adjustable Long Rate to
the effiea that the use of such proceeds and investment earnings to pay the princqial of, premium,
ff any, or interest on tbe Bonds would not be avoidable as preferential payments linder Section 547
(as incorporated into Chapter 9) of the United States Bankruptcy Code should an Event of
Bankmptcy occur; and (e) moneys which are derived from any other source, together with the
investment earnings on such moneys,ffthe Trustee has received an opinion of bankruptcy counsel.
acceptable to the Trustee and to each rating agency then maintaining a rating on the Bonds bearing
interest at a Short Rate or an Adjustable Long Rate to the effea diat paymem of such amounts to
Bondholders would not be avoidable as preferential payments under Section 547 (as incorporated
into Chapter 9) of the United States Bankruptcy Code should an Event of Bankruptcy occur;
provided, however, that (a) through (e) notwithstanding, such proceeds, moneys or income shall
not be deemed to be Eligible Moneys or avaUable for payment of the Bonds ff, among other
things, an injunction, restraining order or stay is in effect preventing such proceeds, moneys or
Incomefrombeing appfied to make such payment. For the purposes of this definition, the term
"moneys" shafi include cash and any investment securities, including, without limitation. Federal
Obligations.
"Event of Bankruptcy" means the filing of a petition in bankruptcy or the
commencement of a proceeding under the United States Bankruptcy Code or any other applicable
law concerning insolvency, reorganization or bankmptcy by or against the City as debtor, other
than any involimtaty proceeding that has been finafiy dismissed without entty of an order for relief
or simUar order and as to which afi appeal periods have expired.
"Fixed Mode" means the Adjustment Period commencing on the Fixed Rate
Conversion Dale for a Bond and ending on the Maturity Date diereof, as established pursuant to

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83297

Section 4.03 hereof, during which the Bonds which bear Interest during such Adjustment Period
bear interest at the Fixed Rate.
"Fixed Rate" means, for the Fixed Mode applicable to a Bond, afixedper annum
interest rate borne by such Bond established pursuant to Section 2.02(f) hereof equal to the lowest
interest rate which, in the judgment of the Remarketing Agent, would enable such Bond to be
remarketed at the prindpal amountfliereofon die Fuced Rate Conversion Date for such Fixed
Mode.
"Fixed Rate Conversion" mpant the conversion of the interest rate to be borne by
all or any portion of the Bonds to a Fixed Rate pursuant to Sections 2.02 and 4.03 hereof.
"Fixed Rate Conversion Date" means an Adjusnnent Date for any Bond on which
it begins to bear interest at a Fixed Rate.
"Flexible Mode" means any Adjustment Period during wldch the Rate
Detennlnation Date, and the Rate Change Date for each Rate Period therein (which shaU have a
duration which is not less -than seven days nor more than 270 days) shafi occur on the first day
of .such Rate Period which shall be designated by tbe Remarketing Agent pursuant to
Section 2.Q2(d), 4.01(c) or 4.02(b) hereof, and during which the Bonds which bear interest during
such Adjustment Period bear interest at the Flexible Rate.
"Flexible Rate" means, for each Rate Period widiln a Flexible Mode applicable to
a Bond, a fixed per annum interest rate home by such .Bond established pursuant to
Section 2.02(d). 4.01(c) or 4.02(b) hereof equal to the lowest interest rate which, in die judgment
of the Remarketing Agent, would enable such Bond to be remarketed at the principal amount
thereof on the Rate Change Date for such Rate Period.
" Indenture" means this Trust Indenture, dated as of
,
,fromthe
City to the Trustee, pursuant to which Bonds are authorized to be issued, and any amendments
and supplements thereto. References to Articles and Sections of the Indenture shafi be deemed
toreferto Articles and Sections of the Indenture as amended.
"Immediate Notice" means notice by telephone, telex or telecopier to such address
as the addressee shall have directed in writing, prompdy followed by written notice byfirstclass
maU. postage prepaid; provided, however, that if any person required to give an Immediate Notice
shaU not have been provided with the necessary Information as to the telephone, telex or telecopier
number of an addressee. Immediate Notice shaU mean written notice by first class maU, postage
prepaid.
"Initial Bank" means
assigns, as provider of the initial Letter of Credit.

•

____»

successors and

 83298

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

'Initial Credit Apreement" means the Reimbursement Agreement, dated as of
, 2002, among die City and the Initial Bank, as it may be supplemented and
amendedfromtime to time.
"Interest Coverage Rate" means the rate used in the Letter of Credit to calculate
the TnaTimnm amount (as reduced and restatedfromtime to time in accordaiice with the terms
thereof) which is available for the payment of die portion of the purchase price of Tendered Bonds
corresponding to interest accrued on the Tendered Bonds, InitiaUy
percent per annum for
Bonds in the DaUy Mode and the Weekly Mode entided to the benefit of die initial Letter of
CredlL
"Interest Mode" means a period of time relating to thefrequencywldi which the
interest rate on the Bonds is determined pursuant to Sections 2.01 and 2.02 hereof. An Interest
Mode may be a DaUy Mode, a Weekly Mode, a Flexible Mode, an Adjustable Long Mode or a
Fixed Mode.
"Interest Payment Date" means (a) for each Bond, each Adjustment Date
(including, without limitation, a proposed Fixed Rate Conversion Date) therefor, <b) for any Bond
in a DaUy Mode, thefirstBusiness Day of each calendar month, (c) for any Bond in the Weekly
Mode, the first Business Day of each calendar mondi. (d) for any Bond In an Adjustable Long
Mode, thefirstday of the sixth calendar month following, the month In which the applicable Rate
Period commences, the first day of each sixth mondi thereafter and each Rate Change Date
therefor, (e) for any Bond in a Flexible Mode, each Rate Change Date therefor, (0 for any Bond
. in a Fixed Mode, each Jammy 1 and July 1. commencing as provided in Seaion 4.03 hereof,
(g) for any Bank Bond, such dates as are spedfied in the Credit Agreement, and (h) for each
Bond, the Maturity Date thereof; provided that, except withrespeato Interest Paymem Dates
with respea to remarketed Bank Bonds under (g). in no event shafi more than one Interest
Payment Date for the Bonds occur in any one calendar month (and the City shall not undertake
any modification of any Interest Mode applicable to the Bonds which might cause such to result).
"Letter of Credit" means the obligation of the Bank to provide fiinds for die
purpose of purchasing Tendered Bonds, which Letter of Credit may be in the form of a line of
credit, bond purchase agreement or letter of credit.
"Letter of Credit Account" means the account of that name established in the Debt
Service Fund as described In Section 5.02 hereof.
"Lener of Credit Cancellation Date" has the meaning attributed to it in
Section 6.02(b) hereof.
"Mamrity Date" means January 1, 2017.
"Maximum Interest Rate" means [18] percent per annum.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83299

"Moody's" means Moody's Investors Service, Inc., a corporation organized and
existing under the laws of tbe State of Delaware, its successors and assigns, and, if such
coiporation sbaU be dissolved orfiquidatedor shall no longer perform the functions of a securities
rating agency, "Moody's" shafi be deemed toreferto any other nationaUy recognized securities
rating agency designated by the City by notice to the Trustee.
"Opinion of Bond Counsel" means a written opinion of Bond Counsel in form and
substance acceptable to the City, the Bank and the Trustee, which opinion may be based on a
ruling or rulings of the Internal Revenue Service.
"Ordinance" means the ordinance duly adopted and approval by the City CouncU
of the Cify on
, 2002 which authorizes the Issuance and sale of the Bonds aiid the
execution and defivety of this Indenture.
"Participant." when used withrespectto any Securities Depositoty, means any
participant of such Securities Depositoty.
"Paving Agent" means any Paying Agent designated by the Trustee pursuant to
Section 10.06 hereof, and any successor thereto.
"Principal and Interest Account" means the account of that name established in the
Debt Service Fund as described in Section 5.02 hereof.
"Principal and Interest Account Requirement" means (a) on the thfrd Business Day
immediately preceding each Interest Payment Date for as long as any Bonds bear interest at a Shon
Rate, an amount equal to (1) the interest coming due on such Bonds on such Interest Payment Date,
and to the extent there is a Rate Change Date between such thfrd Business Day and such Interest
Payment Date, such interest amount shafi indude interest on the Outstanding prindpal amount of
Bonds at tbe Interest Coverage Rate (if a Lener of Credit Is In effect) or the Maximum Interest Rate
(if there is no Letter of Credit in effect) for the number of daysfromsuch Rate Change Date to the
Interest Payment Date, plus (ii) on the third Business Day prior to each Januaty 1, commencing
Januaiy I,
, the principal installment coming due on such Bonds on each such January I
(including any mandatotyredemptionof the Bonds as required by Secdon 3.11 hereof), and (b)
during suchtimeas any Bonds bear interest at a Fixed Rate or Adjustable Long Rate, an amount,
equal to the total principal installment and interest due on such Bonds as of each Januaty 1 and July
1, which amount shall be deposited in the Principal and Interest Account three Business Days prior
to such Januaty 1 and July 1.
"Proceeds Fund" means the fund of that name established and described in Section
5.02 hereof.
"Project Account" means the account of that name established in the Proceeds Fund
as described in Seaion 5.02 hereof.

 83300

JOURNAI^-GITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Program Fep- Acrnnnt" means the account of that name established in the Proceeds
Fund as described in Section 5.02 hereof.
"Program Fees" means:

.-

.. .

(a)
the fees, expenses and other charges payable to eachfiduciaty,including
.the...Tnistee, the Trustee's Agent and any Paying Agent, pursuant to the provisions of this
Indenture;
(b)
the fees, expenses and other charges payable hereunder or under the
Remarketing Agreement to the Remarketing Agent;
(c)
the fees, expenses and other charges (constimting Bank Obligations) payable
hereunder or under the Ciedlt Agreement to the Bank; and
(D) ,any other fees, expenses and other charges of a simUar nature payable by
the City to any person hereunder or otherwise with respect to the Bonds.
"Rate Chanpe Date" means for each Rate Period (a) during any DaUy Mode, each
Business Day, (b) during any Weekly Mode, Wednesday or such odier day ofthe week designated
as such by the Remarketing Agent from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 2.02(c)0i) hereof, (c) during any Adjustable Long Mode, the Business Day(s) specified
In the notice defivered to the Trustee in accordance widi Section 4.01(b) or 4.02(b) hereof,
(d) during any Flexible Mode, the Business Day(s) specified in the notice delivered to the Trustee
in accordance wida Section 2.02(d), 4.01(c) or 4.02(b) hereof, and (e) each Adjustment Date.
"Rate Determination Date" means for (a)each Rate Period during any DaUy Mode,,
the Rate' Change Date for such Rate Period, (b) each Rate Period during any Weekly Mode,
Tuesday or such other day of tbe week designated as such by the Remarketing Agent from time
to time, in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.02(c)(ii) hereof, next precedmg the Rate
Change Date for such Rate Period (unless such day Is not a Business Day, in which case the Rate
Determination Date shall be the immediately preceding Business Day), (c) each Rate Period
during any Adjustable Long Mode, the Business Day(s) specffied in tbe notice ddlvered to the
Tnistee in accordance with Section 4.01(b) or Section 4.02(b) hereof, which Business Day(s) shaU
not be less than one calendar day or more than 30 calendar days prior to the first day of such Rate
Period, (d) each Rate Period during any Flexible Mode, the Rate Change Date for such Rate
Period spedfied in the notice deliveral to the Trustee in accordance widi Section 2.02(d),
4,01(c) or 4.02(b) hereof, (e) the Rate Period during a Fixed Mode, the date of the ffrm
ujiderwriting or purchase contractreferredto in Section 4.03 hereof, (0 the Rate Period foUowing
a proposed Fixed Rate Conversion Date in the event of a faded conversion, such proposed Fixed
Rate Conversion Date, and (g) the Rate Period foUowing a faUed Interest Mode conversion
pursuant to Section 4.01(e), the proposed Adjustment Date.
"Rate Period" means, withrespeato each Bond, each period commencing on a
Rate Change Date for such Bond to and including the day immediately preceding the immediately

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83301

succeeding Rate Change Date for such Bond (or the Maturity Date or date of redemption thereof),
during which period such Bond shaU bear interest at one specific interest rate.
"Record Date" means (a) with respea to any Bond during a DaUy Mode, the
Business Day immediately preceding each Interest Payment Date for such Bond, (b) with respea
to any Bond during a Flexible Mode or Weekly Mode, tbe Business Day immediately preceding
each Interest Payment Date for such Bond, (c) with respect to any Bond during an Adjusuble
Long Mode, the- fifteenth calendar day Immediately preceding each Interest Payment Date
(whether or not a Business Day) for such Bond, and (d) with respect to any Bond during a Fixed
Mode, December 15 and June 15 (whether or not a Business Day); provided, however, thattfthe
Fixed Rate Conversion Date shaU occur on or after December 15 but prior to Januaty 1, or on
or after June 15 but prior to July 1, the Record Date shaU be the Fixed Rate Conversion Date.
"Registered Owner" or "Owner" means the person or persons In whose name or
names a Bond shall beregisteredin the Bond Register.
"Remarketing A gent" means the placement orremarketiDgagent at the time serving
as such under the Remarketing Agreement and designated by the City as the Remarketing Agent
for purposes of the Indenmre. The initial Rcmafketlng Agent is
[
,
,
, and its successors and assigns in such capacity.
"Remarketing Agreement" means the Remarketing Agreement dated as of
, 2002 between the City and the Remarketing Agent, as the same may be amended,
supplemented or assigned from time to time, or any similar agreement as may be substituted
therefor.
"Securities Depositoty" means DTC and any other securities depositoty registered
as a clearing agency with tbe Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to Section 17A of
the Securities Exchange A n of 1934, as amended, and appointed as the securities depositoty for
the Bonds. .
.
'
"Short Mode" means a Flexible Mode, a.Daily Mode or a Weekly Mode.
• "Short Rate" means a Flexible Rate, a DaUy Rate or a Weekly Rate.
"Spedal Record Date" means the date fixed by the ."Trustee pursuant to
Seaion 2.02(g) hereof for the payment of Defaulted Interest.
"S&P" means Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, a division of McGraw-HUl,
Inc., its successors and assigns, and. if S&P shall be dissolved orfiquidatedor shafi no longer
perform the fimctions of a securities rating agency. "S&P" shall be deemed to refer to any other
nationally recognized securities rating agency designated by the City by notice to the Tmstee.
"State" means the Stale of Ulinois.

 83302

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Stated Termination Date" means the stated date upon which the Lener of Credit
by its term expires, as the same may be extendedfix>mtime to time and, with respea to the Initial
Letter of Credit means the Expiration Date as defined therein.
"Substimte Adjustment Date" means.(1) any Business Day duriiig any Adjusttnent
Period for Bank Bonds, and (uj any Business Day for any Bonds In an Adjustable Long Mode on
which such Bonds can be optionaUy redeemed at a price of par plus accrued interest as set forth
In Section 3.11(a)(u) hereof, in each case designated by the City in accordance with Section 4.02
hereof as the first day of a new Adjustment Period.
"Substitute Bank" means one or more commercial banks, trust companies or
financial instimtions selected by the City that are obfigated under any Substimte Letter of Credit.
"Substimte Credit Agreement" means any agreement (other than the Initial Credit
Agreement) between the City and any Substimte Bank as it mayfromtime to time be aip^nHprt
or supplemented, pursuant to which a Substimte Letter of Credit shafi be in effect.
"Substimte Letter of Credit" means a Letter of Credit provided by a Substimte
Bank other than the Bank providing the Letter of Credit on or'prior to the Substimtion Date;
provided, however, that none of the following shafi be deemed a Substimte Letter of Credk: a
change in the Credit Agreement pursuant to which the Letter of Credit is Issued; ai change in the
number of days of interest or Interest rate covered by the Letter of Credit; and a renewal ofthe
term of the existing Letter of Credit.
"Substimtion Date" means the day on which a Substitute Letter of Credit becomes
effective.
"Tendered Bonds" means Bonds tendered or deemed tendered for purchase
pursuant to Section 3.01, 3.02, 3.03, 3.04, 3.05 or 3.06 hereof.
"Trust Estate" means die property conveyed to the Trustee pursuant to the Granting
Clauses hereof
"Trustee" means [Name ofTrustee], a national banking association organized and
existing under the laws ofthe United States of America, and its successors and any entity resulting
ftom or surviving any consofidation or merger to which it or its successors may be a party, and
any successor Trustee at the time serving as successor trustee hereunder.
"Tmstee's Agent" means any agent designated as Trustee's Agent by the Tnistee
and at the time serving in that capacity. Any agent so designated by the Trustee shall execute a
written agreement with the Trustee assuming aU obligations of the Trustee hereunder with respect
to those duties of the Tnistee such agent agrees to perform on behalf of the Tmstee.
"Weekly Mode" means an Interest Mode during which the rate of interest home
by the Bonds is determined on a weekly basis as set forth in Section 2.02(c) hereof

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83303

"Weekly Rate" means, for each Rate Period during any Weekly Mode, die rate of
interest established pursuant to Section 2.02(c) hereof equal to the lowest interest rate which, in
the judgment of the Remarketing Agent, would enable such Bond to beremarketedat the principal
amount thereof, plus accrued interest diereon, ff any, on. die Rate Change Date for such Rate
Period.

ARTICLE n
The Bonds
Section 2.01. Authority for and Issuance of Bonds, (a) No Bonds may be issued
under the provisions of this Indenture except in accordance with this Article. The Bonds are being
issued to provide funds to provide interimfinancingfor capital projects of the City, for the short
term financing of the working capital needs of the City, and to pay Costs of Issuance of the
Bonds. Except as provided in Section 2.07 hereof, the total principal amount of Bonds Uiat may
be issued and be outstanding hereunder is expressly linuted to $200,000,000 less the prindpal
amount of other Authorized Debt (as defined in the Ordinance) then issued and outstanding under
the Ordinance.
(b) • The Bonds shafi be designated "City of Chicago Variable Rate Bonds, Series
." The Bonds shall be issuable as fiillyregisteredbonds, without coupons, in Authorized
Denomination, substantially in die form attached as Exhibit A hereto. Unless die City shall
otherwise direct, the Bonds shall be.lettered and numbered from R-1 and upwards. The Bonds,
as initially issued, shall be dated the Date of Issuance and shall mamre, subject to prior
redemption as provided in Article Iff hereof and further subject to the designation of additional
maturity dates in coimection with a Fixed Rate Conversion Date, on the Maturity Date.
(c)
Each Bond audienticated prior to the first Interest Payment Date diereon
shall bear Interest from the Date of Issuance and thereafter interest shall accme as set forth in the
next paragraph except that if, as shown by the records of the Trustee, interest on such Bond shall
be in default, any Bond issued in exchange for or upon theregistrationof transfer of such Bond
shall bear interest from tbe date to which interest has been paid in fiill on such Bond or, if no
iriterest has been paid on such Bond, the Date of Issuance. Each Bond shall bear interest on
overdue principal and, to the extent pennitted by law, on overdue premium, if any. and interest
at the rate borne by such Bond on the date on which such principal, premium or interest came due
and payable.
(d)

Interest on Bonds in a Daily Mode or Weekly Mode shall be payable on

each Interest Payment Date for the period from the later of (i) the first Business Day of each

calendar month, or (ii) die Adjustment Date for such Daily Mode or Weekly Mode to. but not
including, the earlier of (a) the first Business Day of the next calendar month, or (b) the
Adjustment Date for the Interest Mode which succeeds such Daily Mode or Weekly Mode, as the
case may be. Interest on Bonds in a Flexible Mode shall be payable on each Interest Payment
Date for the period from the Rate Change Date for such Bonds to, but not including, the next

 83304

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

succeeding Rate Change Date. Interest on Bonds in an Adjustable Long Mode shaU be payable
on each Interest Payment Date for the period to, but not including, such Interest Payment Date
from the later of (1) the Rate Change Date for such Bonds, or (ii) the preceding Interest Payment
Date occurring during the Rate Period to which Interest has been paid. Interest on Bonds which
are Bank Bonds shaU be payable on each Interest Payment Date for the period to, but not
including, such Interest Payment Date from the preceding Interest Payment Date to which interest
has been paid. Interest on Bonds in a Fixed Mode shall be payable on each Interest Payment Date
for die periodfromthe Fixed Rate Conversion Date to, but not including, the next succeeding
Januaty 1 or July 1, andfromeach succeeding Januaty 1 or July 1, as the case may be, to, bm
not induding, the next succeeding Januaty 1 or July 1. The foregoing notwithstanding, no interest
sbaU accrue on any Bonds prior to the £^te of Issuance or after the Maturity Date thereof, after
the redemption or mandatoty or optional purchase date for such Bond (provided the redemption
or purchase price is paid or provided for in accordance with the provisions of the Indenture), or
after die date to which such Bond is accelerated and paid.
(e)
The prindpal and purchase price of, premium, ff any, and interest on tbe
Bonds shafi be payable in any coin or currency of the United States of America which, at the
respeaive dates of payment thereof, is legal tender for the payment of pubfic and private debts.
(f)
Tbe principal of and premium, ff any, on Bonds bearing interest at a Bank
Rate, a Short Rate or an Adjustable Long. Rate shafi be payable at the principal corporate trust
office of the Tnistee, upon presentation and surrender of such Bonds. The prindpal of and
premhim, ff any. on Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate shaU be payable at the principal
corporate, trust office of the Trustee or, at the option of the Registered Owners, at the princqial
corporate trust ofifice of any. Paying Agent named in such Bonds, upon presentation and surrender
of such Bonds. Any payment of the purchase price of a Tendered Bond shaU be payable at the
prindpal corporate trust office of the Trustee's Agent (or at such other office as may be
designated by the Tnistee), upon presentation and surrender of such Tendered Bond, as provided
in Section 3.07 hereof.
(g)
Payinent of interest on Bonds bearing Interest at a DaUy Rate, a Weekly
Rate, an Adjustable Long Rate or a Fixed Rate shaU be paid by check maUed on the Interest
Payment Date to the person appearing on the Bond Register as the Registered Owners thereof as
of the dose of business of the Trustee on the Record Date at the addresses of such Registered
Owners as they appear on the Bond Register, or at such other addresses as arefiimishedto the
Tnistee in writing by the Registered Owners not later than the Record Date. Payment of interest
on Bonds bearing interest at a Flexible Rate shall be made to the person appearing on the Bond
Register as the Registered Owner thereof as of the close of busioess ofthe Trustee on the Record
Date, upon presentation and surrender of such Bond at the principal corporate trust office of the
Trustee on the appficable Interest Payment Date. Payment of interest on any Bond shall be made
to the Registered Owner of $1,000,000 or more in aggregate principal amountof Bonds as ofthe
close of business ofthe Trustee on the Record Date for a particular Interest Payment Date by wire
transfer to such Registered Owner on such Interest Payment Date upon written noticefromsuch
Registered Owner containing the wfre transfer address within the United States to which such
Registered Owner wishes to have such' wire directed, which written notice is received not later

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83305

than the Business Day next preceding the Record Date; provided that such wire transfer shafi only
be made for Bonds bearing interest at a Flexible Rate upon presentation and surrender of such
Bonds at the principal corporate trust office of the Trustee on the applicable Interest Payinent
Date. Payment of interest on.Bank Bonds shafi be made to die Bank by wfre transfer on each
Interest Payment Date at the wire transfer address, specified in the Credit Agreement (or such
other wire transfer addiess as is specified by the Bank in writingfromtime to time).
Section 2.02. Interest on Bonds, fa) General. The Bonds shall bear interest from
and including tbe Date of Issuance untU payment of the principal or redenqition price thereof shafi
have been made or provided for In accoidance with the provisions hereof, whether at the Maturity
Date, upoii redemption or acceleration, or otherwise. Interest accrued on the Bonds during each
Rate Period shaU be paid in arrears on each Interest Payment Date. Interest on the Bonds shaU
be computed (i) during any Short Mode upon the basis of a 365- or 366-day year, as applicable,
for the number of days actuaUy elapsed, (u) during any Adjustable Long Mode.or during a Fixed
Mode, upon the basis of a 360-day year consistiiig of tweive.30-day xnontbs, and (iu) with respea
to Bank Bonds, upon the basis of a 360-day year and the actual number of days elapsed.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herem, the Bonds shall Inltialiy bear interest for the
period from the Closing Date to the next Business Day at the interest rate per annum of fbur
perceni (the "Initial Rate"). Tbe Bonds shall continue to bear interest at a B^ufy Rate untU and
unless any portion thereof is converted to a different Interest Mode as provided in Section 4.01,
4.02 or 4.03 hereof. Each Bank Bond shaU bear interest at the Bank Rate. At no time shaU the
Bonds (including Bank Bonds) bear Interest at a rate higher than the Maximum'Interest Rate and
at no time shaU Bonds entided to tbe benefit of the Letter of Credit bear interest at a rate higher
than die Interest Coverage Rate. No Rate Period sbaU be established during an Adjustable Long
Mode or a Flexible Mode .which extends beyond the' Business Day preceding the Stated
Termination Date.
(b)
Daily Mode. For each Rate Period during any DaUy Mode, Bonds in such
Interest Mode shall bear interest beginning on the Rate Change Date at the DaUy Rate determined
on the Rate Determination Date in the foUowing manner for each such Rate Period. No later than
8:30 a.m., Chicago time, on the Rate Determination Date for each such Rate Period, the
Remarketing Agent wUl determine, and is required to give telephonic notice (confirmed by
telecopy) to the Trustee of, the Daily Rate. Except on an Adjustment Date, in the event that the
DaUy Rate is not determined by the Remarketing Agent, the rate of interest home by the Bonds
bearing interest at a DaUy Rate shall be equal to the BMA Municipal Index until the Remarketing
Agem next detemunes the DaUy Rate as required hereunder.
(c)

Weekly. Mode.

(i)

For each Rate Period during any Weekly Mode. Bonds in such Interest

Mode shaU bear interest beginning on the Rate Change Date at the Weekly Rate
determined on the Rate Determination Date in the following manner for each such Rate
Period. No later than 3:00 p.m., Chicago time, on the Rate Determination Date for each
such Rate Period, the Remarketing Agent will determine the Weekly Rate and will give
telephonic notice (confiimed by telecopy) to the Trustee of the Weekly Rale by 1:00 p.m.,

 83306

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Chicago time, on the foUowing Rale Change Date. Except on an Adjustment Date, m the
event that die Weekly Rate is not determined by the Remarketing Agent on a Rate
Detennlnation Date, the rate of mterest borne by the Bonds bearing interest at a Weekly
Rate sbaU be equal to the BMA Municipal Index untU the Remarketing Agent next
determines the Weekly Rate as required hereunder.
(u) ff at any time the Remarketing Agent shaU determine that, in its judgment,
tbe scheduled Rate Determination Dates or Rale Change Dates during a Weekly Mode
have become Inappropriate (taking into account general market practice withrespectto
periodic adjustment of rates on instnunents comparable to the Bonds bearing Interest at the
Weekly Rate, whether based upon the time of compUation or reporting of any interest rate
or financial index or indicator or otherwise), the Remarketing Agent may. after
consultation with the City, designate new scheduled Rate Determination Dates and/or Rate
Change Dates, to remain in effect untU another, redetermination of scheduled Rate
Determination Dates or Rate Change Dates in accordance with this subparagraph. The
Remariceting Agent shaU give written notice of any change in scheduled Rate
Detennimtion Dates andJor Rate Change Dates during a Weekly Mode to the City, die
Tnistee, the Trustee's Agent and the Bank, and such change shall become effective on the
first scheduled Rate Determination Date or Rate Change Date, as the case may be. so
designated occurring not less than 14 days following the giving of such notice. Promptiy
upon receipt of such notice, the Trustee shaU notify or cause the Remarketing Agent to
notify each affected Bondholder of such change in writing.
(d)

Flexible Mode.

(1)
For each Rate Period during any Flexible Mode, each Bond which wiU bear
interest at a Flexible Rate for such Rate Period shaU bear interest beginning on the Rate
Change Date at the Flexible Rate detenmned on the Rate Determination Date m die
foUowing manner for each such Rate Period. No later than 11:00 a.m., Chicago time, on
the Rale Drtermination Date for a Bond bearing mterest at the Flexible Rate, the
Remariaeting Agent wiU determine, and is required to give telephonic notice (confirmed
by telecopy) to die Trustee of, (a) the duration of the Rate Period for such Bond by
spedfying the succeeding Rate Change Date (which shaU also be the succeeding Rate
Determination Date) for such Bond which Rate Change Date shaU be no later than die
Business Day prior to the Stoted Termuiation Date, if a Letter of Credit is requfred to be
in place, and (b) the Flexible Rate applicable to such Bonds bearing interest at the Flexible
Rate during such Rate Period. The last day of such Rate Period must be a Business Day
and the day next succeeding such Business Day must also be a Business Day. Except on
an Adjustment Date, in the event that the Flexible Rate for any Bond is not determined by
ihe Remarketing Agent on any Rntc Determination Date, such Bond shall bear interest at

a Flexible Rate equal to the BMA Municipal Index for a Rate Period of the shortest
possible duration until the Remarketing Agent next determines the Flexible Rate, as
required hereunder.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83307

(u)
The Remarketing Agent shaU determine die duration of Rate Periods during
a Flexible Mode as wUl, in the judgment of the Remarketing Agent, result in the lowest
aggregate cost being payable by the City with respea to the Bonds bearing interest at
Flexible Rates, taking into account Interest and any other deteiminable fees and expenses.
The Remarketing Agent may establish different Rale Periods on the same Rate Change
Date for Bonds in the Flexible Mode in order to achieve an average duration of Rate
Periods, that, in the judgment of the Remarketing Agent, is mostfikelyto achieve die
lowest total aggregate cost being payable by the City with respea to such Bonds, taking
into account Interest and any other determinable fees and expenses. The Remarketmg
Agent's determination shaU be based upon the market for, and tberelativeyields of, die
Bonds and other securities that bear interest at a variablerateor atfixedratesthat, in the
judgment of the Remarketing Agent, are otherwise con^arable to the Bonds, or any faa
or circumstancerelatingto the Bonds, affecting the market for the Bonds or affecting such
other comparable securities in a manner that. In the judgment of the Remarketing Agent,
wUI affea the market for the Bonds. The Remarketing Agem's determination shaU be
conduslve and binding upon afi parties. Except on an Adjustment Date, in the event that
tbe Rate Period for any Bond in a Flexible Mode is not determined by die Remarketing
Agem as provided in this clauise, the Rate Period for such Bond sbaU be a Rate Period of
the shortest possible duration.
(e)

Adjustable Long Mode.

(1)
For each Rate Period during any Adjustable Long Mode each Bond which
wUl bear interest at an Adjustable Long Rate for such Rate Period shall bear interest
beginiung on the Rate Change Date at the Adjustable Long Rate determined on the Rate
Determination Date in the following manner for such Rate Period.. - No later than 11:00
a.m., Chicago time, on the Rate Determination Date for each Rate Period during an
Adjustable Long Mode applicable to a specific Bond, the Remarketing Agent wifi
determine a fixed per annum Interestrateto be borne by such Bond for such Rate Period
and is requfred to give telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the Trustee of the
Adjustable Long Rate. In the event that the Adjustable Long Rate for any Bond Is not
determined by the Remarketing Agent for the imtial Rate Period, tberateof interest borne
by such Bonds shall be determined pursuant to Section 4.01(e) hereof. Except on an
Adjustmem Date, ff the Remarketing Agent shaU faH to determine an Adjustable Long
Rate on a Rate Determination Date for a Rate Period within an Adjustable Long Mode,
the Bonds sbaU automaticaUy convert to a Rate Period of 367 days and shaU bear interest
at an Adjustable Long Rate equal to the Bond Buyer One-Year Note Index as most recently
pubfished in The Bond Buyer prior to the Adjustment E)aie.
(ii)

The Remarketing Agent, upon the request of the City, shall determine the

duration of Rate Periods during an Adjustable Long Mode as wiU, in the judgment of the
Remarketing Agent, result in the lowest aggregate cost being payable by the City with
respect to the Bonds bearing interest at Adjustable Long Rates, taking into account interest
and any other determinable fees and expenses. The Remarketing Agent may esublish
different Rale Periods on the same Rale Change Date for Bonds in an Adjustable Long

 83308

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Mode in order to achieve an average duration of Rate Periods that, in the judgment of the
Remarketing Agent, is most likely to achieve the lowest total aggregate cost being payable
by the City with respect to such Bonds,, taking into account interest and any other
determinable fees and expenses. The Remarketing Agent's detennlnation wiU be based
upon the market for ami the relative yields of the Bonds and other securities that bear
interest at a variablerateor atfixedratesthat, in tbe judgment of the Remarketiing Agent,
are odierwise comparable to the Bonds, or any faa or circtanstancerelatingto the Bonds,
affecting the market for tbe Bonds or affecting such other comparable securities in a
manner that, in the judgment of the Remarketing Agent, wUl affea the market for the
Bonds. Tbe Remarketing Agent's determination wfll be conclusive and binding upon all
parties. Except on an Adjustment Date, in the event that die Rate Period for any Bond in
an Adjustable Long Mode Is not determined by the Remarketing Agent as provided in this
clause (11), the Rate Period for such Bond wUl be a 367-day Rate Period.
(f)
Fixed Rate. From and after the Fixed Rate Conversion Date for a Bond,
such Bond sbaU bear interest at tbe Fixed Rate with respea diereto established as provided In
Section 4.03 hereof.
(g)
Defaulted Interest. Defaulted Interest with respea to any Bond shall cease
to be payable to the Registered Owner of such BOIKI on therelevantRecord Date, and shaU be
payable to the Registered Owner in whose name such Bond isregisteredat the close of business
of the Trustee on the Special Record Date for the payment of such Defaulted Interest, which shaU
befixed,in the foUowing manner. The City shaU notify the Trustee in writing of the amount of
Defaulted Interest proposed to be paid on each Bond and the date of the proposed payment (which
date shall be such as wUl enable tbe Trustee to conqily with the next sentence hereof), and at the
same time the City shall deposit with the Trustee an amount of money equal to the aggregate
ainount proposed to be paid in respea of such Defaulted Interest or shall make arrangements
satisfactoty to the Tnistee for such deposit prior to the date of the proposed payment, such money
when deposited to be held in trust for the benefit of the Bondholders entided to such Defaulted
Interest as provided in this Section. FoUowing receipt of such fiinds. the Trustee shaU fix a
Special Record Date for the payment of such Defaulted Interest which shaU be not more than 15
nor less than ten days prior to the date of the proposed payment and not less than ten days after
the receipt by tbe Trustee of the notice of the proposed payment. The Trustee" shaU prompdy
notify the City of such Special Record Date and. In the name and at the expense ofthe City shafi
cause notice of the proposed payment of such Defaulted Interest and the Special Record Date
therefor to be maUed. first class postage prepaid, to each Registered Owner of a Bond al the
address of such Registered Owner as it appears on tbe Bond Register not less than ten days prior
to such Special Record Date. Such Defaulted Interest shafi be paid to the Registered Owners in
whose names the Bonds on which such Defaulted Interest is to be paid areregisteredon such
•Special Record Date.
(h)
Information for Bondholders. The Trustee agrees to provide to any
Bondholder, upon the written request of such Bondholder, information regarding the Adjustment
Periods, Rale Periods, Interest Payment Dates, optional redemption provisions and interest rate
or rates applicable to such Bondholder's Bonds.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83309

(1)
Notices to City. The Remarketing Agent agrees to provide to the City
notice of afi determinations made by the Remarketing Agent pursuant to the Indenture, including,
but not liinited to, interest rate determinations and duration of Rate Periods, on a timdy basis.
(j)
Alternate Bank Rate. No Alternate Bank RateshaU become effective unless
the Trustee has received an Opinion of Bond Counsel, in form and substance satisfactoty to them,
to the effect that the change to such Alternate Bank Rate wlU not adversely affect the exclusion
from gross income, for Federal income tax purposes, of interest oh the Bonds (other than Bank
Bonds) and wiU not adversefy affect the vafidity of such Bonds.
Section 2.03. Execution; limited Tax Obligations. The Bonds shaU be executed
on behaff of the City widi the official manual or facsimUe signature of the Mayor of the City and
attested with the official manual or facsimUe signature of its City Clerk, and shaU have affixed.
Impressed, Imprinted or otherwise reproduced thereon the corporate seal ofthe City or a facsnnUe
thereof. The Bonds are issued pursuam to and in fiiU con^liance with the Constimtion and laws
of the State, and pursuant to the Ordinance. Tbe Bonds are direct and general obligations of the
City, payable from moneys provided under the Letter of Credit, from moneys attributable to the
proceeds derived from tbe sale of the Bonds or to Income from the temporaty investment thereof
and from any fiinds ofthe City legaUy avaUable for the purpose of paying prindpal, redemption,
premium, tf any, and interest on the Bonds, which amounts are hereby held as security for the
equal andratablepayinent of tbe Bonds; provided, however, that In no event shaU the City be
obligated to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax, in addition to other City taxes, or any
special ad valorem or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to pay principal. Interest or
redenqition premium on the Bonds. In case any officer whose signature, or a facsimUe of whose
signature shaU !^>pear on the Bonds shall cease to be such officer before the defivety of such
Bonds, such signature or such facsimUe shaU nevertheless be valid and sufficient for aU purposes,
as if he or she had remained in office until delivety.
Section 2.04. Authentication. No Bond shall be valid or obligatoty for any
purpose or be entided to any security or benefit under this Indenture unless and until such
certificate-of authentication In substantiaUy the form attached hereto as pan of Exhibit A shaU
have been duly executed by the Trustee, and such executed certificate of the Trustee, upon any
such Bond shaU be conclusive evidence that such Bond has been authenticated and defivered under
this Indenture. The Trustee's certificate of authentication on any Bond shaU be deemed to have
been executed by it ff (a) signed by an authorized signatoty of the Tnistee. but it shaU not be
necessary that the same signatoty sign the certificates of authentication on aU of the Bonds issued
hereunder, and (b) the date of authentication on the Bond is inserted in the place provided therefor
in the certificate of authentication.
Section 2.05. Form of Bonds; Temporary Bonds. Tl»c Bonds issued uiidcr this

Indenture shall be substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A. with such appropriate
variations, omissions and insertions as are permitted or required by this Indenture.
Pending preparation of defuiitive Bonds, or by agreement with the purchasers of
the Bonds, the City may issue and, upon its request, the Tmstee shall authenticate, in lieu of

 83310

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

definitive Bonds, one or more temporaty printed or typewritten Bonds in Authorized
Denominations of substantiaUy the tenor recited above. Upon request of the City, the Trustee
shaU authenticate defmitive Bonds in exchange for and upon surrender of an equal principal
amount of temporaty Bonds. UntU so exchanged, temporaty Bonds shaU have the same rights,
remedies and security hereunder as definitive Bonds.
Section 2.06.. Delivery of Bonds. Upon the execution and delivety of this
Indenture, the City shaU execute and deUver to the Tnistee, and the Tnistee shallauthenticate, die
Bonds and deliver them to the purchasers as may be directed by the City as hereinafter in this
Section provided.
Prior to the defivety by the Tnistee of any of tbe Bonds there shall befiledwith
the Trustee:
(1)

a copy, duly certified by the City Clerk of the City, of the Ordinance; -

(2)
original executed counterparts of this Indenture, the Initial Credit
Agreement, the initial Letter of Credit and the Remarketing Agreement;
(3)
an opinion of legal counsel to the effea that (i) the City had therightand
power to adopt the Ordinance; (u) the Ordinance has been duly and lawfiiUy adopted by
the City CouncU, is in fiiU force and effea and is vafid and binding upon the City and
enforceable in accordance with- its terms; (iii) this Indenture, and the Initial Credit
Agreement have been duty and lawftiUy authorized by afi necessaty action on the pan of
the City, have been duly and lawfiiUy executed by authorized officers of the City, are m
ftdl force and effea and are vafid and binding upon the City and enforceable in accordance
with thefr terms; and (Iv) upon the execution, authentication and delivety thereof, the
Bonds wiU have been duly and vafidly authorized and issued in accordance with the
Constimtion and laws of the State and this Indenture; and
(4)
a written order as to the delivety of .the Bonds, signed by an Authorized
Officer and stating (1) the Identity of the purchasers, the aggregate purchase price and the
date and place of defivety, and (u) that no Event of Default has occurred and is continuing
under this Indenmre. .
Section 2.07. MutUated, Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Bonds. In the event any
Bond is mutUated, lost, stolen or destroyed, the City may execute and the Tnistee may
authenticate a new Bond of like date, maturity, interest rate and denomination as the Bond
mutUated, lost, stolen or destroyed; provided that, in the case of any mutUated Bond, such
mutilated Bond shall first be surrendered to the Trustee, and in the case of any lost, stolen or.

destroyed Bond, there shall be first furnished to the City and the Tnistee evidence of such loss,
theft or destruction satisfactoty to the City and the Trustee, together with indemnity satisfactoty
to them. In the event any such Bond shall have matured, instead of issuing a substimte Bond the
City may pay the same without surrender thereof. The City and the Tnistee may charge the
Registered Owner of such Bond with thefr reasonable fees and expenses in this coimection. All

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83311

Bonds so surrendered to.the Tnistee shall be canceUed and destroyed, and evidence of such
destruction shaU be given to the City. Upon the date offinalmaturity or reden^jtion of aU of the
Bonds, the Trustee shaU desfroy any inventoty of unissued certificates.
AU duplicate Bonds issued and audienticated pursuant lo dus Section shafi constitute
original, contractual obUgations of the City (whether or not, in the case of the first paragraph of
this Section, lost, stolen or destroyed Bonds be at any dime found by anyone), and shaU be entided
to equal and proportionaterightsand benefits hereunder as aU other outstanding Bonds issued
hereunder.
All Bonds shall be owned upon the express condition that the foregoing provisions,
to the extent pennitted by law. are exclusive with respect to the replacement or payment of
mutilated, desfroyed, lost, stolen or purchased Bonds, and shall preclude any and aU other rights
or remedies.
Section 2.08. IVansfer and Exchange of Bonds; Peirsons Treated as Owners,
(a) Subject to the limitations contained in subsection'(c) of diis Section, upon surrender for
registration of transfer of any Bond at the principal corporate trust office of the Trustee, duly
endorsed by, or acconqiaiiied by a written instrument or instruments of transfer in form
satisfactoty to the Tnistee and duly executed by the Bondholder or such Bondholder's attorney
duly authorized in writing, the City shall execute, and tbe Trustee shall authenticate and deliver,
in the name of the transferee or transferees a new Bond or Bonds of fike date and tenor in
Authorized Denominations of the same Maturity Date for the aggregate principal ainount which
the Registered Owner is entitiedroreceive bearing numbers not contenqioraneously Outstanding.
Subject to die liihitations contained in subsection (c) of this Section, Bonds may be exchanged at
such times at such principal corporate trust office of the Trustee upon surrender thereof together
widi an assignment duly executed by the Registered Owner thereof or such Registered Owner's
attorney in such form and with guarantee of signature as shaU be satisfaaoty to the Tnistee for
an equal aggregate principal amoimt of Bonds of like date' and tenor of any Authorized
Denomination as the Bonds sunendered for exchange bearing numbers not contemporaneously
Outstanding. The execution by the City of any Bond of any Authorized Denomination shaU
constimte fiill and due authorization of such Authorized Denondnation, and the Trustee shaU
thereby be authorized to authenticate and defiver suchregisteredBond.
(b)
No service charge shall be imposed upon the Registered Owners for any
exchange or transfer of Bonds. The City and the Trustee may, however, require payment by the
person requesting an exchange or transfer of Bonds of a sum sufficient to cover any tax. fee or
other governmental charge that may be imposed inrelationthereto, cxc:ept in the case of die
issuance of a Bond or Bonds for the unredeemed portion of a Bond sunendered for redemption
in part.

(c)
Subsequent to the Fixed Rate Conversion Date for any Bond, the Trustee
shafi not be required to transfer or exchange such Bond during the period commencing on the
Record Date next preceding any Interest Payment Date of such Bond and ending on such Interest
Payment Date, or to transfer or exchange such Bond after the mailing of notice caUuig such Bond

 83312

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

for redemption has been made as herein provided or during the period of 15 days next preceding
the giving of notice of redemption of Bonds of the same Maturity Date and interestratewhich
were converted on tbe same date. Prior to the Fixed Rate Conversion Date applicable to any
Bonds, the Trustee shall not be required to exchange orregisterthe transfer of such Bond after
the maUing of notice calling such Boul for redemption has been made as hdein provided, except
that the City and the Tnistee shaU be required to issue or register the transfer of Tendered Bonds
after such date of mailing of notice of redemption.
(d)
Bonds delivered upon anyregistrationof transfer or exchange as provided
herein or . as provided in Section 2.07 hereof shafi be vafid limited obUgations of the City,
evidencing the same debt as the Bonds sunendered, shaU be secured by the Indenture and shaU
be entided to afi of tbe security and benefits hereof to the same extent as the Bond surrendered.
(e)
The City, the Trustee, the Remarketing Agent, the Bond Insurer, the Bank
and any Paying Agent may treat the Registered Owner of any Bond as the absolute owner thereof
for all purposes, whether or not such Bond shall be overdue, and sIuU not be bound by any notice
to the contraty. Afi payments of or on account of the principal of, premium,ffany, and interest
on any such Bond as herein provided shall be made only to or upon the written order of the
Registered Owner thereof or such Registered Owner's l e ^ representative, but such registration
may be changed as herein provided. All such payments shaU be valid and effectual to satisfy and
discharge the liability upon such Bond to the extent of the sum or sums so paid.
(f)
In the event that sufficient moneys are on deposit with tbe Trustee to pay
tbe appficable purchase price of any Tendered Bond as provided herein, such Tendered Bond shaU
be deenied to have been purchased whether or not delivered by the Registered'Owner diereof on
the date such Tendered Bond is to be purchased. In the event any such purchased Tendered Bond
is not so delivered, the City shaU execute and the Tnistee shaU authenticate and defiver a
replacement Bond of lUce date, Mamrity Date and denomination as the Tendered Bond and bearing
a number not contemporaneously outstanding. In the event any such purchased Tendered Bond
is so delivered, the Tmstee shafi register such Tendered . Bond as provided in
Section 3.09(b) hereof.
Section 2.09. Required Information in Bond Form, (a) On each date on which
the Trustee or the Trustee's Agent authenticates and deliveis a Bond, it shall complete the
Information required to be inserted by the Bond foim.and shall keep a record of such information.
(b)
On each date on which the Trustee or the Trustee's Agent authenticates and
delivers a Bond during a Flexible Mode or an Adjustable Long Mode applicable to such Bond as
provided in Section 2.07 or 2.08 hereof, the Tnistee or Trustee's Agent shall attach to each such
Bond a copy of ihc notice in substanuaify ihe form sei forth \n the form of Bond attached as
Exhibit A hereto for the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of the terms and provisions
of the Adjustment Period then applicable to such Bond.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83313

(c)
On each date on which the Tnistee authenticates and delivers Bonds bearing
interest at a Fixed Rate from and after the Fixed Rate Conversion Date appUcable to such Bonds,
the Trustee shall issue Bonds with such information as is required pursuant to Section 4.03 hereof.
Section 2.10. Cancellation. Any Bond surrendered for the purpose of payment
orretirement,or for exchange, transfer orreplacement,shaU be canceUed upon surrender thereof
to die Trustee or any Paying Agent, ff the City shaU acquire any of the Bonds, the City shall
deliver such Bonds to tbe Trustee for cancellation and the Tnistee shaU cancel the same. Any
such Bonds canceUed by any Paying Agent other than tbe Tnistee shaU be pronqiUy transmitted
by such Paying Agent to the Tnistee. Certification of Bonds canceUed by the Trustee and Bonds
cancelled by a Paying Agent other than the Tnistee which are transmitted to the Trustee shaU be
made to the City. Cancelled Bonds may be destroyed by the Tmstee unless instructions to doe
contraty arc received from, the City. Upon the date of final maturity or redemption of aU Bonds,
the Trustee shaU destroy'any inventoty of unissued certificates.
Section 2.11. Book-Entty Provisions. The provisions of diis Seaion shall apply
as long as the Bonds are mgintainpH- in .book-entty form with DTC or another Securities
Depositoty, any provisions of this Indenture to the confraty notwithstanding.
(a)
The Bonds shaU be payabletothe Securities Depositoty, or its nomiiKe, as
the Registered Owner of the Bonds, in same day fiinds on each date on which the principal of,
premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds is due as set forth in this Indenmre and the Bonds.
Such payments shaU be made to the offices of the Securities Depositoty specified by the Securities
Depositoty to the. City and the Trustee in writing. Without notice to or the consent of the
beneficial owners of the Bonds, the City and tbe Securities Depositoty may agree in writing to
make payments of principal and interest In a manner differentfiromthat set forth herein, ff such
different manner of paymem is agreed upon, the City shall give the Trustee notice thereof, and
the Trustee shaU make payments with respecttotbe Bonds in the manner specified in such notice
as set forth herein. Neither the City nor the Tnistee shaU have any obligation with respect to the
transfer or crediting of the principal of, premium,ffany. and interest on the Bonds to Participants
or the beneficial owners of the Bonds or thefr nominees.
(b)
If (i) the City determines, or (u) the City receives notice that die Securities
Depositoty has received notice from its Participants having interests in at least 50 percem in
prindpal amount of the Bonds that the Securities Deposhoty or its successor is incapable of
discharging its responsibifities as a securities depositoty, or that it is in the best interests ofthe
beneficial owners that they obtain certificated Bonds, the City may (or, in the case of clause (u)
above, die City shaU) cause the Trustee to audienticate and defiver Bond certificates. The City
shaU have no obfigation to make any investigation to determine the occunence of any events that
would pcnnii the City lo make any detenninadon described in ihis paragraph.
(c)
If. foUowing a determination or event specified in paragraph (b) above, the
City discontinues the maintenance ofthe Bonds in book-entty form with the then cuneni Securities
Depository, the City will issuereplacementBonds to the replacement Securities Depository, if
any, or, if no replacement Securities Depositoty is selected for the Bonds, directly to the

 83314

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Participants as shown on the records of the former Securities Depositoty or, to the extent
requested by any Participant, to tbe beneficial owners of the Bonds shown on the records of such
Participant. , Replacement Bonds shaU be in fullyregisteredform and in Authorized
Denominations, be payable astointerest on the Interest Payment Dates of the Bonds by check
maUed to each Registered Owner at the address of such Registered Owner as it appears on the
Bond Register or. at the option of any Registered Owner of not less than $1,000,000 principal
amount of Bonds, by wirefransferto any address In the United States of America on such Interest
Payment Date to such Registered Owner as of such Record Date, ff such Registered Owner
provides the Tnistee with written notice of such wire transfer address not later than the Record
Date (which notice may provide that It wiUremainIn effea with respect to subsequent Interest
Payment Dates unless and untU changed orrevokedby subsequent notice). Principal and
premium,ffaity, on the replacement Bonds are payable only upon presentation and sunender of
such replacement Bond or Bonds at tbe principal corporate trust office of the Trustee.
. .(d). The Securities Deposhoty and Its Participants, and the beneficial owners
of the Bonds, by thefr acceptance ofthe Bonds, agree that the City and the Tnistee shaU not have
fiabifity for the faUure of such Securities Depositoty to perform its obligationstothe Partidpants
and the beneficial owners of the Bonds, nor sbaU the City or the Trustee be liable for the faUure
of any Participant or other nominee of the beneficial ownerstoperform any obligation of the
Participant to a beneficial owner of the .Bonds.
(e) . As long as Cede & Co. is the Registered Owner of the Bonds, as nominee
of DTC,referencesherein to the Registered Owners of the Bonds shaU mean Cede & Co. and
shaU not mean the beneficial owners of the Bonds.
(f)

As long as Cede & Co. is the Registered Owner of the Bonds:

(1) selection of Bonds to be redeemed upon partial redemption, presentation of
Bonds to the Tnistee upon partial redemption, delivety of Bonds to the Tnistee in
connection with an optional or mandatoty tender,- or redellvety of such Bonds by the
Trustee to registered owners foUowing a remarketing or faUed conversiontotbe Fixed
Rate thaU be deemed made when therightto exercise ownershiprightsin such Bonds
through DTC or DTC's Participants is transferred by DTC on its books;
(ii) notices of demand for purchase of Bonds shaU be given by the beneficial
owners of such Bonds exercising ownershiprightstothe Remarketing Agent (pursuant to
DTC's Defiver Order procedures) by telephonic notice (confirmed in writing) or written
notice;
(iii) any notices of the interest rate on the Bonds to be provided by the Trustee

shall be provided to anyone identifying itself to the Trustee as a person entided lo exercise
ownershiprightswith respect to such Bonds through DTC or its Participants;
(iv) DTC may present notices, approvals, waivers or other communications
required or permitted to be made by Registered Owners imder the Indenture on a

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83315

fractionalized basis on behaff of some or aU of those persons entided to exercise ownership
rights in the Bonds through DTC or Its Participants; and
(v) benefidal interests In Bank Bonds sha'l be held for the account of the Bank
(or its Participant) on the records of DTC. .

ARTICLE III
Purchase and Redemption of Bonds
Section 3.01. Purchase on Demand of Registered Owner 'WhOe Bonds Bear
Dally Rate or Weddy Rate, (a) WhUe a Bond (odier than a Bank Bond) bears interest at a DaUy
Rate, such Bond (or portion thereof in an Authorized Denomination) shall be purchased on a
. Demand Date therefor upon the demand of the Registered Owner thereof, at a purchase price
equal to 100 percent of the principal ainount thereof plus accrued interest, if any,tosuch Demand
Date, upon irrevocable telephonic or written notice (which telephonic notice sbaU be confiimed
in writing, and which written notice may be given by telecopy)toboth the Trustee's Agent and
the Remarketing Agent, which notice must be received not later than 10:00 a.m., Chicago time,
on a Business Day in order to be effective on that date. Any notice received after 10:00 aon..
Chicago tinie. on a Business Day shaU be deemed given on the next succeeding Business Day:
The Business Day on which any notice is deemed given wiU be the Demand Date for the
applicable Tendered Bond. Such notice must specify the principal amount and number of such
Bond, the name and the address of such owner and the taxpayer identification number,ffany, of
such owner. The Trustee's Agem shall give Immediate Notice (which notice shaU be delivered
no later than 10:30 a.m., Chicago time, on the Busioess Day on which it receives notice of tender)
to the Trustee, the Remarketing Agent, the City and the Bank as to the contents of .any such
notices received by it.
(b)
WhUe a Bond (other than a Bank Bond) bears interest at a Weekly Rate,
such Bond (or portion thereof in an Authorized Denomination) shaU be purchased on a Demand
Date therefor upon the demand of the Registered Owner thereof, at a purchase price equal to 100
percent of the principal amount thereof plus accnied interest, ff any, to such Demand Date, upon
irrevocable wrinen notice (which may be given by telecopy) to the Trustee's Agent, which notice
must be received by the Trustee's Agent and the Remarketing Agent not later than 4:00 p.m.,
Chicago time, on a Business Day in ordertobe effective on that day. Any notice received after
4:00 p.m., Chicago time, on a Business Day shaU be deemed given on the next succeeding
Business Day. Such notice must specify (i) the principal amount and number of such Bond, the
name and the address of such owner and the taxpayer identification number, if any, of such
owner, and (ii) the Demand Date on which such Bond is lo be purchased. The Trustee's Agent
shaU give Immediate Notice (which notice shall be given no later than 4:30 p.m.. Chicago time,
on the Business Day on which it receives notice of tender) to the Trustee, the Remarketing Agent,
the City and the Bank as to the contents of any such notices received by it.

 83316

J O U R N A L - C I T Y COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(c)
The determination of the Trustee's Agem as to whether a notice of tender
has been properly delivered pursuant to the foregoing shafi be conclusive and binding upon the
Registered Owner of such Bond. Any notice received by the Trustee's Agent pursuant to this
Sectionfromany person reasonably believed by the Trustee's Agent to be the Registered Owner
of a Bond may be conclusively relied upon by the Trustee's Agent as a true, irrevocable notice
of demand with respea to such Bond.
Section 3.02. Purchase on Notice of Certain Events of Default Under Credit
Agreement WhOe Letter of Credit is Required. During the period a Letter of Credit is required
by Section 6.02 of this Indenmre, the Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest
at a Fixed Rate) are subjea to mandatoty tender by the Registered Owners thereof to the Trustee
when the Tnistee gives Immediate Notice to the Registered Owners of such Bonds and tbe
Remarketing Agent of tbe occurrence and continuation of a Credit Agreemeni Default. Upon the
giving of such Immediate Notice, such Bonds shaU be purchased, on a date designated by the
Trustee, which date is no more, than 15 days after the- date of the Immediate Notice to the
Bondholders, and In no event later than the Business Day priortothe last day on which fimds wifi
be avaUable under the Letter of Credit, at a purchase price equal to 100 percent of the prindpal
amount thereof plus accnied interest, ff any, to the purchase date. In such case, the Registered
Owner of any such Bondrequiredtobe purchased may not eleatoretainits Bond and by the
acceptaice of such Bond shaU be dermed to have agreed to seU such Bond to the Tnistee on the
date specified pursuant to this Section. Tbe Trustee shafi give such Immediate Notice upon receipt
by the Tnistee of a written noticefromthe Bank of the occurrerce of a Credit Agreement DefaulL
Section 3.03. Purchasie While Bonds Bear Flexible Rate. WhUe any Bond (odier
than a Bank Bond) bears Interest at a Flexible Rate, such Bond shaU be purchased pursuant to this
Section on each Rate Change Date for such Bond, other than the Rate Change Date which is the
first day of a Flexible Mode appficable to such Bond, and on the Adjustment Date immediately
following the last day of the Flexible Mode at a purchase price equal to 100 percent of the
principal amount thereof. The Registered Owner of such Bond may not electtoretainIts'Bond.
Section 3.04. Purchase Prior to Stated Tennlnation Date When Required
Letter of Credit Not in Place; Purchase Prior to Substitution Date; Purchase Prior to Letter
of Credit Cancellation Date, (a) If, during the period a Letter of Credit Is required pursuant to
the terms of Section 6.02 of this Indenture, by tbe 20th day preceding any Stated Termination
Date ofthe Letter of Credit the Trustee has not received notice of an extension of the then current
Letter of Credit or a Substimte Letter of Credit in accordance widi the terms of this Indenture,
all Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) shaU be purchased
on the Business Day prior to the Stated Termination Date of the Letter of Credii pursuant to this
Section, ff a Letter of Credit isrequfredpursuant to the terms of this Indenmre, and the City
gives notice to tbe I rusiee thai it wiU provide a Substimte Letter of Credit pursuant to
Section 6.01 of this Indenture, Bonds shall be subjea to purchase hereunder, unless each Rating
Agency then providing a short-termratingon the Bonds confirms in writing that such short-term
rating wiU not be withdrawn or reduced as aresultof the delivety of such Substimte Letter of
Credit (a "Rating Exception Non-Tender"). In addition, if a Letter of Credit is no longer required
pursuant to Section 6.02 of this Indenture, all Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing

 5/ 1 /2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83317

interest at a Fixed Rate) shaU be purchased on the . Business Day prior to the Letter of Credit
ClanceUatlon Date pursuam to this Section. A purchase of Bonds pursuant to this Section shaU be
at a purchase price for each such Bond equal to the principal amount thereof plus accnied Interest,
If any, to the purchase date.
(b)
Not later than the 15th day preceding the Stated Termination Date of the
Letter of Credit, tf no extension of such Letter of Credit or Substimte Letter of Credit has been
defivered, the Tnistee shall give Immediate Notice to the Registered Owners of the Bonds (odier
than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) and tbe Bond Insurer stating (i) the
Stated Termination Date, (ii) that no Substimte Letter of Credit has been received as of the date
of such notice, and (iii) that tbe Bonds aie required to be purchased on tbe Business Day
immediately preceding the Stated Termination Date.
(c)
Except as provided in subsection (e) of this Section, not later than the 15th
day preceding a Substimtion Date, die Trustee shall give Immediate Notice to the Registered
Owners of the Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing Interest at a Fixed Rate) stating
(1) the Substimtion Date and (u) the Bonds arerequfredtobe purchased on the Business Day prior
to die Substimtion Date.
(d) ff pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section the Bonds are subjea to
mandatoty tender and purchase, not later than the 15th day preceding the Letter of Credit
- Cancellation Date, the Trustee shafi give Immniiatit Notice to the Registered Owners of the Bonds
(other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Race) stating (1) that tbe existing
Letter of Credit is to be canceUed pursuant to Section 6.02 of this Indenture, and (ii) the Bonds
are required to be purchased on the Business Day priortotbe Letter of Credit CanceUation Date.
(e)
In the event of a Rating Exception Non-Tender pursuant to subsection (a)
of this Section, not later than the 15th day preceding the Letter of Credit Cancellation Date, the
Trustee shaU give TmmeHiatp. Notice to the Registered Owners of the Bonds (other than Bank
Bonds and Bonds bearing mterest at a Fixed Rate) stating (1) that the existing Letter of Credit is
to be canceUed pursuam to Section 6.02 of this Indenture, and (ii) tbe name of the Substimte Bank
and the material terms of the Substimte Credit Agreement and Substimte Letter of Credit proposed
to be delivered.
Section 3.05. Purchase WhOe Bonds Bear Adjustable Long Rate. While any
Bond (other than a Bank Bond) bears interest at an Adjustable Long Rate, such Bond shaU be
purchased pursuant to this Seaion on each Rate Change Date within an Adjustable Long Mode
for such Bond, odier than the Rate Change Date which is the first day of an Adjustable Long
Mode applicable to such Bond, and on the Adjustment Date immediately foUowing the last day
of such Adjustable Long Mode, at a purchase price equal to 100 percent of the principal amount
thereof The Registered Owner of such Bond may not elect to retain its Bond.
Not later than the 15th day next preceding such Rate Change Date for each Rate
Period, the Trustee shall give notice by maU to the Registered Owners of the Bonds which bear
interest at an Adjustable Long Rate stating (i) the last day of the Rate Period then ending, and

 83318

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(u) that the Bondis arcrequiredtobe purchased on such Rate Change Date. The foregoing
notwidistanding, the faUure of the Tnistee to give such notice or cause such notice to be given wiU
not affect the requirement of such Registered Owners to tender thefr Bonds for purchase, ff
sufficient moneys are on deposit with the Trustee on the applicable Rate Change Date to purchase
such Bonds at the purchase price therefor, such Bonds shaU not after the appficable Rate Change
Date bear interest, be protected by the Indenture or be deeinedtobe Outstanding.
Section 3.06. Purchase on Adjustment Date. On each Adjustment Date with
respea to a Bond (other than a Bank Bond),- including, without limitation,- a proposed Fixed Rate
Conversion Date or a Substimte Adjustment Date, such Bond shafi be purchased pursuant to diis
Seaion at a purchase price equal to 100 percent of the principal amoimt thereof, except that 0) a
Bond which Istobe purchased on an Adjustment Date which immediately follows the last day of
a Flexible Mode shaU be purchased pursuant to Section 3.03 hereof, and (11) a Bond which is to
be purchased on an Adjustment Date which immediately foUows the schediUed final day of an
Adjustable Long Mode sbafi be purchased pursuant to Section 3.05 hereof. Tbe Registered Owner
of such Bond may not elea to retain its Bond.
Not later than the 15th day next preceding the Adjusnnent Date for any Bond
bearing interest at a DaUy Rate or a Weekly Rate, the Tiiistee shaU give Immediate Notice to the
Registered Owner of such Bond stating (1) the last day -of the Adjustaaent Period then ending, and
(il) diat such Bond is required to be purchased on the Adjustment Date.
Section 3.07. Purchase of Tendered Bondis Defivered to Trustee's Agent;
Notices, (a) TeiKlered Bonds shall be purchasedfromthe Registered Owners thereof at a purchase
price equal to 100 percent ofthe principal amount thereof, plus'accrued interest thereon (unless
purchased on an Interest Payment Date, In which event such accnied interest shaU not be paid as
pan of the purchase price secured by the Letter of Credit), but solelyfromthe foUowing sources
in order of priority indicated, neither the Cify, the Tnistee, the Trustee's Agent nor the
Remarketing Agent having an obligation to use fiindsfromany odier source:
(1)
proceeds of the sale of such Tendered Bonds (other than Tendered Bonds
sold to the City in violation of Section 3.15(b) hereof) pursuant to Section 3.08 hereof;
(ii)
moneys received from the underwriter or purchaser (other than the City) of
Tendered Bonds upon the conversion of tbe Interestratethereon to a Fixed Rate;
(iu)

proceeds of die Letter of Credit, to tbe extent a Letter of Credit is available;

(iv)

Eligible Moucys rumlshcd by the City lo the Tmstee for the purchase of

and

Tendered Bonds, provided that the conditions of Section 3.15(b) hereof are satisfied.
(b)
Tbe Trustee's Agent shall pay the purchase price specified abovefromdie
sources specified above of each Tendered Bond to the Registered Owner thereof by 1:30 p.m.,
Chicago lime, on the purchase date, provided that the Trustee's Agent shall have confirmed that

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83319

such Registered Owner has delivered such Tendered Bond (with any necessary endorsements) to
the principal corporate trust office of the Trustee's Agent no later than 12:00 noon, Chicago tune,
on such date.
Section 3.08. Remarketing of Tendered Bonds by Remarketiiig Agent. Upon
the defivety or deemed defivety of Tendered Bonds' by the Registered Owners thereof in
accordance with the provisions hereof, the Remarketing Agent sbaU offer for sale and use Its best
efforts to remarket such Tendered Bonds pursuant to tbe Remarketing Agreement, any such
remarketing to be made on the date on which such Tendered Bonds are to be purchased, at a price
equal to 100 percent of the principal amount diereof plus accrued interest,ffany.
ff Bonds arc delivered or - deemed delivered for purchase under
Section 3.01(a) hereof, the Remarketing Agent shaU give telephonic notice to the Tnistee, die
Trustee's Agent, the City and tbe Bank no later than 11:00 a.m., Chicagotime,on the date on
which such Bonds are to be so defivered or deemed deUvered, of the aggregate principal amount
of such Bonds to be purchased on such date which It has reasonable groundstoexpea wUl not be
remarketed on such date.
In addition, with respea to Bonds deUvered or deemed defivered for purchase
under Section 3.01(b), 3.02, 3;03, 3.04,3.05 or 3.06 hereof, die Remarketing Agent shall give
telephonic noticetothe Trustee, die Trustee's Agent, the City and the Bank no later than 11:00
a.m., Chicago time, on the Business Day next preceding the date on which such Bonds are to be
so delivered or deemed defivered. of tbe aggregate prindpal amount of such Bonds to be
purchased on such date which it has reasonable groundstoe;q>ea wUI not be remarketed on such
date.
The Remarketing Agent shaUremarketBank Bonds to tbe extent, and subjeatothe
conditions, set forth herein and in the Remariceting Agreement; provided, however, that no Bank
Bond may be remarketed unless the amoimt of fimds which are available and may be loaned under
the Letter of Credit has beenreinstatedtotbe amount which was available prior to the purchase
of such Bank Bonds, unless tbe Letter of Credit has been reduced pursuant to Section 6.01 of this
Indenture or the Letter of Credit Is no longer required pursuant to Section 6.02 of this Indenmre.
Bank Bonds shaU beremarketedat a price of par plus accmed interest, if any. at the Bank
Variable Rate untU the Bond Sale Date; accnied interest on Bank Bonds at the Differential Interest
Amount shaU be due to the Bank from the City on the Bond Sale Date. Upon the remarketing of
Bank Bonds, the Remarketing Agent shall Immediately provide telephonic notice, prompdy
confirmed by telecopy, of such remarketing to the Trustee, the City and the Bank, and thereupon
the Tmstee shall, subjecttoSection 3.09(a)(u) hereof, immediately deliver or provide for transfer
of beneficial interest in such Bonds for delivety to the purchasers thereof upon payment to the
Bank of the principal amount of such Bank Bonds.

 83320

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 3.09. Defivety of Bonds and Proceeds of Sale.
(a)
(i) Subjea to Section 3.10 hereof. Bondsremarketedby the Remarketing
Agent pursuant to Section 3.08 hereof sbaU be delivered by the Trustee or the Trustee's
Agent as directed by the Remarketing Agent by 11 ;00 a.m., Chicago time, on the date of
purchase against payment therefor. The proceeds of sale by the Remarketing Agent shaU
be deUvered to the Trustee by 11:00 asa., Chicago time, on the date of purchase.
(u)
Bank Bonds shaU be delivered to tbe Trustee or otherwise at the direction
of the Bank, or for as long as the Bonds are In the Book-Entty-Only System described in
Seaion 2.11 hereof, credited to the designated account of tbe Bank or its designee as •
beneficial owner of such Bank Bonds by DTC (In its capacity as custodian) puisuant to the
Credit Agreement or the Custody Agreement, ff any. Notwithstanding anything berem to
the contraty. ff the Tnistee holds Bank Bonds as custodian for the Bank pursuant to the
Credit Agreement or the Custody Agreement, ff any, the Tnistee shafi notreleasetotbe
purchaser thereof Bank Bonds remarketed pursuanttoSection 3.08 hereof unless the Bank
shaU have given written notification (which may be by facsimUe communication) to the
Tnistee that it hasreinstatedthe Letter pf Credit. The Trustee hereby agrees to foUow the
provisions of the Credit Agreemem or the Custody Agreement, ff any, as to registration
and procedures for Bank Bonds during the effective period of the Letter of Credit!
(b)
Except as otherwise provided In the Credit Agreement or the Custody
Agreement, ff any. Tendered Bonds delivered as provided In this Section'shaU be registered In tbe
manner directed by the purchaser thereof, except that Bank Bonds shaU beregisteredin the name
of the Bank, and beneficial interest therein shall be transferred as provided in paragraph
(a)Oi) above.
(c)
The Trustee's Agem shaU notify the Trustee in writing (which may be
delivered by telecopy) no later than 10:30 a.m., Chicago time, on each day on which Tendered
Bonds in the DaUy Mode, and no later than 4:30 p.m., Chicago time, on the Business Day prior
to the day on which Tendered Bonds In any other Interest Mode, are delivered or deemed
delivered for purchase under Section 3.01, 3.02, 3.03, 3.04, 3.05 or 3.06 hereof of the aggregate
prindpal amount of Tendered Bonds to be purchased on such date. The Trustee shafi take such
actions as arc necessaty to draw or obtain fimds under the Letter of Oedit in accordance with its
terms to pay the purchase price of aU Tendered Bonds (other than Bank Bonds) on such date; and,
in connection with the Initial Letter of Credit, shall make drawings thereunder (based upon the
proceeds of sale by the Remarketing Agent actually delivered to the Trustee by 11:00 a.m.,
Chicago time, on the date of purchase pursuant to paragraph (a)(i) of this Section) no later than
11:15 a.m.. Chicago time, on such date In order to obtainfimdsthereunder by no later than 1:15
p.m., Chicago time, on such date. If surplus moneys from the Bank remain after the payment in
full of aU Tendered Bonds, tbe Trustee shall provide Immediate Noticetothe Bank of the amount
of funds made available by the Bank on such date which are not required for the payment of
Tendered Bonds and shall immediately remm such excess funds to the Bank.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83321

(d)
If sufficient moneys are on deiposit with the Trustee or the Trustee' s Agent
to pay the applicable purchase price of any Tendered Bond, such Tendered Bond shall be deemed
to have been purchased whether or not defivered by the Ricglstered Owner thereof on the date such
Tendered Bond Istobe purchased,ffany such purchased Tendered Bond is not so delivered, the
City shafi execute, and the Tnistee shall authenticate and defiver, a replacement Bond of like date.
Maturity Date and denomination as the Tendered Bond and bearing a number not
contemporaneously outstanding.
Section 3.10. No Remarketing After Cert2un Defaults. Anything in die
Indenturetothe contraty notwidistanding, (a)tfduring the period a Letter of Credit is required
puisuanttoSection 6.02 of this Indenture, there is no Letter of Credit In effect, there shaU be no
remarketing of Tendered Bonds unless consentedtoin writing by the City, die Remarketing Agent
and the Bank, and (b) tf there sbaU have occurred and be continuing an Event of Default under
the lodenture of which an authorized officer in the prindpal office of the Remarketing Agent or
an authorized officer in the principal corporate trust office of the Trustee has actual knowledge,
there shafi be no remarketing of Tendered Bonds pursuant to Section 3.08 hereof unless consented
to in writing by the City, , the Remarketing Agent and the Bank.
Section 3.11. Redemption Terms, Dates and Prices. The Bonds shafi be subjea
to redemption prior to thefr Maturity Date in the amounts, at the times and in the manner provided
in this Section.
(a) . Optional Redemption.
• •

.

.

.

. f

*

(1)
Bonds in a DaUy Mode or a Weekly Mode shall be subjea to redemption
priortothefr Maturity Date at the option of the City,fromEUgible Moneys, In whole or
in part (and, ff in part, in an Authorized Denomination) on any Business Day during such
DaUy Mode or Weekly Mode, as applicable, at a redemption price equal to 100 percent
of the prindpal amount thereof plus accrued interest,tfany, to the redemption date.
(u)
Bonds in an Adjustable Long .Mode shaU be subject to redemption prior to
diefr Mamrity Date, during each Rate Period therein, at the option of the City, from
EUgible Moneys, in whole or in part (and, tf in part, in an Authorized Denomination) on
any Business Day after the No-CaU Period described bdow, at the foUowing redemption
prices (expressed as percentages of the principal amoimt of Bonds called for
redemption) plus accnied interest,tfany,tothe redemption date:

 83322

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCII^-CHICAGO

Length of Rate Period

No-Call Period

5/1/2002

Redemption Price

greater than 12 years

10 yearsfromthe
Rate Change Date

102%, declining 1% per
12 mondis to 100%

less than or equal to 12 years
and greater than 4 years

untU 2 years prior to
end of Rate Period

100%

less than or equalto4 years

length of Rate Period'

not subjeatooptional
redemption

The City may deliver to the Tnistee an alternative redemption schedule to the
schedule shown above, if the City deUverstothe Bank and the Trustee an Opinion of iBond
Counsel to the effect that the alternative schedule of redemption wUl not adversely affect
the validity and enforceabUity of the Bonds In accordance with thefr terms, and wiU not
have an adverse effea on any exclusion firom gross income of the Interest thereon for
Federal Income tax purposes. After the ffrst Rate Change Date succeeding the defivety
of such alternative schedule and Opinion of Bond Counsel, Bonds in an Adjustable Long
Mode shaU be subjea to redemption pursuant.to the terms of such alternative schedule.
(iu)
Bonds in the Fixed Mode sbaU be subjea to redemption prior to thefr
Maturity Date at the option of the City, in whole or in part (and. ff In part, in an
Authorized Denomination) on any Business Day after the No-CaU Period described below,
at the foUowing redemption prices (expressed as percentages of the principal amount of
the Bond caUed for redemption) plus accnied interest, ff any,.to the redenqition date: .
Term of Maturity

No<:aIl Period

Redemption Price

greater than 12 years

10 yearsfromtlie Fixed
Rate Conversion Date

102%, declining 1 % per
12 mondis to 100%

less than or equal to 12 years
and greater than 4 years

untU 2 years priortothe
Mamrity Date

100%

less than or equal to 4 years

term to die Maturity Date

not subjea to optional
redemption

The City may deliver to the Trustee an alternative redenqition schedule to the
schedule shown above,-ffthe City defiverstothe Bank and the Tnistee an Opinion of Bond
Counsel to the effect that the alternative schedule of redemption wifi not adversely affect
the validity and enforceabUity of tbe Bonds in accordance with thefr terms, and wiU not
have an adveise effect on any exclusion from gross income of the interest thereon for
Federal income tax purposes. Bonds which commence bearing interest at a Fixed Rate on
or after the delivery of such alternative schedule and Opinion of Bond Counsel shall be
subject to redemption in accordance with the provisions of such alternative schedule.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83323

(iv) , Bonds bearing interest at a Flexible Rate or an Adjustable Long Rate shall
be subjea to optionalredemptionprior to thefr Maturity Date at the option of the City,
from Eligible Moneys, in whole or in part (and, ff in part, in an Authorized •
Denomination) on any Rate Change Date therefor, at a redemption price equal to 100
percent of tbe principal amount thereof plus accrued interest, tf any,-to the redemption
date.
(b)
Optional Redemption of Bank Bonds. Bank Bonds shaU be subject to
redemption priortothefr Maturity Date at the option of the City, in whole or in part (and, tf in
part, in an Authorized Denomination) on any Business Day at a redenqition price equal to 100
percent of the principal amount thereof plus accrued interest, If any, to die redemption date.
(c)
Extraordinary Redemption of Bank Bonds. Bank Bonds shaU be subjea
to mandatoty redemption on the dates and In the amounts specified In' Section 3.1 of the Ciedh
Agreement. Such redemption shaU be at a price equal to the principal amotmt thereof plus
accmed interest thereon to the redemption date, without premium. Bank Bonds shall be redeemed
pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph without any noticefromof direction by the City.
. (d)

General Provisions Repaidine Optional and Extraordinary Redemptions.

(1)
No redemption of less than all of the Bonds outstanding shaU be made
puisuant to Section 3.11(a) or (b) hereof unless (i) tf such redenption is of Bonds bearing
interest at a Shon Rate or an Adjustable Long Rate, the aggregate principal amount of
Bonds to be redeemed is equal to $100,000 or Integral multiples thereof, and (u) if siich
redemption is withrespectto Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate, the aggregate
principal amount of Bonds to be redeemed is equal to $100,000 or $5,000 multiples in
. excess thereof. Anyredenqitionof less than aU of the Bonds outstanding shaU be made
in such a manner that aU Bonds outstanding after such redemption are in Authorized
Denominations..
01)
Bonds may be called for redemption by the Trustee pursuant to
Section 3.11(a) hereof (A) in the case of Bonds bearing Interest at a Short Rate, upon
receipt by the Trustee at least 35 days priortothe redeii5)tion date of a written retjuest of
the City requesting such redemption, or (B) in the case of Bonds bearing interest at an
- Adjustable Long Rate or a Fixed Rate, upon receipt by the Trustee at least 45 days prior
to the redemption date of a writtenrequestof the City lequestiDg such redemption.
(in)
Bonds may be called for redemption by tbe Tmstee pursuant to
Section 3.11(b) hereof upon receipt by the Tnistee at least one Business Day priortothe
redemption date of a written request of the City requesting such redemption. The Trustee
or the Trustee's Agent shafi give notice to the Bank one Business Day prior to any
redemption of Bank Bonds pursuant to Section 3.11(b) or (c) hereof.
(iv)
In lieu of redeeming Bonds pursuant to Section 3.11(a) hereof, the Tmstee
may, at the request of the City, use such fimds avaUable hereunder for redemption of

 83324

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Bonds to purchase Bonds in the open market at a price not exceeding the redemption price
then applicable hereunder. Any Bond so purchased shafi be purchased with Eligible
Moneys unless such Bond is a Bank Bond or bears Interest at a Fixed Rate. Any Bond so
purchased in lieu of redemption shaU be ddlvered to the Trustee for canceUation and shaU
be canceUed, afi as provided in Section 2.10 hereof.
Section 3.12. Notice of Redemption, (a) Except as hereinafter provided, a copy
of tbe notice of the caU for any redemption identlfymg the Bondstobe redeemed shall be given
byfirstclass maU, postage prepaid, withrespecttoBonds bearing Interest at a Short Rate, not less
than 30 or more than 45 days priortothe date fixed for redeiqption and shall be given by first
class maU, postage prepaid, widi respecttoBonds bearing Interest at an Adjustable Long Rate or
a Fixed Rate, not less than 30 or more than 60 days priortothe datefixedfor redemption, to the
Bank, tbe Remarketing Agent and the Registered Owners of the Bondstobe redeemed at thefr
addresses as shown on the Bond Register,. Such notice shall specify the redemption date, the
redemption price, the place and manner of payment, and thatfromthe redemption date interest
wUI ceasetoaccrue on the Bonds which are the subject of such notice, and shaU include such
other Information as the Tnistee shaU deem appropriate or necessaty at the time such notice Is
giventocomply with any appUcable law,regulationor industty standard. Priortothe date that
the redemption notice isfirstgiven as aforesaid, fimds shaU be placed with the Trustee to pay such
Bonds, any premium thereon, and accrued interest thereontothe redeniption date, which moneys
shaU be Eligible Moneys to the extent such payments are required to be made with Efigible
Moneys, or-such notice shafi state that any redengition is conditional on suchfimdsbeing
deposited on the redemption date,.-and that faUuretodqxisit such funds shafi not constimte an
Event of Default under the Indenmre; any funds so deposited with the Tnistee shall be Invested
solely in Federal Obfigations maturing no later than the earlier of (1) 30 days after the date of
placement with the Trustee, or (u) the redemption date.
(b)
Notwidistanding Section 3.12(a) hereof, if Bank Bonds are to be redeemed
pursuanttoSection 3.11 (b) or (c) hereof, the Trustee shafi give Immediate Notice of a redemption
of Bank Bondstothe Bank at least one Business Day priortothe date fixed for redemption.
(c)
In addition to the requirements of subsections (a) and (b), notice of the
redemption of Bonds or any portion thereof identifying the Bonds or portions thereof to be
redeemed shall specify (1) the series name and designation and certificate numbers of Bonds being
redeemed, (11) the CUSIP numbers of the Bonds being redeemed, (iu) the principal amount of
Bonds being redeemed and tbe redeemed amount for each certificate (for partial calls), (iv) the
redemption date, (v) the redemption price, (vi) the Date of Issuance, (vii) the interestrateand
Mamrity Date of the Bonds being redeemed, (viu) die date of maUing of notices to Registered
Owners and information services, and (ix) the name of the employee of the Tmstee which may
be contacted with regard to such notice.
(d)
Redemption notices shall also be forwarded byregisteredmaU, telecopier
or overnight delivery service with the intention that they be received at least two days prior to the
date of mailing of notices to Registered Owners, to the foUowing depositoty institutions:

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

(i)

The Depositoty Trust Company
711 Stewart Avenue
Garden City, New York 11530
Attention: Muni Reorganization Manager
FAX: (516) 227-4039 or 4190

(u)

Philadelphia Deposhoty Trust Company
Reorganization Division
1900 Markrt Street
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103
Attention: Bond Department
DEX: (215)496-5058

83325

ff either such trust company ceases operations, notices shaU be sent to Its successor (if any). (e)
Redemption notices shaU also be sent byregisteredmaU, at least 30 days
but not more than 60 days priortothe redemption date, to two national information services that
disseminate reden^tion information as determined by the Tnistee as long as such services exist
(0
A second reden^tion notice shaU be sent by first dass maU. not more than'
60 days after the redemption datetoeach Registered Owner of Bonds caUed for redemption who
has not presented such Bonds within 30 days foUowing the redemption date.
(g)
In the event of an advancerefimdingof the Bonds, a notice of such event
shaU be given as requfred above for redemptions at least 30 days but not more than 60 days prior
to the actual redemption date.
(h)
FaUure to give notice in the manner prescribed hereunder with respect to
any Bond, or any defect in such notice, shall not affea the validity of the proceedings for
redemption for any Bond with respea to which notice was properly given. Upon the happening
of the above conditions and if sufficient moneys are on deposit with the Tnistee on the applicable
redemption date to redeem the Bonds to be redeemed and to pay interest due thereon and
premium, ff any. the Bonds thus caUed shaU not, after the applicable redemption date, bear
interest, be protected by the Indenture or be deemedtobe outstanding under the provisions of the
Indenture.
(i)
If any Bond is transferred or exchanged on the Bond Register after notice
has been given caUing such Bond for redemption, the Tnistee wiU attach a copy of such notice
to the Bond issued in connection with such transfer or exchange.
Section 3.13. No Partial Redemption After Default. Anything in this Indenture
to the contrary notwithstanding, if there shaU have txxuned and be continuing an Event of Default
of which an officer of the Trustee has actual knowledge, there shall be no redemption of less than
all ofthe Bonds at the time outstanding.

 83326

JOURNAL-CITY

COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 3.14. Sdection of Bonds for Redemption, ff less than aU the Bonds shaU
be caUed for redemption under any provision of this Indenture permitting such partial redemption,
the partictUar Bonds or portions thereof to be redeemed shaU be selected by the City, in the
principal amount designated to tbe Trustee by the City, which designation shafi include tbe Interest
Mode and Maturity Date of the particular Bonds to be redeemed, or otherwise as required by this
Indenture; provided, however, that subject to the last sentence of this Section, (1) in the case of
the redemption of less than aU Bonds wMch bear interest in the same Interest Mode at the same
rate for the same Rate Periods, and which, in the case of Bonds bearing Interest at a Fixed Rate,
were converted on the same date, such reden^tion shafi be. by lot in such manner as the Trustee
may determine among such Bonds, and (ii) subjedtoother applicable provisions of the Indenture,
the portion of any Bond to be redeemed sbaU be in a principal amount equal to an Authorized
Denomination. In selecting Bonds for redeoqition, the Trustee shafi treat eadi Bond as
representing that number of Bonds which Is obtained by dividing the principal amount of such
Bond by the minimnrn Authorized Denomination, ff It is determined that one or more, but not
afi, of the integral multiples of tbe Authorized Denomination of principal amount represented by
any Bond Is to be caUed for redemption, then, ^>on notice of intention to redeem such integral
multiple of an Authorized Denomination, tbe Registered Owner of such Bond shall forthwith
surrender such Bondtothe Tnistee for (a) payment to such Registered Owner of the redemption
price of tbe integral multiple of the Authorized Denomination of principal amount cafied for
redenqition, and (b) delivety to such Registered Owner of a new Bond or Bonds in the aggregate
principal amount of the unredeemed balance of the priacipal amount of such Bond. New Bonds
representing the unredeemed balance of the principal amount of such Bond shafi be Issuedtothe
Registered Owner thereof without charge therefor. Anything herein to the contraty
notwithstanding, any redemption of less than aU of the Bonds outstanding shall be made first from
Bank Bonds.
Section 3.15. Limit on Remarketing, (a) Any Bond purchased pursuant to
Section 3.01, 3.02, 3.03, 3.04, 3.05 or 3.06 hereoffromthe date notice is given of redenqition
of such Bond pursuanttoSection 3.12 hereof through the date for such redemption, or from the
date of notice of mandatoty purchase of such Bond pursuanttoSection 3.02, 3.03, 3.04, 3.05 or
3.06 hereof through the date for such mandatoty purchase, shall not be remarketed except to a
purchaser who has been notffied at the timft of such purchase of the requirement to deliver such
Bond for reden^on or purchase to the Trustee on the redemption or purchase date.
(b)
Tendered Bonds shafi not be remarketed to the City. Therequirementof
the preceding sentence shall not apply to a purchase of Tendered Bonds when there is either (a)
a default under the Letter of Credit then in effect with respea to die Bonds, or (b) no Letter of
Credrt in effect pursuant to Section 6.02 of this Indenture. The Trustee shall not be required to
monitor the actions of the Remarketing Agent to ensure that it will not remarket any Bonds to the
City, and, for the purposes of Section 3.07(a)(i) hereof, the Trustee may, in the absence of actual
notice to the contraty, assume that no funds furnished to the Trustee by the Remarketing Agent
constimte proceeds of the remarketing of any Bonds to the City.
(c)
Notwithstanding anything else herein to the contnuy, in no event shall any
Bond owned by the City be entided to the benefit of the tender provisions hereof, and.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83327

consequendy, in no event shaU proceeds of the Letter of Credit ever be applied to the payment
of such City-owned Bonds (and, as such, the Tnistee shaU make no drawings under the Letter of
Credit with respea thereto).
Section 3.16. Deposit of Funds. For theredemptionof any of tbe Bonds, the City
shaU cause to be deposited in die Principal and Interest Account- moneys sufficient'to pay when
due the prindpal of, and premium, ff any, and interest on. the Bonds to be redeemed on the
redemption datetobe appfied in accordance widi the provisions hereof.

AR-nCLEIV
Mode Conversion
Section 4.01. Authority for and Conditions to Conversion to Adjustable Long
Mode or Short Mode, (a) If the City shafi deliver to the .'Trustee a form of supplemental
indenmre responsive to die provisions of Section 11.01(b) hereof, it is not necessaty that afi of
the Bonds operate in the same Interest Mode at the same time. Tbe City may designate a different
Interest Mode with respect to any Bond during a Rexible Mode, or one or more Adjustable Long
Modes on any Rate Change Date, and during a DaUy Mode or a Weekly Mode on any Business
Day, upon compliance with this Section. The City may selea such subsequent Interest Mode and.
within an Adjustable Long Mode or a Flexible Mode, the Remarketing Agent may designate such
Eate Periodsfiromtimetotime, upon the written request of tbe City in the case of the Adjustable
Long Mode, as wiU, in its judgment,resultin the.Iowest aggregate cost being payable by the Chy
with respect to the Bonds bearing interest at a Flexible Rate or an Adjustable Long Rate, as the
case may be, taking into account Interest and any other determinable fees and expenses, and taking
into account any Qualified Swap Agreementrelatingto such Bonds. The Chy may establish
differem Interest Modes and, within an Adjustable Long Mode or a Flexible Mode, the
Remarketing Agent may from time to time, upon the request of the City In the case of the
Adjustable Long Mode, establish different Rate Periods, for Bonds on die same Adjustment Date
in order to achieve an average duration of Rate Periods that, in tbe judgment of the Remarketing
Agent, is-most likely to achieve the lowest total aggregate cost being payable by the City with
respea to the Bonds, taking into account interest and any other determinable fees and expenses,
and taking Into accoum any jQuafified Swap Agreemenirelatingto such Bonds. The Remarketing
Agem's determination shafi be based upon the market for and the relative yields of the Bonds and
. other securities that bear Interest at a . variable rate or at fixedratesthat, in the judgment of the
Remarketing Agent, are otherwise comparable to the Bonds, or any fact or circumstance relating
to the Bonds or affecting the market for the Bonds, or affecting such odier comparable securities,
in a manner that, in the judgment of the Remarketmg Agent, wUl affect the market for the Bonds.
The Remarketing Agent, in its discraion, may consider such Infoimation and resources as it
deems appropriate in making the determinations required by this Section, but tbe Remarketing
Agent's determination shall be based solely upon the Remarketing Agent's judgment, and the
Remarketing Agent's determination shall be conclusive and binding upon all parties. The
foregoing notwithstanding, the City may select any Interest Mode and. within an Adjustable Long
Mode or a Rexible Mode, the Remarketing Agent may designate any Rate Period which does not

 83328

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCII^-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

meet the foregoing standardsffthe conditions of Section 4.01(g)(ii) hereof are satisfied. The City
shall select such a prindpal amoimt of Bonds for conversionfromone Interest Mode to another
as wiU aUow Bonds after conversion to be sold in the minimum Authorized Denominations
applicable to such Interest Mode.
(b)
The City shaU evidence each designation of a subsequent Interest Mode and
Adjustment Date for Bonds pursuant to Section 4.01(a) hereof by giving written notice to the
Tnistee, tbe Trustee's Agent, the Remarketing Agent, the Bank and eachratingagency then
maintaining aratingon the Bonds, which written notice shaU be recdved by each such party not
less than 20 days prior to the Adjusttnent Date wiib respect to the new Adjustment Period,
specifying (i) the Interest Mode or Modes in which sudi Bonds shall operate during such
Adjustment Period and the commencement date of such Adjustment Period, and Qi) ff such
Interest Mode is to be an Adjustable Long Mode, the duration of such Adjustment Period for each
Bond affected thereby, the Rate Detennlnation Date or Dates, the Rate Change Date or Dates
therefor and the^ipficable optional redemption provisions determined in acconlance with
Section 3.11 (a)(u) hereof; provided, however, that (A) tf such Adjustment Period Is an Adjustable
Long Mode or a Rexible Mode, the first day foUowing each Rate Period therein shall be a
Business Day, and (B) not later than the 20th day priortothe Adjustment Date withrespeatothe
new Adjustment Period, the Trustee must have received written evidence from eachratingagenty
then maintaining aratingOU the Bonds that the then current rating on the Bonds wiU not be
reduced or withdrawn due to the conversion of the Bonds to the Adjustable Long Mode or the
Rexible Mode. In addition, the Letter of Credit must provide enough days of Interest coverage
after the Adjustment Date as may be required by anyratingagency then maintaining aratingon
the Bondstocontinue its unenhanced rating,ffany, unless no Letter of Credit is required pursuant
to Section 6.02 of this Indenture.
(c)
No later than 10:00 a.m., Chicago time, on an Adjustmem Date which is
the first day of a Rexible Mode, the Remarketing Agent shafi give telephonic notice (confirmed
by telecopy) to the City and the Tnistee of (1) the initial Rate Period and initial Rexible Rate to
be borne by each Bond designated to operate in a Flexible Mode, and (11) the Rate Change Date
which immediatdy succeeds such initial Rate Period. No later than 9:30 a.m., Chicago time, on
an Adjustment Date wlu'ch Is the ffrst day of a DaUy Mode, the Remarketing Agent shaU give
telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the City and the Tnistee of the initial DaUy Rate to
be borne by the Bonds designated to operate in a DaUy Mode.. No later than 10:00 a .m., Chicago
time, on the Rate Determination Date preceding an Adjustment'Date which is the first day of a
Weekly Mode, the Remarketing Agent shaU give telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy)totbe
City and the Trustee of the initial Weekly Rate to be home by the Bonds designated to operate in
a Weekly Mode. No later than 10:00 a.m., (Thicago time, on the Rate Determination Date
preceding an Adjustment Date which is the first day of an Adjustable Long Mode, the
Remarketing Agent shall give telephonic notice (confinned by telecopy) to tbe Trustee and the
City of the imtial Adjustable Long Rate to be borne by each Bond designated to operate in an
Adjustable Long Mode.
(d)
If the City shall designate a Shon Mode for any Bond which had been
operating in an Adjustable Long Mode, or if the City shall designate an Adjustable Long Mode

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83329

for any Bond which had been operating in a Short Mode, the City shall cause to be delivered to
the Trustee, die Trustee's Agent, the Bank and the Remarketing Agent concunendy whh the
notice described in (b) above, an Opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that such designation (1) Is
authorized or pennitted by this Indenture, (u) wifi not have an adverse effea on the exclusion
from gross income of interest on the Bonds for. Federal income tax purposes, and (Ui) wiU not
have an adverse effect on the vafidity or enforceablfity of any Bond, ff an Opinion of Bond
Counsel is required to be delivered together with the notice, the conversion contemplated by such
opinion and notice shafi not become effective unless prior to 11:00 a.m., Chicago time, on tbe
appficable Adjustment Date the Tnistee shafi have received an Opinion of Bond Counsd, dated
die Adjusnnent Date, reaffirming die conclusions of the opinion accompanying the notice
defivered as above required. .
(e)
In the event (i) the Remarketing Agent does not determine the interest rate
applicabletothe initial Rate Period during a new Interest Mode with respect to any Bond all as
provided .in Section 4.01(a) hereof, or (u) an opinion required by Section 4.01(d) hereof is not
deUvered or reaffirmed on the applicable Adjustment Date, the Immediately succeeding Interest
Mode with respea to the Bonds in the Interest Mode then ending shaU be (A) a DaUy Modtffthe
preceding Mode was a Short Mode, with a DaUy Rate established by the Remarketing Agent, or
ff the Remarketing Agent fuls to set such Rate, such DaUy Rate shaU be equal to the BMA
Municqial Index, or (B) an Adjustable Long Mode with an Adjusttnem Period of 367 daysfftbe
preceding Mode was an Adjustable Long Mode, with an Adjustable Long Rate established by the
Remarketing Agent, or, ff the Remarketing Agent fails to set suchrate,such Adjustable Long Rate
shaU be equal to the Bond Buyer One-Year Note Index, as most recentiy published In The Bond
Buyer preceding tbe Adjustment Date.
(f)
.Upon receipt of noticefronathe City as provided In Section 4.01(b) hereof,
tbe Tmstee, at least 15 days prior to each succeeding Adjustment Date, shaU give the Immediate
Notice described in Section 3.06 hereof to each Registered Owner of Bonds thereby affected
bearing interest at a DaUy Rate or a Weekly Rate of the mandatoty tender for purchase of the
affected Bonds on the Adjustment Date.

-.s

(g)
Any designation pursuant to Section 4.01(a) of a subsequent Adjustment
Period shall be accompanied by (1) a written statementfromthe Remarketing Agent, addressed
to the City, the Bank and the Trustee, to die effect that the Remarketing Agent has detenmned that
such change satisfies the standards provided in Section 4.01(a) hereof, or (11) an approval in
writing of such change by a duly authorized officer of the City or an Opinion of Bond Counsel
to the effea that such approval is not required for the continued validity and enforceabUity ofthe
Bonds in accordance with their terms.
(h)
During such time as a Letter of Credit is required under Section 6.02 of this
Indenture, no conversion of Interest Modes shall be effective unless the City has certffied to the
Trustee that the Credit Agreement in effect on and after such Interest Mode change permits
requests to be made and fimds to be made avaUable to the Trustee's Agent so the Trustee's Agent
can comply with Section 3.07 hereof in a timely manner.

 83330

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 4.02. Designation of Substitute Adjustment Date; (a) The City may
designate a Substimte Adjustment Date (1) for any Bank Bonds (provided that such Bank Bonds
shall continue to bear interest at the Bank Rate as long as they remain Bank Bonds), with Bank
Approval, on any Business Day, and (11) for any Bonds in an Adjustable Long Mode, on any
Business Day on which such Bonds can be optionally redeemed at a price of par plus accmed
mterest as set forthin Section 3.1 l(a)(u) hereof. The Substimte Adjustment Date shall be the next
succeeding Adjustment Date for such Bonds for aU purposes of the Indenture.
' (b). The City shaU evidence each such designation of a Substimte Adjustment
Date by giving written noticetothe Remarketing Agent, the Bank and tbe Trustee, which written
notice shaU be received by the Remarketing Agent and the Tnistee not less than one day prior to
each such Substitute Adjustment Date for Bank Bonds and not less than 20 days prior to each
Substitution Date for Bonds in an Adjtistable Long Mode, specifying (1) the Interest Mode in
which such Bonds shall operate commencing with such Substimte Adjustment Date, and (u) tf
such Adjustment Period is to be an Adjustable Long Mode, the duration of the- immediately
succeeding Adjustment Period for each Bond affected thereby, the Rate Periods therein, the Rate
Change Dates and Rate Determination Dates therefor, and tbe appUcable optional redemption
provblons determined in accordance with Section 3.11(a)(u) hereof; provided, however, that
clauses (A) and (B) of tbe proviso of Section 4.01(b) hereof shall apply to the designation by the
City of a Substitute Adjustmem Date and the selection of the Rate Change Date or Dates
appUcable thereto. In addition, ff the succeeding Adjustment Period Is to be an Adjustable Long
Mode, the Remarketing Agent shafi give telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy)tothe Trustee
no later than 10:00 a.m., Chicago time, on the Business Day immediatdy preceding the Substimte
Adjustment Date, specifying the interest rate which wiU be effective commencing on such
Substitute Adjusttnent Date, ff the succeeding Adjustment Period is to be a Rexible Mode, the
Remarketing Agent shaU give telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the Tnistee. no later
than 10:00 a.m., Chicago time, on the Adjustment Date which is the fust day of a Rexible Mode,
of (1) the duration of the initial Rate Periods during such Rexible Mode and the initial Rexible
Rates to be borne by the Bonds designated to operate In a Rexible Mode during such Rate
Periods, and 01) the Rate Change Dates upon which such Rate Periods shaU terminate, ff tbe
succeeding Adjustment Period is to be a Weekly Mode, the Remarketing Agent shall give
telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the City and the Trustee, no later than 10:00 a.m.,
Chicago time, on the Business Day immediately preceding the Substitiite Adjustment Date,
specifying the interest rate which wiU be effective commencing on such Substitute Adjustment
Date, ff the succeeding Adjustment Period is to be a DaUy Mode, the Remarketing Agem shall
give telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the Tnistee, no later than 9:30 a.m., Chicago
time, on the Substimte Adjustment Date which is thefirstday of a DaUy Mode, of the initial DaUy
Rate to be borne by the Bonds designated to operate in a DaUy Mode during such Rate Period,
ff the succeeding Adjustmem Period is to be a Fixed Mode, the City shaU satisfy the requfrements
of Section 4.03.
(c)
If the City shall designate a Substimte Adjustment Date for any Bonds, it
shall cause to be delivered to the Trustee, the Remarketing Agent and the Bank concurrentiy with
the notice described in (b) above, and no such designation of a Substimte Adjustment Date shall
take effect without, an Opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that the designation of such

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83331

Substimte Adjustment Date CO is authorized or permitted by this Bond Indenmre, (ii).wUl not have
an adverse effect on the exclusionfromgross income for Federal income tax purposes of interest
on die Bonds, and (in) wUI not have an adverse effect on the vafidity or enforceabUity of any
Bond. The Substimte Adjustment Date shaU not be effective unless prior to 10:00.a.in-, Chicago
time, on the Substimte Adjustment Date, the. Tnistee shaU have received an Opinion of Bond
Counsel, dated such Adjustment Date, reafiinnlng the conclusions of the opinion accompanying
the notice delivered as above required.
(d)
Any designation by the City pursuant to Section 4.02(a) of a Substitute
Adjustment Date shall be accompanied by (1) a written statementfromthe Remarketing Agent,
addressed to the City and die Tnistee,tothe effect diat the Remarketing Agent has determined that
such change satisfies the standards provided m Section 4.01(a) hereof, or (u) an Opinion of Bond
Counsel to the effect that such approval is not required for the contiiiued yaUdity and
enforceabUity of the Bonds in accordance with thefr terms.
Section 4.09. Authority for and Conditions to ConversiontoFixed Rate, (a)
On any Rate Change Date during a Rexible Mode or an Adjustable Long Mode, or on any
Business Day during a DaUy Mode or a Weekly Mode, tbe interestraleto be borne by all or any
portion of tbe Bonds m such Interest Mode shaU be convened to a Fixed Rate, and such Bonds
so converted shaU thereafter bear interest at such Fixed Rate untU payment of the principal or
ledenqition price thereof shaU have been made, or provided for in accordance with the provisions
hereof, whether at the Maturity Date, upon redemption or otherwise, upon receipt by the Trustee
of (1) a directionfroma duty authorized officer of the City specifying a Fixed Rate Conversion
Date and the prindpal amoimt of Bonds to be converted, (U) afirmunderwriting or purchase
contractfipoma recognized firm of bond underwriters or recognized instimtional Investors to
underwrite or purchase aU Bonds which are tp be convened on such Fixed Rate Conversion Date
at a price of 100 percent of the principal amount thereof, and (iu) an Opinion of Bond Counsel
addressed to the. City and the Trustee to the effea that such conversion (A) is authorized or
permitted by this Bond Indenmre, (B) wiU not have an adverse effect on the exdusionftomgross
income for Federal income tax purposes of die Interest on the Bonds, and (Q wiU not have an
adverse effect on the vaUdity or enforceablfity of any Bond, aU of which direction, certificates,
contract and opinion shaU be received not less than 20 days prior to the Fixed Rate Conversion
Date. The conversion of the interest rate borne by Bonds pursuam to this Section shall not
become effective unless prior to 10:(X} a.m., Chicago time, on the applicable Fixed Rate
Conversion Date the Tnistee shall have received an Opinion of Bond Counsel, dated the Fixed
Rate Conversion Date, reaffirming the conclusions of the opinion accompanying the written
dfrection of the City delivered as above requfred.
(b)
At least 15 days prior to the Fixed Rate (Conversion Date, the Trustee shafi
give or cause the Remarketing Agent to give written notice of such election by the City to the
Registered Owners of aU Bonds to be converted bearing interest at a DaUy Rate or a Weekly Rate,
which notice shall state (i) the Fixed Rate Conversion Dale, and (ii) that such Bonds shall be
subject to mandatoty purchase on such Fixed Rate Conversion Date. The Trustee shall give
written notice by first class maU to the Remarketing Agent and the Bank of the foregoing
information.

 83332

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5 / 1 / 2002

(c)
The City, at the direction of the Trustee, shaU deliver replacement Bonds
bearing the Fuced Rate for converted Bonds surrendered or deemed surrendered by the Registered
Owner thereof. Any such replacement Bonds shaU be executed and authenticated as provided in
Section 2.08 hereof; provided, however, that, unless the fonn of the Bonds Isrevisedpursuant
to Section 2.05 hereof, the Trustee shafi affix a legend on the face of each Bond authenticated on
or after the Fixed Rate Conversion Date therefor in substantiaUy the foUowing form:
This Bond bears interest at the Fixed Rate, as defmed In this Bond, of
percent per annumfromand after
. This Bond is not
secured by a Letter of CredlL This Bond matures on
(d)
From tbe date notice of the proposed establishment of a Fixed Rate with
respect to any Bond is received by the Trustee as provided in subsection (a) of this Section 4:03
through the Fixed Rate Conversion Date therefor, such Bond shaU not be remarketed by the
Remarketing Agent excepttoa buyer who is notified in 'writing of the mandatoty purchase of such
Bond on such Fixed Rate Conversion Date.
(e)
No Letter of Credit Isrequiredfor Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate,
so the amount of the Letter of Credit, ff any. -may be reduced on or after the Fixed Rate
Conversion Date with respect to such Bonds as provided in the Chnedit Agreement. Tbe
determination of the Fixed Rate for any Bonds shafi be coiK:liisive and binding upon the
Registered Owners of such Bonds, the City and the Tnistee.
. . .
(f)
After the Fixed Rate Conversion Date for any Bonds, interest on such Bonds
shafi be payable semiannuaUy oh each Januaty 1 and July 1 untU aU of such Bonds shall have been
paid or payment shaU have been duly provided for. The Interest payable on the Januaty 1 or July
1, as the case may be, next following the' Fixed Rate Conversion Date for such Bonds shall be for
the period, which may be less than six months, commencing on such Fixed Rate Conversion Date
untU such Januaty 1 or July 1'.
(g)
If the conversion of the interest rate on any Bond does not occur for any
reason, including In the evem that any condition precedent to the conversion shaU not occur, such
Bonds shaU bear Interest from and after the proposed Fixed Rate Conversion Date In the same
Interest Mode as the Interest Mode applicable to such Bond prior to the proposed Fixed Rate
Conversion Date, at the interestratecalculated in the manner set fortb in Section 2.02 hereof,
and, in the case of an Adjustable Long Mode, for a Rate Period of 367 days.
Section 4.04. Effert of Notices. Any notice maUed as provided herein shall be
conclusively presumed to have been given, whether or not the Registered Owners of the Bonds
receive the same.

 5 / 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83333

ARTICLE V
Revenues and Funds
Section 5.01. Source of Payment of Bonds. The Bonds are direa and general
obfigations of the City but are lunlted as to payment as described in Section 2.03 hereof and as
otherwise provided herein.
Section 5.02. Creation of Proceeds Fund and Debt Service Fund; Creation of
Bond Purchase Fund, (a) Creation of Proceeds Fund and Debt Service Fund. There is hereby
created by the City and ordered established with the Trustee a separate and segregated fimd to be
designated the "City of Chicago Variable Rate Bonds, Series
Proceeds Fund" (die "Proceeds
Fund") and a separate and segregated fund to be designated the "City of Chicago Variable Rate
Bonds, Series
Debt Service Fund" (die "Debt Service Fund"). Moneys on deposit in the
Proceeds Fund and the Debt Service Fund, and in each Account established therein as hereinafter
provided, shafi be held in trust by the Trustee for the sole and exduslve benefit of the Registered
Owners of the Bonds and the Bank.
(b)
Creation of Accounts. There arc hereby created by the Chy and ordered
established whh tbe Trustee separate Accoimts within the Proceeds Fund, designated as foUows:
(1)
Projea Account: an Account to be designated the "City of Chicago
Variable Rate Bonds, Series
Projea Account" (the "Projea Account");
(2)
C^itafized Interest Account: an Account to be designated the "City of
Chicago Variable Rate Bonds, Series
Capitalized Interest Account" (the " Capitalized
.Interest Account");
(3)
costs of Issuance Atxount: ain Account to be designated the "City of
Chicago Variable Rate Bonds, Series
Costs of Issuance Accoimt" (the "C^osts of
Issuance Account"); and
(4)
Program Fee Account: an Account to be designated the "City of Chicago
Variable Rate Bonds,. Series
Program Fee Account" (the "Program Fee Account");
There is hereby created by the City and ordered established with the Trustee
separate accounts within the Debt Service Fund designated as follows:
(1)
Prindpal and Interest Account: an Accoimt to be designated the "City of
Chicago Variable Rate Bonds, Series
Principal and Interest Account" (the "Principal
and Interest Account"); and
(2)
Letter of Credit Accoimt: an Account to be designated the "City of Chicago
Variable Rate Bonds, Series
Letter of Credit Account" (the "Letter of Credit
Account-")

 83334

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(c)
Creation of Bond Purchase Fund. The Trustee shall establish and maintam
(but shall not have a lien on as pan of the Trust Estate),, as long as any Bonds are outstanding
which have not been converted to a Fixed Rate, a separate fimdtobe known as die "City of
Chicago Variable Rate Bonds, Series
Bond Purchase Fund" (die "Bond Purchase Fund").
There shaU be deposited Into the Bond Purchase Fundfromtime to time the foUowing:
(1)
the moneys received upon theremarketingof Tendered Bondstoany person
pursuant to the Remarketing Agreement (other than Tendered Bonds soldtothe City in
violation of Section 3.15(b) hereoO;
(u) the moneys receivedfiomthe underwriter or- purchaser (other than the
City) of Tendered Bonds upon the conversion of the interest rate thereontoa Fixed Rate;
(ui) the moneys obtained by the Tnistee pursuant to the Letter of Credit, if any,
then In effect to be appliedtopay tbe purchase price of Tendered Bonds; and
(iv) Hlgible Moneys from die City to the extent that moneys obtamed pursuant
to (1). (11) or (In) above are insufficient on any date to pay the purchiase price of Tendered
Bonds, provided that the conditions of Section 3.15(b)'hereof are satisfied.
Moneys in the Bond Purchase Fund shaU be held in trust exclusivefy for the
payment of the purchase • price of Tendered Bonds; provided, however, that under no
circumstances shaU proceeds of a loan made pursuanttothe Letter of Credit be usedtopurchase
Bank Bonds. Moneys obtained by the Trustee puisuant to the Letter of C^redlt m excess of the
amount needed for the paymdu of the purchase price of Tendered Bonds shaU be prompdy paid
to die Bank. Moneys on deposit in tbe Bond Purchase Fund shall be invested only In Federal
Obfigations with a term not exceeding the earfier of 30 days ftom the date of investment of such
moneys or the date or dates that moneys therefrom are anticipatedtobe requfred. Amounts held
to pay the purchase price shafi be appfied in the same manner as provided imder the Indenture
with respecttounclaimed payments of principal and Interest.
Section 5.03. Appfication of Bond Proceeds. The proceeds received by the City
from the sale of the Bonds shall be appfied as foUows:
(a)
Principal and Interest Account: the Tnistee shaU deposit into the Principal
and Interest Account any accmed interest received upon the sale of the Bonds;
(b)
Capitalized Interest Accoimt: the Tnistee shall deposh into the Capitalized
Interest Account the amount of $
;
(c)
Program Fee Account: the Trustee shall deposit into tbe Program Fee
Account the amount of $
;
(d)
of $

Project Account: the Trustee shall deposh into the Project Account the sum
; and

 ^/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83335

(e)
COsts of Issuance Account: the balance of the proceeds of the Bonds in the
amount of $
shaU be deposited in the Costs of Issuance Account and appfied
by the City to the payment of Closts of Issuance of the Bonds.
Section 5.04. Deposits into Dd>t Service Fund and Accounts Therein. From
timetotune, when and as received, the City shaU deposit into the Debt Service Fund such fiinds
as are legaUy avaUable therefor, as necessaty to satisfy the Principal and Interest Account
Requirement, such moneystobe appUed as described below:
(a)
for deposit into the Prindpal and Interest Account, the amount, projected
to be required as of the dose of business on the applicable dates of calculation for tbe
Prindpal and Interest Account Requirementtorestore the Prindpal and Interest Account
- to an amount equal to the Principal and Interest Account Requirement, treating, for
purposes of such calculation any balance projected to be on deposit m the Capitalized
Interest Account as of the close of business on such date as amounts creditedtothe
Principal and Interest Accoimt; and
(b)
for deposit into the Program Fee Account, tbe amount esthnated by the City
to be required as of the close of busmess on therelatedDeposit Date to pay aU Program
. Fees payablefiomamounts in die Program Fee Account during die semi-annual period
commencing on suchrelatedDeposit Date.
In additiontothe Debt Service Fund, Uiere shafi be deposited into the Ddit Service
Fmid any other moneys received by the Trustee under and pursuant to this Indenture, when
accompanied by directionsfromtbe person depositing such moneys that such montys aretobe
paid into the Debt Service Fund and to one or more accounts therein.
Section 5.05. Use of Moneys in Certain Accounts for Payment of Bonds.
Moneys m the Capitalized Interest Account, the Principal and Interest Account and the Letter of
Credit Accoimt shafi be used solely for the payment of the principal of, premium,ffany, and
Interest on tbe Bonds, for the redemption of the Bonds prior to thefr' Maturity Date, and for
rchnbursement of the Bank for draws on the Letter of Credit as provided below. Funds for such
payments shafi be derived from the foUowing source or sources but only In the following order
of priority:
(a)
for payment ofprincipalofand interest on the Bonds on each Payment Date
with respect to the Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed
Rate), so long as the Letter of Oedit shall be in effea,frommoneys held in the Letter of
Credit Account, which Accoimt shall be held for the sole and exclusive benefit of the
owners of the Bonds;
(b)
for payment of interest on the Bonds on each Interest Payment Date with
respect to the Bonds,frommoneys held in the Capitalized Interest Account; provided,
however, that so long as the Letter of Credii shall be in effect, interest due on the Bonds
(except for Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) on such Interest

 83336

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Payment Date shaU be" paidfroma draw or draws on the Letter of Credit and moneys held
in the Capitalized Interest Account shaU be used on such Interest Payment Date to
reimburse die Bank In an amount not to exceed the amount of such diaw or draws;
(c)
for payment of principal of tbe Bonds on each Payment Date on which a
Principal Installment is payable with respea to the Bonds, from moneystiansfeiiedfix}ffl
the Projea Account pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.07 hereof and held in the
Principal and Interest Account; provided, however, that so long as the Letter of Credit
shaU be in effect, such Principal Installment or Sinking Fund Payment (except in respea
of Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing Interest at a Fixed Rate) shaU be paidfroma draw or
draws on tbe Letter of Credit and moneys held in the Principal and Intdrst Account shaU
be used on such Payment Date toreimbursethe Bank in an amount not to exceed the
amount of such draw or draws; and
(d) for paymem of principal of, premium, If any, and Interest due on each
Payment Date with respea to the Bonds and not otherwise provided for,fiximmoneys held
in the Princqial and Interest Account.
Section 5.06. Useof Moneys in Costs oflssuance Accoimt and Program Fee
Accoimt. Moneys deposited into the Costs of Issuance Account pursuanttoSection 5.03(e) sbaU
be used solely for the payment of Costs of Issuance of the Bonds as directed In a certificate of the
City.fUed with the Trustee. If after the payinent of aU COsts of Issuance, as specified in a
certificate of the Cityfiledwith die Tnistee, there shafi be any balance remaining m the COsts of
Issnapce Account, such balance sbaU be transferred to tbe Program Fee AccounL Moneys
depbshed Into the Program Fee Account pursuant to Section 5.03(c) hereof shaU be used soldy
for the payment of Program Fees'payable by the Citytothud parties, including the.Bank, -whh
respect to the Bonds as set forth in a certificate ofthe Cityfiledwith the Trustee.
Section 5.07. UseofMoneys in Project Account. Except as otherwise provided
herem. moneys in the Project Accoimt shall be disbursed and appfied to pay, ortoreunburse the
payment of, the cost of capital projects of the City and for the short termfixtanclngof the •working
capital needs of die City.
•
Section 5.08. Tax Covenants. The City covenants to take any action required by
the provisions of the Code and within Its powertotake in order to preserve the exclusion of
interest on the Bonds firom gross income for Federal income tax purposes, including, but not
liinitedto,the provisions of Section 148 of the Coderelatingto "arbitrage bonds."
The City further covenanis to comply with the provisions of tbe Tax Compliance
Certificate of the City relating to the Bonds, including, but not limited to, those provisions rdating
lo the status of the Bonds as "private activity bonds" under Section 141 of the Code.
Section 5.09. Non-presentment of Bonds. In the event any Bond shall not be
presented for payment when the prindpal thereof becomes due, whether at maturity, at the date
fixed for redemption or otherwise, if moneys sufficient to pay such Bond shall have been made

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83337

avaUable to the Trustee for the benefit of the Registered Ovner thereof, subjecttothe provisions
of the immediately foUowing paragraph, aU liabUity of tbe City to the Registered Owner thereof
for the payment of such Bond shall forthwith cease, determine and be completely discharged, and
thereupon it shaU be the duty of the Tnistee to hold such moneys, without liabUity for Interest
thereon, for the benefit of the Registered Owner of such Bond who shaU thereafter be restricted
exclusively to such moneys, for any claim of whatever nature on his or her part under the
IndeDQire or on, or with respect to, such Bond.
Any moneys so deposited wiUi and held by die Tnistee not so applied to the
payment of Bonds within two years after the date on which the same shaU have become due shall
be repaid by tbe Tnistee to the City, and thereafter the Registered Owners of such Bonds shaU he
enthled to look onlytothe City for payment, and then only to the extent of the amount so repaid,
and aUfiabifityof tbe Tnistee with respea to such moneys shall diereupon cease, and the C^ty
shaU not be liable for any interest thereon and sbaU not be regarded as a tnistee of such moneys.
The obligation of the Trustee under this Sectiontopay any such fundstothe City shaU be subject,
however, to any provisions of law appficable to the Trustee or to suchfimdsproviding other
requirements for disposition of unclaimed property.
Section 5.10. Moneys Held in Trust. Afi moneys required to be deposited with
or paidtothe Tnistee for the account of any FUnd or Accountreferredto in any provision of this
Indenture shaU be hdd by the Tnistee m trust as provided m this Indenmre. and shaU. whUe held
by the Trustee, constimte pan of the Trust Estate and be subjea to the lien or security interest
created hereby. Payfrients under the Letter of Credit shall be used solely and only to pay prindpal
and interest on the Bonds, and the purchase price of Bonds, as provided in the Letter of Credit.

ARTICLE VI
Credit Facifities
Section 6.01. Letter of Credh. (a) The Chy covenants and agrees that at aU times
whUe any Bonds are outstanding which bear interest at arateother than the Fixed Rate, it wiU
mahitain a Letter of Credh in fiiU force and effect with respea to all such Bonds bearing interest
at other than a Fixed Rate, except as otherwise provided in Seaion 6.02 of this Indenture.
(b)
Upon the receipt by the Tnistee of a written request of the City staring that
the amount available under the Letter of Credit may be reduced in compliance with Section 6.02
of this Indenture, the Trustee shaU direct or send appropriate notice to the Bank requesting or
directing that such amoimt be reduced and specifying the amount that shaU thereafter be available
under the Letter of Credit, subject to any requirements of the Credit Agreement. In no event shaU
the Letter of Credit be reduced to an amount less than the principal amoimt of tbe Bonds
outstanding which bear imerest at other than a Fixed Rate, plus an amount equal to interest
thereon at the Interest Coverage Rate thenrequiredby anyratingagency thenratingthe Bonds
for the number of days then requfred by anyratingagency thenratingthe Bonds, unless the City
has deposited a Substimte Letter of Credit with the Trustee in accordance with the terms of this

 83338

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCII^-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section, or unless the requirements set forth in Section 6.02 of this Indenture are satisfied; in no
event shaU any Substimte Letter of Credit replace only in part any then current Letter of Credit
Notwithstanding the foregoing, immediately after payment in fiiU has been made on any Bond,
eidier at Its Mamrity Date, by optional redemption or otherwise, the Tnistee shaU direct or send
appropriate noticetothe Bankrequestingor directing that the amount available under the Letter
of Credit be reduced by an amount equal to such prindpal so paid plus the amount of interest
theretofore provided for under tbie Letter of Credit on such princqial amount. No diiection or
consent of the City shaU be required for the Tnistee to take the action requfred by the preceding
sentence.
(c)
Priortothe Fixed Rate Conversion Date, a Substimte Letter of Credh may
become effective on any Business Day, which shaU be a Substimtion Date. The City shaU cause
a draft of any Substimte Letter of Credit In substantiaUyfinalform and a commitment letter with
respect thereto, together whh written evidencefromeachratingagencyratingthe Bonds prior to
tbe Substimtion Date of theratlng'ontbe Bonds after the Substimtion Date, to be deliveredtotbe
Trustee, die Trustee's Agent and the Remarketing Agent, not less than 15 days prior to the
proposed Substimtion Date. On each Substimtion Date the City, the Remariceting Agem. die
Tnistee and the Tnistee's Agent shall also receive (0 an opunon of counsel for the Substimte Bank
regarding the enforceablfity of the Substitute Letter of Credit in substantially the form deUvered'
to the Trustee upon execution and defivety of the Letter of Credit then In effect, and (u) an
Opmion of Bond Counsel to the effea that the substimtion of the Letter of Credh then in effect
wlU not adversely affea the validity of the Bonds or any exclusion from gross income for Federal
income tax purposes of mterest on the Bonds would otherwise be entitied. No Substkute Letter
of Credit shall become effective uidess the then current Bank certifies to the City, tbe Trustee's
Agent and the Tnistee that aU obfigations owing to such Bank under the Credit Agreement have
been paid m fiiU.
(d)
On any Substimtion Date on which a Substhute Letter of Credit becomes
effective in accordance with tbe provisions of this Section, the Trustee shaU take such action as
is required under the Credit Agreement to cause the cancellation of the Letter of Credit dien in
effect provided that all drawings requested thereunder have been honored.
(e)
Immediate Notice shall be given by tbe Tnistee to the Bank, tbe City, the
Remarketing Agent, the Trustee's Agent and eachratingagetity then maintaining aratingon the
Bondsffno satisfaaoty Substimte Letter of Credit shaU be fiimished to the Trustee in accordance
with this Section on or priortothe Stated Termination Date of the then current Letter of Credit,
unless therequirenientsof Section 6.02 of this Indenture are satisfied.
(f)
Each Substimte Letter of Credit shaU provide for the submission of draws
thereunder, and the payment of properly submitted draws, on the same tirmng as that ofthe Letter
of Credh being substimted for, unless the Rating Agency shaU agree to some other timing.
Section 6.02. Letter of Credit Not Required in Certain Cfrcumstances. (a)
Prior to the Fixed Rate Conversion Date therefor^ Bonds are not requfred to have the benefit of
a Letter of Credit with respect to 100 percent of the outstanding principal amount of such Bonds

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83339

if, priortothe expiration or termination of the Letter of Credit then in effect, there is defivered
to the City, die Remarketuig Agent, die Tnistee and the Tmstee's Agent (i) an Opmion of Bond
Counsel to the effea that the expiration or termination of the Letter of Credit then in effea wlU
not adversely affect the validity of the Bonds or any exclusionfiximgross income for Federal
income tax purposes of Interest on the Bonds, and Gl) written evidencefiromeachratingagency
then maintaining aratingon the Bonds that the ratings on the Bonds (odier than Bonds hi the
Fixed Mode) following the expiration or termination of the Letter of Credit wifi not be reduced,
or withdrawn from tbe ratings on the Bonds immediately prior to such expiration or termination.
Bonds bearing Interest at a Fixed Rate shafi not be required to have the benefit of a Letter of
Credh after the Fixed Rate Conversion Date appUcable to such Bonds. •
(b)
Upon satisfaction of the requirements described in subparagraph (a) above,
(i) tbe Tnistee, upon receipt of a written request of the City, shall direct or send appropriate
noticetothe Bank requesting or directing the cancefiation of the Letter of Oedh then In effea on
the date (the "Letter of Credit CanceUation Date") requested by the City in such written request,
which date may not be less than 30 days, or such longer period as isrequiredby the Credit
Agreement for its termination at the request of the City,fromthe date the Trustee receives such
'Written request, and Cu) foUowing the date of such canceUation, aU Tendered Bonds may be
remarketed by the Remarketing Agent pursuanttothe Remarketing Agreement without the benefit
of a Letter of Credit untU such time, if any, as the Bonds are thereafter entitied tp the benefits of
a Letter of Credit pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.01 of this Indentiire, but only,ffdiere
b defiveredtothe C ^ . the Tnistee, the Trustee's Agem and the Remarketing Agent an Opmion
of Bond Counsel to the effea that the execution and delivety of the Letter of Credit wlU not
adversely affea the vafidity of the Bonds or any exclusionfromgross income for Federal Income
tax purposes of mterest on the Bonds. In the event of a Letter of Credit COncellation Date, the
Bonds shaU be subjea to mandatoty tender pursuant to Section 3.04 hereof. - ff at any time no
. Letter of C^redlt.is required on the Bonds, tbe Tnistee shaU affix a legend on the face of each Bond
which does not bear interest at a Fixed Rate authenticated on or after the date on which a Letter
of Credit is no longer required in substantiaUy the foUowing form:
A Letter of Credit is not required withrespecttothis Bond, ff a Letter of
Credh is currendy provided, it may be discontimied at any time without prior
notice to, or arightto tender by, the Bondholder.
Section 6.03. (Onsent of Bank Required. No consent of or notice to the Bank
shaU be required under any provision of tbe Indenture, nor shall the Bank have anyrightto
receive notice of, consem to, direct or control any actions, restrictions,rights,remedies, "waivers
or accelerations pursuamtoany provision of the Indenture, during any time which:
(1)
the Bank is in default in its obligation to make loans under and m
compliance with the terms of the Letter of Credit;
(u)
the Letter of Credit for any reason ceases to be valid and binding on the
Bank or is declared to be null and void, or the validity or enforceabUity of any provision
ofthe Letter of Credit is denied by the Bank or any governmental agency or authority, or

 83340

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

the Bank is denying furtherfiabUityor obligation under the Letter of Credh, in all of the
above cases contraty to the terms of the Letter of Credit;
Oii) a petition has been fUed and is pendmg against die Bank under any
bankruptcy, reorganization, arrangemeu, insolvency, readjustment of debt, dissolution or
liquidation law of any jurisdiction, whether now or hereafter In effea, and has not been
dismissed wlthm thirty (30) day after such fifing;
(iv)
die Bank has filed a petition, which is pendmg, under any bankruptcy,
reorganization, arrai^ement. Insolvency, readjustment of debt, dissolution or Uquidation
law, of any jurisdiction, whether now or hereafter In effect, or has consented u the fding
of any petition against it under such law; or
(v)
the Bank is dissolved or confiscated by action of government due to "war or
peace time emergenty or the United States government declares a moratorium on the
Bank's acri'vitles.
. '
Section 6.04. Draws on the Letter of Credit, (a) Trustee's Duty to Draw on
Letter of Oedit to Pay Principal of and Interest on Bonds. Tbe City hereby authorized and directs
the Tnistee, and the Tnistee hereby agrees, to draw moneys under the Lener of C^redlt for the
benefit of the owners of the Bonds in accordance with the terms thereof in amounts sufficient to
make timely payments of the principal of and interest on the Bonds (other than Bank Bonds or .
Bonds bearing Interest at a Rxed Rate) in accordance widi the provisions of Section
hereof
after taking into account any amounts held in the Letter of Credit Account as a result of draws on
the Letter of Credh pursuant to subsection (c) of this Section 6.04. .
(b)
Trustee's Duty to Draw on Letter of Credit to Pay Purchase or Redemption
Price of Bonds. Tbe Trustee shall also (1) draw moneys under the Letter of Credit in accordance
with the terms thereof to the extent necessaty to make timely payments requfred to be made
pursuant to, and m accordance widi. Sections 3.01, 3.02, 3.03, 3.04, 3.05 and 3.06 hereof, and
(11) draw moneys under the Letter of Credit to pay the redemption price of Bonds (other than Bank
Bonds or Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) pursuant to Section 3.11 hereof in accordance
with the terms thereof in the amounts required by said Section 3.11. It is understood and agreed
that the Trustee when drawing amounts under tbe Letter of Credit as provided in clauses (i) and
(il) of diis subsection (b) Is not acting as an agent of the City. The Tnistee shall make draws
imder the Letter of Credit in accordance with the terms thereof to pay the purchase price of Bonds
pursuant to Sections 3.01, 3.02, 3.03, 3.04, 3.05 and 3.06 hereof, or to pay the redemption price
or purchase price of the Bonds pursuant to Section 3.11 hereof, so as to provide immediately
available funds in New York. New York, by the close of business on the date such purchase or
redemption is to be made.
(c)
Drawines Under Letter of Credit When Bonds Bear Interest at Rexible
Rate. On the first Business Day of each month while the Bonds bear interest at a Rexible Rate
and on any Adjustment Dale commencing a Rexible Mode that is not the first Business Day of
a month, the Trustee shall make draws under the Letter of Credit in accordance with the terms

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83341

thereof in an amoimt that would be sufficient to cause the amount on deposit in the Letter of
Credit Account on such day to equal the accrued and unpaid interest on the Bonds (other than
Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) plus the Interest that would accrue on the
Bonds from such date to and including the first Business Day of the foUowing calendar month ff
the Bonds were outstanding at aU times during such period calculated on the basis of the Interest
rate used in the Letter of Credit for purposes of calculating the stated amount thereof, for any day
Interest is to accrue at arateunknown on the date such draw is made. In either case, the Tnistee
shall apply amounts held to the credit of the Principal and Interest Actxunttoreimbursethe Bank
the amoimt of such draw pursuant to Section
hereof. The, Trustee sbaU provide any Paying
Agent with the amounts calculated by the Trustee to be drawn under tbe Letter of Credit by such
Paying Agent pursuant to this Section 6.04. Notwithstanding the deposit of such moneys in the
Letter of Credit Account and thereimbursementof the Bank; the Chy shaU have no right, titie,
or interest in such moneys, and such moneys shall be held exclusi'vely for the Registered Owners
and paid over In accordance whh the provisions of this Indenture.

ARTICLEVn
Investment of Moneys
Section 7.01. Investment of Moneys. Moneys held in the fiinds, accounts and
sub-accounts established hereunder shall be Invested and reinvested in accordance with die
provisions governing Investments contained In the Indenmre; provided,-however, diat proceeds
of the Letter of Credit shall only be invested in Federal ObUgations manmng no later than the date
upon which such moneys wiU be required to be used in accordance herewith. AU such
investments shall be held by or under the confrol of the Trustee and shall be deemed at all tunes
a pan of the fimd, account or sub-accoimt for wluch they were made.
Section 7.02. Investinent Income. The interest eamed. on any Investment of
moneys held hereunder, any profit realizedfipomsuch investment and any lossresultingfromsuch
investment shaU be credited or charged to the fimd, accoimt or sub-account for which such
investment was made; provided, however, that any interest earned on, and any profit resulting
from, the investment of moneys on deposit in the Debt Service Reserve Account shaU be
transferred by the Trustee to the Second Lien Revenue Fund.

ARTicnjE vra
Discharge of Lien
Section 8.01. Defeasance, ff die City shaU pay to die Registered Owners of the
Bonds, or provide for the paymem of, the principal, preinium, if any, and interest to become due
on the Bonds, and satisfy in fidl the Bank Obligations, then this Indenture shall be fiiUy discharged
and satisfied. Upon the satisfaction and discharge of this Indenture, the Trustee shaU, upon the
request of the City, execute and deliver to the City all such instruments as may be desirable to

 83342

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

.

5/1/2002

evidence such discharge and satisfaction, and aUfiduciariesshall pay over or delivertothe City
all funds, accoimts and other moneys or securities held by them pursuanttothis Indenmre which
are not required for the payment or redemption of the Bonds or tbe Bank Obfigations
ff the City sbaU pay and discharge a portion of the Bonds as aforesaid, and such
portion shafi cease to be entided to any Hen, benefit or security under the Indenture, andtfthe
City shaU so direct; the Tnistee shaU take such actions as may be necessaty to reduce the Letter
of Credit in an amountrelatedtosuch portion of the Bonds which have been paid and discharged
in accordance with Section 6.01 hereof. ThefiabUityof the City with respecttosuch Bonds shaU
contmue, but the Registered Owners thereof shafi thereafter be entitied to payment (to the
exclusion of aU other Bondholders) only out ofthe moneys or Federal Obligations deposited widi
the Tnistee under Article XI of the Indenture.

ARTICXE IX
Default Provisions; Remedies
Section 9.01. Defaults. Each of the foUowing events is hereby declared to be an
"Event of Defeult":
(a)
paymem of the principal or Redemption Price, ff any, of any Bonds shaU
not be made when and as the same shaU become due, ndietber at maturity or upon caU for
redemption or otherwise;
(b)
paymem of any installment of Interest on any Bonds shall not be made when
the same shaU box)me due;
(c)
the City shafi faU or refuse to comply with the provisions of this Indenture,
or shaU default in the performance or observance of any of tbe covenants, agreements or
conditions on Its part contained herein or in the Bonds, which materiaUy affects the rights
of the owners of the Bonds and such faUure,refusalor default shall continue for a period
of 45 days after written notice thereof by the Trustee or the owners of not less than 25
percent in prindpal amount of the Outstanding Bonds; provided, however, that in the case
of any such default which can be cured by due dUlgence but which cannot be cured within
the 45-day period, the time to cure sbaU be extended for such period as may be necessaty
to remedy the default with all difigence;
(d)
default in the due and punctual payment of the purchase price of any
Tendered Bond; or;
(e)
receipt by the Trustee of noticefromthe Bank that an Event of Default has
occurred under the Credh Agreement and that the Letter of Credit is being terminated
pursuant to its terms by the Bank.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83343

Section 9.02. Remedies, (a) Upon the liappening and continuance of any Event
of Default specffied m paragraph (a), (b), (d) or (e) of Section 9.01 hereof, die Trustee shaU
proceed, or upon the happening and continuance of any Event of Default specified in paragraph
(c) of Section 9.01 hereof, the Tnistee may proceed, and upon the written request of the owners
of not less than 25 percent in principal amount of the Outstanding Bonds, sbaU proceed, in its own
name, subjeatotbe provisions of this Section, to protect and enforce itsrightsand therightsof
die owners of the Bonds by such of the foUowmg remedies as the Tnistee, being advised by
counsel, shall deem most effectual to protect and enforce such rights:
(1)
by mandamus or other suit, action or proceeding at law or in equity, to
enforce aUrightsof the owners of the Bonds uicludmg therightto require the City or tbe
Banktocarty out any covenant or agreement with or for tbe benefit of the owners ofthe
Bonds and to perfoim its or thefr duties under this Indenture or the Letter of Oedit;
(u)

by bringing suit upon the Bonds;

(iu)
by action or suh in equity, require the City to accoum as tf h were the
tnistee of an express trust for the owners of the Bonds; or
(iv)
by action or suit in equity, enjoin any acts or things which may be unlawfiil
or in violation of therightsof the owners of the Bonds.
(b)
In the eiffoicement of anyrightsandremediesunder this. Indenture, the
Trustee shaU be entided to sue for, enforce payinent of and receive any and aU amounts then or
during any default becoming, and at any time.remaining, due from the City but only out of
moneys pledged as security for die Bonds for principal. Redemption Price, interest or otherwise,
under any provision of this Indenture or of the Bonds, and uiqiaid, with Interest on overdue
payments at therateorratesof interest specified in such Bonds, together with any and aU costs
and expenses of coUection and of all proceedings hereunder and under such Bonds without
prejudice to any other right or remedy of the Trustee or of the owners of the Bonds, and to
recover and enforce a judgment or decree against the City for any portion of such amounts
remaining unpaid, with Interest, cost and expenses, and to coUect from any moneys avaUable
under this Indenture for such purpose, in any manner provided by law, the moneys adjudged or
decreed to be payable.
(c)
As long as the Letter of Credit shall be in effect, and the Bank shall not
have faded to satisfy its obligations thereunder or otherwise lost itsrightsas provided in Section
6.03 hereof, die Bank shall be entitied to exercise all of the rights granted to the Registered
Owners of tbe Bonds under this Indenmre. and, in such event, shaU befiirtherentided to direa
the Trustee with respect to the use and disposition of moneys on deposit in the Principal and
Interest Account of the Debt Service Fund (including, without limitation, therighttodirect the
Tnistee to pay over all or any part of such moneys to the Bank) untU aU of the obligations to the
B^nk secured by the Trust Estate shaU have been satisfied in fiill. Except as provided in Section
9.02(e) hereof, as long as the Letter of Credit shall be m effect, and the Bank shall not have faUed
to satisfy its obligations thereimder or otherwise lost itsrightsas provided in Section 6.03 hereof.

 83344

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

the Bank shall contt'ol the exercise of aU remedies hereunder; as such, in the foregoing
cfrcumstances. Registered Owners of the Bonds shall not be entided to the exercise of any
remedies hereunder without the Bank's prior written consent.
(d)
Under no circumstance may the Tnistee declare the principal of or Interest
on the Bonds to be due and payable prior to the Maturity Date following the occurrence of an
Event of Default imder this Indenture.
(e)
Notwithstanding anything in this Indenturetothe contraty, the Trustee and
the Bondholders shafi have the absoluterightai aU times to enforce the provisions of the Letter
of Credit without any requirement of consent from the Bank.

ARTICLE X
Trustee, Remarketing Agent and Paying Agent
Section 10.01. Acceptance of Trusts. The Tnistee hereby accepts the tnists
itiqxised upon it by this Indenture, and agrees to perfoim said trusts, but only upon and subjea
to tbe express terms and conditions set forth herein. The Tnistee assumes no duties,
responsibUities orfiabUitiesby reason of its execution of this Indenture other than as expressly
set forth ui this Indenture. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Indenture, tbe Tnistee
shaU have no lien or security interest m and to the proceeds of the Letter of Credit or the proceeds
ofremarketedBonds,- for the puipose of paying the fees or expenses of the Trustee. The Trustee
shaU draw on the Letter of Credit, when required, whether or not its fees and expenses have been
fidly paid. Notwithstanding any provision of this Indenture to the contraty, tbe Tnistee may not
resign or be removed untU a successor Trustee shaU have been appointed as herein provided, and
the Letter of Credit duly and effectively transferred to such successor Trustee.
Section 10.02. Dealing in Bonds. The Tnistee and the Remarketing Agent, m
its individual capadty, may buy, seU, own, bold and deal in any of tbe Bonds, and may join in
any action which the Registered Owner of any Bond may be entided to take with like effea as ff
It did not aa in any capacity hereunder. The Trustee or the Remarketing Agent, in its individual
capacity, either as principal or agent, may also engage in or be interested in any financial or other
transaction with the City, and may act as depositaty, trustee or agent for any committee or body
of the Registered Owners of Bonds secured hereby or other obligations of the City as freely as ff
it did not aa in any capacity herainder. It is expressly understood that die Tnistee in carrying
out its duties under this Indenture shall be acting as a condiiit with respea to deliveries of Bonds
for purchase and purchases pursuant to Article HI of this Indenture.
Section 10.03. Remarketing Agent. The City shall designate the Remarketing
Agent for the purpose of determining the interestrateon the Bonds, subject to the conditions set
forth in Section 10.04 hereof, and for die purpose of remarketing the Bonds as provided herein.
The Remarketing Agent shall designate to the Trustee its Delivety Office and signify its

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83345

acceptance of the duties and obligations imposed upon it hereunder by wrinen instniments of
acceptance delivered to tbe City and the Trustee.
Section 10.04. Qualifications of Remarketing Agent. The Remarketing Agent
shaU be (i) a member of tbe National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc., havmg a
capitalization of at least $
, and (u) authorized by law to perform aU the duties
imposed upon it by this Indenture and the Remarketing Agreement.
In the event of the resignation or removal of the Remarketing Agent, the
Remarketing Agent shaU pay over, assign and defiver any moneys and Bonds held by it in such
capacity to its successor or, ff there be no successor, to the Trustee.
Section 10.05. Paying Agent. The Trustee may, and, ff die Bonds bear mterest
at a Short Rate and are no longerregisteredin the name of a nominee of a Securities Dqxishoty,
shafi, appoint a Paymg Agent with power to act on its behalf and subjea to its direction (0 hi the
authentication,registrati'oaand defivety of Bonds in connection with transfers and exchanges.
hcreuiKler, as fiiUy to aU Intents and purposes as though such Paying Agem had been expressly
authorized by this Indenture to authenticate,registerand deliver Bonds, (u) for effecting purchases
and sales of Bonds pursuant heieto and accepting deliveries of Bonds, making deliveries of Bonds
and holding Bonds pursuant hereto, and (iU) in the rrn^Hng of draws and accepting notice of
reinstatements under the Letter of Credit, including in the case of clauses (u) and On) the
est^lishment of required trust accounts in the name and on behaff of the Tnistee. The foregoing
notwithstanding, the Tnistee need not appoint a Paymg Agent for as long as the Trustee shafi have
an office in New York, New York capable of hanett'mg the duties of Paying Agent hereunder.
Any Paying Agent appointed pursuanttothis Section shall evidence its acceptance by a certificate
filed widi the Tnistee. the Bank and the Chy. For all purposes of this Indenture, the
authentication,registrationand delivety of Bonds by or to any Paying Agent pursuant to this
Section shaU be deemedtobe die audientication.registrationand delivety of Bonds "by ortothe
Tnistee." Such Paying Agent shall at aU times.be a commercial bank having an office in New
Yotk, New York, and shall at aU times be a corporation organized and doing business under the
laws of the United Stales or of any state with combined capital and surplus of at least $50,000,000
aiKl authorized under such laws to exercise corporate trust powers and subjea to supervision or
exanunation by Federal or state authority. If such corporation pubUshes reports of condition at
least annuafiy pursuanttolaw or the requirements of such authority, then for tbe piuposes of this
Section the combined capital and surplus of such corporation shall be deemedtobe Its combmed
capital and surplus as set forth in its most recent report of condition so published.
Any corporation into which such Paying Agent may be merged or converted, or
with which h may be consolidated, or any corporation resulting from any merger, consolidation
or conversion to which such Paying Agent shaU be a party, or any corporation succeeding lo tbe
corporate trust business of such Paying Agent, shaU be a successor of such Paying Agent
hereunder, tf such successor corporation-is otherwise eligible under this Section, without the
execution orfilingor any fiinher act on the part of the parties hereto or such Paying Agent or
suQh successor corporation.

 83346

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Any Paying Agent may at any time resign by giving written notice of resignation
to the Trustee, the Remarketing Agent, tbe Bank and tbe City, and such resignation shaU take
effect at the appointment by the Tnistee of a successor Paying Agem pursuant to the succeeding
provisions of this Section and the acceptance by the successor Paying Agent of such appointment.
The Tnistee may at any time tenninate the agency of any Paying Agent by giving written notice
of termination to such Paying Agent, the Remarketing Agent, the Bank and the City. Upon
receiving such a notice of resignation or upon such a termination, or in case at any time such
Paying Agent shaU cease to be efigible under this Section, the Trustee sbaU promptly appoint a
successor Paying Agent, shaU give written notice of such appointment to the City, the
Remarketing Agent and the Bank, and shaU maU notice of such appointment to afi registered
owners of Bonds.
Norwithstanding anything hereintothe confraty. any Paying Agent shall be entitied
to rdy on information furnished to it orally or in writing by the Trustee and the Remarteting
Agem, and shaU be protected hereunder inrelymgthereon.
The Trustee agrees to pay to any Paying Agem from time to time its fees and
expenses for its services, and the Trustee shaU be entitied to bereimbursedfor such payments
pursuant to Seaion 1005 of tbe Indenture. .
Section 10.06. Notice to Rating Agendes.. The Trustee hereby agrees that tf at
any time (a) any mandatoty tender of the Bonds occurs, (b) the City redeems any portion of the
Bonds outstanding hereunder prior to thefr Maturity Date, (c) the City provides for the paymem
of any portion of the Bonds pursuant to Article X I of the Indenture, (d) a- successor Trustee is
appointed, (e) any supplement to the Indenhire. the Credit Agreement or the Custody Agreement,
tf any, shaU become effective, or any party thereto shaU waive any provision of the Indenture,
(f) any change in the Remarketing Agem occurs, (g) any Fixed FLate Conversion Date occurs,
(h) an Adjustable Long Mode or a Rexible Mode is established, 0) the Letter of C^redh then m
effea expires or terminates or a Substimte Letter of CJredlt is delivered, (j) the Stated Termmation
Date of the Letter of Credh is changed., then, in each case, the Trustee shaU give notice thereof
to eachratingagency then maintaining a rating on the Bonds.
Section 10.07. Qualification of TVustee. The Trustee hereumler shafi be a bank,
trust company or national banking association having the powers of a trust coinpany doing
business and having an office in the City of Chicago, Dlinois.
Section 10.08. ResponsibUities of TYustee. (a) Tbe recitals of fact herem and in
the Bonds shall be taken as the statements of the City and tbe Trustee assumes no responsibiUty
for the correctness of the same. The Trustee makes no representations as to the validity or
sufficiency of this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture or of any Bonds issued hereunder or
thereunder or inrespectof the security afforded by this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture,
and the Trustee shall not incur any responsibUity inrespectthereof. The Trustee shafi, however,
be responsible for its representation contained in its certificate of authentication on the Bonds.
The Tmstee shall not be under anyresponsibUityor duty with respect to the issuance of the Bonds
for value or the application of the proceeds thereof except to the extent such proceeds are paid to

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83347

the Tmstee in its capacity as Tnistee, or the application of any moneys paid to the City or others
in accordance with this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture. The Trastee shafi not be under
any obfigation or duty to perform any aa that would involve it in expense or liability or to
instimte or defend any action or siut in respect hereof, or to advance any of its own moneys,
unless properly indemnified. Subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this Section, tbe
Tnistee shaU not be liable in connection with the performance of its duties hereunder except for
its own negfigence or willftil mlscondua or that of its agents.
(b)
The Trustee, prior to the occunence of an Event of Default and after the
remedy of aU Events of Default that may have occurred, undertakes to perform such duties and
onfy such duties as are specificaUy set fortb in this Indenture and each Supplemental Indenhire.
In case an Event of Delimit has occurred and has not been remedied, the Trustee shaU exercise
such of therightsand powers vested in it by law, this Indenmre and each Supplemental Indenture,
and shall use tbe same degree of care and skiU in thefr exercise as a prudent person would exercise
or use under the circumstances in the conduct of his or her own affairs. Any provision of this
Indenture and any Supplemental Indenturerelatingtoaction taken or sotobe taken by the Trustee
ortoevidence i ^ n which the Trustee may rely shaU be subjecttothe provisions of this Section.
Section 10.09. Funds Hdd in IVust and Security Therefor. Any moneys held
by the Tnistee, as such, at any time pursuant to the teims of this Indenmre or any Supplemental
Indenmre ^haU be and hereby are assigned, transferred and set over unto the Trustee in trust for
the purposes and upon the terms and conditions of this Indenture or such Supplemental Indenture.
Subject to the terms of this.Indenture concerning Pennitted Investments, all moneys (not including
securities) held by the Trustee, as such,, may be deposited by the Tnistee in its banking
department, or with such other banks, trust con^anies, or national banking associations, each
havmg its principal place of business m the City of Chicago, Blmois, as may be designated by the
City and approved by the Tnistee. No such ftinds. shaU be deposited with any bank, trust
company or national banking association, other than the Trustee, in an amoimt exceeding 25
percent of the amoimt which an officer of such bank, trust coinpany or national banking
association shaU certifytothe Trustee and the City as the.combined capital, surplus and undivided
profits of such bank, trust company or national banking association. No such fiinds shaU be
deposited or remain on deposit with any bank, trust company or national banking association in
excess of the amount insured by tbe Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, unless (a) such bank,
trust company or national banking association sbaU have deposhed in trust with the trust
departmem of the Trustee or with a Federal Reserve Bank or branch or, with the written approval
of the Tnistee and the City, pledged to some other bank, trust company or national banking
association, for tbe benefit of the City and the appropriate fiind, account, subfimd or subaccount,
as coUateral security for the moneys deposited. Qualified Collateral ha'ving a current market value
(exclusive of accmed interest) at least equal to 110 percent of the amount of such moneys, or
(b) in lieu of such collateral security as to aU or any pan of such moneys, there shaU have been
deposited in trust with the trust department of the Tmstee, for the benefit of the City and the
appropriate fimd, account, subfimd or subaccount, and remain in fuU force and effect as security
for such moneys or part thereof, ibe indemnifying bond or bonds of a surety company or
companies quafified as surety for deposits of fimds of the United States of America and qualified
to transact business in the State in a sura at least equal to the amount of such moneys or part

 83348

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

thereof. The Trustee shaU allow and credit interest on any such moneys held by it at such rate
as it customarily aUows upon slmUar moneys of slmUar size and under similar conditions or as
required by law.-Interest in respea of moneys or on securities in any fiind, account, subfimd-or
subaccount shkll be credited in each case to the fiind, account, subfimd or subaccount in which
such moneys or securities are held.
Section 10.10. Evidence on which Trustee May Act. The Trustee shaU be
protected in acting upon any notice, resolution, request, consent, order, certificate, report,
opinion, bond or other paper or document believed by it to be genuine, and to have been signed
or presented by the proper party or parties. The Tnistee may consult with counsel,, who may or
may not be of counsel to the City, and the opinion of such counsel shafi be fidl and coiqilete
authorization and protection in respea of any action taken or suffered by it hereunder in good
faith and In accordance therewith. 'Whenever the Tnistee shall deem it necessaty or desirable that
a matter be proved or established prior to taking or suffering any action hereunder, inchiding
paymem of moneys out of any Fuiid or Account, such matter (unless other evidence in respea
thereof be herein specificaUy prescribed) may be deemed to be conclusively proved and
established by a C^ertificate, and such Certificate shaU be fidl warrant for any action taken or
suffered in good faith under the provisions of this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture upon
the faid) thereof, but in its discretion the Trustee may in lieu thereof accept other evidence of such
faa or matter or may require such fiirther or additional evidence as to it may seem reasonable.
Except as otherwise expressly provided herem or therein, any request, order, notice or other
direction required or permitted to be fiimished pursuant to any provision hereof or thereof by the
C^ty to the Tnistee shafi be sufficiendy executed tf executed in the name of the Chy by an
Authorized Officer.
Section 10.11. Permitted Acts and Functions. The Trustee may become the
Owner of any Bonds, with the samerightsh would have if it were not the Tnistee; To the extent
pennitted by law, the Trustee may act as depositaty for, and permit any of its officers or dhectois
to aa as a member of, or in any other capadty with respea to, any committee formedtoprotea
therightsof the Owners of Bonds or to effect or aid in any reorganization growing out of the
enforcement ofthe Bonds or this Indenmre or any Supplemental Indenture, whether or not any
such committee shafi represent the Owners of a majority in principal amount of the Bonds then
Outstanding.
Section 10.12. Resignation. The Trustee may at any time resign and be
discharged of its duties and obligations created by this Indenture by giving not fewer than 60 days'
written notice to the City and mailing notice thereof, to the Bank and to the owners of Bonds at
diefr addresses shown on theregistrationbooks kept by the Trustee within 20 days after the giving
of such written notice. Such resignation shall take effect upon the appointment of a successor by
the City or the Owners of Bonds as herein provided.
Section 10.13. Removal. The Tmstee may be removed at any time by the Owners
of a majority in principal amoum of the Bonds then Outstanding, excluding any Bonds held by or
for the accoimt of die City, by an instniment or concunent Instrumenis In writing signed and duly
acknowledged by such Owners of Bonds or by their anomeys duly authorized in writing and

 5/1/2002 .

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83349

delivered to the City. Copies of each such instniment shall be delivered by the City to the Bank
and to the Trustee and any successor. The City mayremovethe Trustee at any time, except during
the existence of an Event of Default, for such cause as shaU be determined in the sole discretion
of the City by fUing with the Tnistee an instniment signed by an Authorized Officer and by
maifing notice thereof to the Bank and to the. Owners of Bonds at thefr addresses shown on the
registration books kept by the Trustee. Any removal of the Tnistee shaU take effect upon the
appointment of a successor Trustee.
Section 10.14. Appointment of Successor. In case at anytimethe Trustee shaU
resign or shafi be removed or shafi become mcapable of acting, or shaU be adjudged a bankrupt
or Insolvent, ortfa receiver, Uquldator or conservator of tbe Trustee or of its property shaU be
appointed, orffany public officer shaU take charge or control of the Trustee or of its property or
affairs, a successor may be appointed by tbe Owners of a majority in principal amount ofthe
Bonds then Outstanding, excluding any Bonds held by or for the account of the City, by an
instniment or concurrent instniments in writihg signed by such Owners or thefr attorneys duly
authorized m writing and defivered to such successor Tnistee, notification thereof being given to
the City, the Bank and the predecessor Trustee. Pending such a >pomtment, the City shaU
forthvrith ^;polm a Trustee to fiU sudi 'vacancy untU a successor Trustee Of any) shall be
appomted by tbe Owners of Bonds as herein authorized. The City shaU maU notice to the Bank
and to Owners of Bonds of any such appomttnent within 20 days after such appomtment. Any
successor Tnistee ^pomted by the City shaU, unmediatdy and without further act, be superseded
by a "Trustee appointed by tbe Owners of Bonds, ff in a proper case no ^poinhnent of a
successor Tnistee shaU be made pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this Section 'within 45
days after the Trustee shall have given to the City written notice of resignation as provided m
Section 10.12 hereof or after the occurrence of any other event requiring or authorizing such
appointment, the Trustee, the Bank or any Owner of Bonds may applytoany coun of competent
jurisdiction to appomt a successor. Said court may thereupon, , after such notice, if any, as said
coun may deem proper and prescribe, appoint such successor Trustee. Any Trustee appomted
under the provisions of this Section shaU be a bank, trust company or national banking
ass(x:iation, domg busmess and having an office in the City of Chicago, Dlmois.
Section 10.15. Transfer of Rights and Property to Successor. Any successor
Trustee appointed under this Indenture shaU execute, acknowledge and deliver to its predecessor
Trustee, and alsototbe City, a written instniment of acceptance respecting such appomtment, and
thereupon such successor Tnistee, without anyfiirtheraa, deed or conveyance, shaU become fidly
vested with aU moneys, estates, properties, rights, powers, duties and obfigations of such
predecessor Tnistee, witii lUce effea as if originally named as Tnistee; but the Trustee ceasing to
act shaU nevertheless, on the request of the City, or of the successor Trustee, execute,
acknowledge and defiver such instruments of conveyance and fiinher assurance and do such other
things as may reasonably be required for more fidly and certainly vesting and confirming in such
successor Tmstee all theright,tideand interest of the predecessor Trustee in and to any property
held by it under this Indenmre, and shall pay over, assign and deliver to the successor Trustee any
mohey or other property subject to the tnists and conditions herein set forth. Shoidd any deed,
conveyance or instrument in writingfromthe City be required by such successor Trustee for more
fiilly and certainly vesting in and confirming to such successor Trustee any such estates, rights,

 83350

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIl^-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

powers and duties, any and aU such deeds, conveyances and instruments in writing shaU, on
request, and so far as may be authorized by law, be executed, acknowledged and delivered by the
City.
Section 10.16. Merger or Consofidation. Any company into which the Tnistee
may be merged or converted or with which it may be consofidated or any coxnpany resiUting from
any merger, conversion or consolidationtowhich it shall be a party or any company to which the
Tnistee may seU or transfer all or substantially aU of its corporate trust business, provided such
company shaU be a bank, trust company or national banking association which is qualifiedtobe
a successortodie Trustee under Section 10.14 hereof and shaU be authorized by law to perform
aU the duties imposed upon it by this Indenture and any Supplemental Indenture, shaU be tbe
successor to the Trustee without tbe execution orfilingof any paper or tbe performance of any
fiirther aa.
Section 10.17. Adoption of Authentication. In case any of the Bonds
contemplated to be Issued under this Indenture shaU have been authenticated but not delivered,
any successor Trustee may.adopt the certificate of authentication of any predecessor Tmstee so
authenticating such Bonds and defiver such Bonds so authenticated, aiKl in case any of the said
Bonds shaU not have been authenticated, any successor Trustee may authenticate sucb Bonds in
the name of the predecessor Tnistee, or in tbe name of the successor Trustee, and in aU such cases
such certificate shaU have the fiiU force \tiilch h is anywhere in the Bonds or in this Indenture
provided that the certificate of the Tnistee shaU have.
Section 10.18. Evidence of Signatures of Owners and Ownership of Bonds,
(a) Any request, consent or other instmment which this Indenture may require or permit to be
signed and executed by the Owners of Bonds may be in one or more instruments of slmUar tenor,
and shaU be signed or executed by such Owners in person or by thefr attorneys appointed m
writing. Proof of (i) the e:xecution of any such insomment, or of an instniment appointing any
such attorney, or (u) the ownership by any person of the Bonds, shaU be sufficient for any
purpose of this Indenmre (except as otherwise herein expressly provided)ffmade m the fofiowing
manner, but the Trustee may nevertheless in its discretionrequirefiirtheror other proof in cases
where it deems the same desirable:
(1)
The faa and date ofthe execution by any Owner or his attorney of such
instrument may be proved by the certificate, which need not be acknowledged or verified,
of an officer of a bank or trust company satisfaaoty to the Trustee or of any notaty pubfic
or other officer authorized to take acknowledgments of deeds to be recorded in the
jurisdiction in which he purports to aa, that the person signing such request or odier
instrument acknowledged to him the execution thereof, or by an affidavit of a witness of
such execution, duly swom to before such notaty pubfic or other officer.
(2)
The authority of the person or persons executing any such instniment on
behalf of a corporate Owner of Bonds may be established without further proof if such
instrument is signed by a person purporting to be the president or vice president of such

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83351

corporation with a corporate seal affixed and attested by a (lersoh puiporting to be its
secretaty or an assistant secretaty.
(b)
Th^ ownership of Bonds and the amount, nuinbers and odier identification,
and date of ownership of the same shaU be proved by the Bond Register. Any request, consent
or vote of the Owner of any Bond shaU bind all fiiture Owners of such Bond in respect of anything
done or suffered to be done by the City or ±e Tnistee in accordance dierewith.
Section 10.19. Freservatioii and Inspection of Documents. All documents
received by the Tnistee under the provisions of this Indenture sbaU be retained in its possession
and shaU be subjea at aU reasonable times to the Inspection of the City, the Bank and any Owner
of Bonds and thefr agents and thefr representatives, any of whom may make copies thereof:
Section 10.20. Trustee's Agent. UntU such thne as the Bonds have been
converted to bear interest at a Fixed Rate, the Trustee shaU have therightto appoim a Trustee's
Agent with tbe power to aa on the Trustee's behaff and subjea to its direction m the
authentication and defivety of the Bonds, payment of the Bonds, provision of notice of interest
rates on Bondsto'Bondholdersand in connection with transfers, exchanges, tenders and purchases
thereof, as fiiUy to all Intents and purposes as diough the Trustee's Agent bad been expressly
authorized hereundertoauthenticate, defiver, pay, transfer and exchange Bonds, provide notice
of interestratestoBondholders, receive tender notices, purchase tendered Bonds and make
payments on the Bonds. The Tmstee's Agent shaU perform suchfimctionssubjea to the terms
and conditions ejq;iressed in this Article X. Tbe foregoing notwidistanding. tbe Trustee's Agent
shaU not be answerable for other than its gross negligence or wUUid mlscondua and the Trustee's
Agent shaU not be deemed to have notice of any event of default hereunder unless notified by tbe
Tnistee. Any such Trustee's Agent shaU be a commercial bank with trust poweis or a trust
company organized under the laws of the United States of America or'one of the States thereof.
For all purposes, any sucb Trustee's Agent shall be deemed to be acting solely as tbe agent of the
Tnistee and the authentication, defivety, transfer or exchange of Bonds, provision of notice of
Interestratesto Bondholders, receipt of tender notices, purchase of tendered Bonds and payment
of Bonds by the Trustee's Agent pursuanttothis Section shaU be deemed to be die audientication,
delivety, transfer or exchange of Bonds, provision of notice of interest rates to Bondholders,
receipt of tender notices, purchase of tendered Bonds and payinent of Bonds by the Tnistee. The
Trustee's Agem may act as Bond Registrar for any Bond prior to the Fixed Rate Conversion Date.
The Trustee's Agem shall at aU times be a bank or trust company having a
corporate trust office in the City of New York, New York (or having an agent with sucb a
principal corporate trust office) and shall at all times be an instimtion organized and doing
business under the laws of the United States or of any state, authorized under such laws to
exercise corporate trust powers and subject to supervision or examination by federal or state
authorities and either (a) having, together with its parent bank or trust company, a reported
combined capital and surplus of al last $50,000,000 or (b) affiliated with and indenuufied by the
Trustee. If such instimtion publishes reports of condition at least annually pursuant to law or the
requirements of such authorities, then for the purposes of this Section the combined capital and
surplus of such instimtion shall be deemed to be its combined capital and surplus, as set forth in

 83352

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

its most recent report of condition so published. The appointment of a Trustee's Agent under this
Section shall be effective upon acceptance by the Trusiee's Agent and shaU contitme untU the
Trustee making such appolntmem shaUrescindsuch appointment or untU the effective date of the
resignation orremovalof such Trustee pursuant to Section 10.13 or 10.14 hereof. In addition,
the Trustee's .Agent may resign upon 60 days prior written notice to. the Tnistee, the City, the
Remarketing Agem, and the Bank. The Trustee's Agent may aa Uirough an agent constimting
a commercial bank or trust cpiiq>any.
ff at anytimethere is no Trustee's Agent, afireferencesto the Trustee's Agent
herein and in the Bonds shaU be deemed to refer to the Trustee. As. of the Date oflssuance, there
is no Trustee's Agent hereunder.

AR'nCLE XI
Supplemental Indentures
Section 11.01. Supplemental Indenture EfTective Upon Execution by the
Trustee. For any one or more of the foUowing purposes, and at any time orfromtime to time,
a supplemental indenture may be authorized by an ordinance adopted by the City CouncU of the
City, v^ch, upon thefilingwith the Trustee of a copy of such ordinance certified by the Chy
Clerk and the execution and defiveiy of such supplemental indenture by the City and the Tnistee,
shall be fiiUy effective in accordance with its terms:
(a) to addtothe covenants and agreements of the City in dils Indenture other
covenants and agreements to be observed, by the City which are not contraty to or
inconslstem with this Indenture as theretofore in effect;
(b)
to add to the limitations and restrictions in this Indenture other limitations
and restrictions to be observed by the City which are not confraty to or inconsistent with
this Indenmre as theretofore in effect;
(c)
to surrender anyright,power or privUegereservedtoor conferred upon the
City by the terms of this Indenture, but only tf the surrender of such right, power or
privUege is not contraty to or inconslstem with the covenants and agreements of the City
contained in thii Indenture;
(d)
to create a series of Bonds and, in connection therewith, to specify and
determine other matters and thingsrelativetosuch Bonds which are not contraty to or
inconsistent with this Indenture as theretofore in effect, or to amend, modify or rescind
any such authorization, specification or determination at any time prior to thefirstissuance
of such Bonds;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83353

(e)
to confirm, as fiirther assurance, the pledge herein, and the subjection of,
additional properties, taxes or other coUateral to anyfien,claim or pledge created or to
be created by, this Indenture;
- (f)
to modify any of the pro'vdsions of this Indenmre in any respea whatever,
provided that such modification shall take effea only as of the date on which aU of the
Bonds are subjea to mandatoty tender;
(g) to cure any ambiguity, supply any omission, or cure or conea any defea
or inconsistent provision in this Indenture;
(h) - to insen such provisions clarifying matters or questions arising under this
Indenmre as are necessaty or desirable'and arc not contraty to or inconsistent with this
Indenmre as theretofore in effea;
(1) to provide additional duties of the Tnistee under this Indenture;
(j)

to

provide for certificated Bonds;

(k) to implement a conversion of the interestrateon aU or any portion of tbe
Bonds to a Fixed Rate, an Adjustable Long Rate or a Short Rate, aU as provided herefai.
induding. but not limited to. modifying, anwniting or supplementing the form of Bond to
reQect, among ottier things, a change in the designatedtideof the Bonds, thefixingof an
annual rate of interest, the termination of therightsof any Registered Owner of Bonds to
tender such Bonds for purchase, and tbe faa that the purchase price of,-or interest on, the
Bonds is no longer payable out of moneys drawn under the Letter of Credh;
(I)
to evidence or give effea to, or facUitate, the ddivety and, administration'
under this Indenmre of a Substimte Credit Agreement and/or a Substimte Letter of Credit,
including, but not limited to, such provisions as are necessary to pennh the issuer of such
a Substimte Credit Agreemem to provide credit supportrelatingto payment of principal
of and uiterest on the Bonds and a separate Issuer of another Substimte Credit Agreement
to provide liquidity support rdatingtopayment ofthe purchase price of Bonds deUvered
or deemed delivered hereunder for purchase;
(m) to evidence or give effect to orfecifitatethe delivety and administration
under this Indenmre of a letter of credit, a line of credit, a bond purchase agreement, an
insurance poficy or any other credit or liquidhy device to secure die Bonds;
(n)
to secure or maintain ratings from any rating agency in the highest
short-term or commercial paper debtratingcategoty, and the highest long-term debt rating
categoty, of such rating agency which are avaUable for the Bonds, whether or not a Letter
of Credit secures the Bonds, which changes wiU not restrict, limit or reduce the obligation
of die Citytopay the principal of. premium, if any. and interest on die Bonds as provided

 83354

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

in the Indenture or otherwise adversely affect the Registered Owners of tbe Bonds under
the Indenture; and
(o) to effect a change in die optional reden^tion schedule for Bonds m a Fbied
Mode or an Adjustable Long Mode pursuant to Section 3.11(a)(u) or (iu) hereof, or to
effea a change in redenqition price in accordance with Section 3.11(d) hereof.
Section 11.02. Supplemental Indentures Effective With Consent of Owners of
Bonds. At any time orfromtime to time, a supplemental indenture may be authorized by an
ordmance adopted by die City Council of die City, subjecttoconsent by tbe Owners of Bonds in
accordance with and subjea to the pro'vislons of this Article, which Supplemental Indenmre, upon
the fUlng with the Tnistee of a copy of such ordinance certified by the City Clerk, upon
conqillance 'with the provisions of this Article, and upon execution and delivety of such
Supplemental Indenmre by the City and the Tmstee, shafi become fiiUy effective in accordance
-widi its terms.
Section 11.03. General Provisioiis. (a) This Indenture shaU not be modified or
amended in any respea except as pro'vided in and in accortlaise with and subjea to the provisicms
of this Article. Nodung in this Anicle shaU affect or limit therightor obligation of the City to
adopt, make, do, execute, acknowledge or deliver any ordinance, resolution, act or other
instrument pursuam to the provisions of this Artide or the right or obfigation of the City to
execute and defiver to the Tnistee any instrument which elsewhere in this Indenture it is provided
shafi be defiveredtothe Trustee.
(b)
Any ordinance authorizing, a supplemental .Indenture,referredtoand
permitted or authorized by Section 11.01 hereof may be adopted by the City CoimcU of the Chy
without the consent of any of the Owners of Bonds, but such supplemental indenmre shall be
executed and defivered by the City and the Trustee and shafi become effective only on the
conditions, to the extent and at the time provided in this Article. Evety supplemental Indenmre
delivered to the Tnistee for execution shall be accompanied by an opinion of counsel suting that
such supplemental indenture has been duly and lawftiUy authorized by the City CouncU of the City
and executed by the C^ty in accordance with the provisions of this Indenture, is authorized or
permitted by this Indenture, and wiU, when executed and delivered by the Trustee, be vafid and
binding upon the City and enforceable In accordance with its terms.
(c)
The Trustee is hereby authorized to enter into, execute and deliver any
supplemental indenmrereferredto and permitted or authorized by this Artide and to make afi
fiirther agreements and stipulations which may be therein contained, and the Trustee, in taking
such action, shafi be fidly protected inrelyingon an opinion of counsel that such supplemental
indenture is authorized or permitted by the provisions of this Indenture.
(d)
No supplemental indenture shall change or modify any of the rights or
obligations of the Tmstee without its written assent thereto.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83355

(e)
No supplemental indenmre shall take effect unless and imtU there has been
delivered to the Tnistee an Opmion of Bond Counsel to the effea that such supplemental mdennire
does not adversely affect the exclusion from gross income for federal income tax purposes to
which interest on the Bonds would otherwise be entided.
Section 11.04. Consent of Bank Required. As long as (i) a Letter of Credit is
In effect or any Bank Bonds are outstanding, or (u) the Bank Obfigations remain unsatisfied, a
supplemental indenmre under this Article shaU not become effective unless and untU the Trustee
shaU have received Bank Approval. In this regard, tbe Tnistee shaU cause notice ofthe proposed
execution of any such supplemental indenture, together with a copy ofthe proposed supplemental
indenture, to be maUed to the Bank at least ftfteen Business Days prior to the proposed date of
execution and defivety of snch supplemental indenture. The Bank shall be deemed to have denied
consent to the execution and delivety of such supplemental indenture ff the Tnistee does not
receive a letter of approval thereto signed by or on behalf of the Bank on or before the fifteenth
Business Day after the mailing of said notice.
Section 11.05. Maiiingof Notice of Amendment. Any provision in diis Anicle
for the mailing of a notice or other paper to owners of Bonds shafi be fiiUy compfied with ff it is
maUed posuge prepaid only (1) to each Registered Owner of then Outstanding Bonds- at his
address, ff any, appearing upon the registration books maintained by the City at tbe prindpal
corporate tmst office of the Tmstee. (u) to the Bank, and (iU) to the Trustee.
Section 11.06. Powers of Amendment. Any modification or amendment of this
Indenhire or of any supplemen]tal indenture or of therightsand obligations of the City and ofthe
Owners of the Bonds, in particiUar, may be made by a supplemental indenmre. with the written
consent given as provided in Section 11.07, (a) of the Owners of a majority in principal amount
of the Bonds Outstanding at the time such consent is given, or (b) in case less than afi of the then
Outstanding Bonds are affected by the modification or amendment, of the Owners of a majority
in principal amount of the then Outstanding Bonds so affected, except that if such modification
or amendment wifi, by hs terms, not take effect so long as any Bonds of any specified maturity
remain OutstandLog, tbe consent of the Owners of such Bonds shafi not be required and such
Bonds shaU not be deemed to be Chitstandlng for the purpose of any calculation of Outstanding
Bonds under this Section. No such modification or amendmem shaU permit a change in the terms
of redenqition or maturity of the principal of any Outstanding Bonds or of any installment of
interest thereon or a reduction in tbe principal amoimt or the Redemption Price thereof or in tbe
rate of interest thereon, or in terms of purchase or the purchase price thereof, without the consent
of tbe owner of such Bonds, or shaU reduce the percentages or otherwise affea the classes of
Bonds the consent of the owners of which is required to effect any sucb modification or
amendmem, or shall change or modify any of therightsor obligations of the Trustee •without its
written asseni thereto. For the purposes of this Section, a Bond shaU be deemed to be affected
by a modification or amendment of this Indenture if the same adversely affects or diminishes the
rights of the owners of such Bond.
Section 11.07. Consent of Owners of Bonds, (a) The City may at any time
authorize a supplemental indenture making a modification or amendment permined by the

 83356

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

provisions of Section 11.06, to take effea when and as provided in this Section. A copy of such
supplemental indenture (or brief summaty thereof or refenince thereto in form approved by the
Trustee), together with a request to the Owners of the Bonds for thefr consent thereto m form
satisfaaoty to the Trustee, shaU be maUed by the Citytodie Owners of the Bonds (but faUure to
maU such copy and request shall not affect the validity of the supplemental indenmre when
consentedtoas in this Section pro'vided). Such supplemental Indenture shaU not be effective unless
and untU. and shall take effea in accordance with its terms when, (1) there shafi have been fUed
with the 'Trustee (1) tbe written consents of Owners of the percentages of Outstanding Bonds
specified in Section 11.06 and (2) an opinion of counsel stating that such supplemental indenture
has been duly and lawfiiUy executed and defivered by the City and the Tnistee In accordance with
the provisions of this Indenmre, is authorized or permitted hereby and is vafid and binding upon
tbe City and enforceable in accordance with its terms upon its becoming effective as m this
Section provided, and Cu) a notice shaU haye 'been maUed as hereinafter in this Seaion provided.
(b) . The consent of an Owner of Bonds to any modification or amendment shaU
be effective only ff accon^>anled by proof of the Ownership, at the date of such consent, of the'
Bonds with respeatowhich such consent is given, which proof shaU be such as is pemutted by
Section 10.18. A certificate or certificates signed by the Tmstee that h has examined such proof
and that such proof is suffident in accordance with Section 10.18 shaU be conclusive that the
consents have been given by. the Owners of the Bonds described in such certificate or certificates.
Any such consent sbaU be binding upon the Owner of the Bonds giving such consent and upon
any subsequem Owner of such Bonds and of any Bonds issued in exchange therefor (whether or
not such subsequem Owner thereof has notice tbereoO unless such consent is revoked in writing
by the Owner of such Bonds giving such consent or a subsequent Owner thereof by fifing such
revocation with the Tnistee, prior to the time when the written statement of the Tmstee hereinafter
provided for in this Section is fUed. Tbe faa that a consent has not bedirevokedmay likewise
be proved by a certificate of the Trusteetothe effect that norevocationthereof is onfilewith tbe
Trustee.
(c)
At any time after the Owners of the required percentages of Bonds shaU
have fUed thefr consentstothe supplemental indenture, the Trustee shaU make and fUe with the
City a written statement that the Owners of such required percentages of Bonds havefiledsuch
consents. Such written statement shaU be conduslve that such consents have been so fUed. At
any time thereafter notice, stating in substance that the supplemental indenture (which may be
referred to as a supplemental indenture entered into by the City and the Tnistee as of a stated date,
a copy of which is onfilewith the Trustee) has been consented to by the Owners of the required
percentages of Bonds and wiU be effective as provided in this Sedion, shaU be giventoOwners
by the Tmstee by inailing such notice to the Owners of the Bonds and the Bank (but faUure to
maU such notice shall not prevent sucb supplemental indenturefrombecoming effective and
binding as provided in this Section). The Tnistee shafi fUe with the City proof of the mailing of
such notice. A record, consisting of the papers required or permitted by this Section to be fUed
with the Trustee, shafi be proof of the matters therein stated. Such supplemental indenture making
such amendmem or modification shafi be deemed conclusively binding upon the Tmstee, the Bank
and the Owners of all Bonds at the expiration of 40 days after the fUing with the Tmstee of proof
of the maUing of such last mentioned notice, except in the event of a fuial decree of a court of

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83357

competent jurisdiction setting aside such supplemental indenture in a legal action or equitable
proceeding for such.purpose commenced within such 40-day period; except that the Tmstee and
the City, during such 40-day period and any sach fiirther period during which any sucb action or
proceeding may be pending, shaU be entided. in thefr absolute discretion to take such action^ or
torefrainfromtaking such action, with respea to such supplemental indenmre as they may deem
expedient.
^
Section 11.08. Modifications by Unanimons Consent. The terms and provisions
of this Indenmre and the rights and obligations of the City, and of the Owners of the Bonds
hereunder may be modified or amended in any respea upon the consent of the Owners of aU the
then Outstanding Bonds to the execution and delivety of such supplemental indenmre, such
consent to be given as provided in Section 11.07 except that no notice to the Owners of the Bonds
shaU be required; but no such modification or amendment sbaU change or modify any of the rights
or obUgations of the Tnistee without its written assem thereto.
Section 11.09. Exdusion of Bonds. Bonds owned by or for die account of the
City shafi not be deemed Outstanding for the puipose of consent or other action or any calculation
of Outstanding Bonds provided for in this Article, and the City shaU not be entitied 'with respea
to such Bonds to give any consem or take any other action provided for in this Article. At the
time of any consem or other action taken under this Article, the City shaU fiimish the Tnistee with
a Certificate upon which the Trustee may rely, describing aU Bonds so to be excluded.
Section 11.10. Notation on Bonds. Bonds authenticated and delivered after the
effective date of any action taken as in this Artide provided may, and, i f tbe Tnistee so
determines, shafi. bear a notation by endorsemem or otherwise in forin approved by tbe City and
the Tnistee as to such action, and in that case upon demand of the Owner of any Bond
Outstanding at such effective date and (sesentation of his Bond for that purpose at the principal
corporate tmst office of the Trustee or upon any exchange orregistrationof transfer of any Bond
Outstanding at such effective date, suitable notation shafi be made on such Bond or upon any Bond
issued upon any such exchange orregistrationof transfer by the Tmstee as to any sudi action.
If the City or the Trustee shafi so determine, new Bonds so mcxfified as in the opinion of the
Trustee and the City to conform to such action shafi be prepared, authenticated and deUvered, and
upon demand of the Owner of any Bond then Outstanding shall be exchanged, without cost to such
Owner, for Bonds of the same maturity upon surrender of such Bond.

ARTICLE x n
Miscellaneous
Section 12.01. Severabifity. ff any provision of this Indenture shall be held or
deemedtobe, or shall. In faa, be, Ulegal, inoperative or unenforceable, the same shall not affect
any other provision or provisions herein contained or render the same invalid, inoperative or
unenforceable to any extent whatever.

 83358

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 12.02. Payments Due on Saturdays, Sundays and Hofidays. If the date
for making any payment, or the last date for the performance of any act or the exercise of any
right, as provided In diis Indenmre, shall not be a Busmess Day, such paymem may be made, act
performed orrightexercised oh the next Business Day widi the same force and effect as if done
on tbe nommal date provided in this Indenmre, and no interest shafi accme for the period after
such nomnial date; provided, however, that nodiing herem shaU be deemedtoextend the Stated
Temunation Date or odierwise affea die obligations, of the Bank under the Credh Agreement.
Section 12.03. Counterparts. This Indenmre may be simultaneously executed
in several coimterpahs, esich of which shall be an origmal and all of which shall constimte but one
and the same instrument.
' Section 12.04. Rules of Interpretation. Unless expressly liidicated otherwise,
references tp Secd'ons or Articles are to be constmed asreferencesto Sections or Articles of this
instnuncnt asorigmaUy executed. Useofdie words "herein," "hereby," "hereunder," "hereof,"
"hereinbefore," "hcrehiafter" and oUier equivalent words refer to this Indenture and not solely
to the particular portion m which any such word Is used.
^>ection 12.05. Captions. The captions and headings in this Indenmre are for.
convenience only and m no way define. Ifanil or describe the scope or hiieni of any provisions or
Sections of tbis Indenture.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF. City has caused diese presents to be executed in its
name and with its official seal hereunto affixed and attested by its duly audiorized officials; and
to evidence its acceptance of tbe trusts hereby created, and Trustee has caused these presents to
be executed m its corporate name and widi its corporate seal hereumo affixed and attested by its
duly audiorized officers, as of the datefirstabove wrinen.
[SEAL]
CITY OF C m C A C ^
Attest:

By-

:

:

City Clerk

'•

By:

.
Chief Fmancial Officer

[SEAL!
[NAME OF TRUSTEE], as Tnistee
Attest:

By:

By:.
Authorized Signatory

Audiorized Signatoty

(Sub)Exhibit "A" referred to in this Trust Indenture reads as follows:

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83359

(Sub)Exhibit "A".
(To Trust Indenture)
Form Of Bond
Number R-1

$_
United States' Of Ainerica
State Of lUinois
City Of Chicago
City Of Chicago Variable Rate Bond,
Series
.

Maturity Date

Original Issue Date

C.U.S.I.P.

Current Mode:
(ff the current Interest Mode is a Flexible' Mode or an Adjustable Long Mode,
additional information is set forth in the Notice of Rate Period attached hereto.)
Registered Owner: Cede & Co.
Principal Amount:
As Hereinafter Described, Under Certain Circumstances On Certain Dates This
Bond Is Permitted To Be, Or Is Requfred To Be, Tendered For Purchase To The
Trustee Or The Trustee's Agent At The Purchase Price Specffied Herein. The
Registered Owner Hereof Who Elects To Tender This Bond, Or Is Requfred To Tender
This Bond, For Purchase ShaU Be Entitied Solely To The Payment Of Such Purchase
Price On The Appficable Purchase Date, And ShaU Not Be Entitied To The Payment
Of Any Prindpal Hereof Or Any Interest Accrued Hereon On Or After Such Date.
City of Chicago (the "City"), a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local
government duly organized and existing under the laws of the Slate of Illinois, for
value received, hereby promises to pay (but only out of the sources hereinafter

 83360

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

provided) to the registered owner identified above, or registered assigns, on the
maturity date specified above, unless this Bond shaU have been caUed for
redemption and payment of the redemption price shedl have been duly made or
provided for, upon presentation and surrender hereof, the prindpal sum specified
above, and to pay (but only out of the sources hereinafter provided) interest on the
balance of said principal sum from time to time remaining unpaid from and
including the original issue date specified above, or from and including the most
recent Interest Payment Date (as defined in the hereinafter-defined Indenture) -with
respect to which interest has Ijeen paid or duly provided.for, untU payment of S£ud
prindpal sum has been made or duly provided for.
The Bonds are fimited obligations of the City and shaU not constitute an
indebtedness of the City or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any
constitutional or statutoty limitation. Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing
power ofthe City, the State of Ulinois or any pofitical subdivisioii thereof is pledged
to the payment of the principal of the Bonds, or the interest or any premium
thereon. The Bonds are payable solely from the Trust Estate (as defined in the
hereuiafter-defined Indenture) pledged to such payment under the Indenture and
certain other monies held by or on behalf of the Trustee, and no. registered owner or owners of the Bonds shafi have the right to compel any exerdse of the taxing
power of the City, the State of Illinois or any pofitical subdivision thereof.
Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth below,
and such further provisions shaU for afi purposes have the same effect asffset forth
at this place.
It Is Hereby Certified, Redted And Dedared that aU acts and conditions requfred
to be performed precedent to and in the execution and defivety ofthe Indenture and
the issuance of this Bond have been performed in due time, form and manner as
requfred by law, and that the issuance of this Bond and the series of which it forms
a part does not exceed or violate any constitutionad or statutory limitation.
This Bond shaU not be valid or become obfigatoty for any purpose or be entitied
to any security or benefit under the Indenture unless and untU the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been duly executed by the Trustee.
In Witness Whereof. The City of Chicago has caused this Bond to be executed in its
name by the inanual or facsinule signature of its Mayor and the manual or facsinule
of its corporate seal to be printed hereon and attested by the manual or facsimile
signature of its City Clerk.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS O F C O M M I T T E E S

83361

City of Chicago

By:

:
Mayor

Attest:

City Clerk

. .

Certificate Of Authentication.

This Bond is one o f t h e Bonds described i n the within-mentioned Indenture.

Authentication Date:

[Name ofTrustee], as Trustee

By: J
Authorized Signatory

D.T.C. Legend.

Unless this certificate is presented by an authorized representative of The
Depositoty Trust Company, a New York corporation ("D.T.C"), to the issuer or its
agent for regisfration of fransfer, exchange or payment, and any certificate issued
is registered i n the name of Cede & Co. or i n such other neune as is requested by an
authorized representative of D.T.C. (and any payment is made to Cede & Co. or to
such other entity as is requested by an authorized representative of D.T.C), Any
Tremsfer, Pledge Or Other Use Hereof For Value or Otherwise By Or To Any Person
Is Wrongful inasmiich as the registered owner hereof. Cede & Co., has an interest
herein.
Payments. The principal of and premium, if any, on Bonds bearing interest at a
Bank Rate, a Short Rate or an Adjustable Long Rate shaU be payable at the

 83362

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

principal corporate trust office ofthe Trustee, upon presentation and surrender of
such Bonds. The principal of and premium, ff any, on Bonds bearing interest at a
Fixed Rate shaU be payable at the principal corporate trust office ofthe Trustee or.
at the option ofthe registered owner, at the principal corporate trust office of any
Paying Agent, if any, named in any such Bond, upon presentation and surrender
of such Bonds. Any payment of the purchase price of a Tendered Bond shaU be
payable at the principal corporate trust office of the Trustee's Agent (or at such
other office as may be designated by the Trustee), upon presentation and surrender
of such Tendered Bond as hereinafter described.
Interest on Bonds bearing interest at a DaUy Rate, a Weekly Rate, an Adjustable
Long Rate or a Fixed Rate shaU be paid by check maUed on the Interest Payment
Date to the persons appearing on the Bond Register as the registered owners thereof
as ofthe dose of business ofthe Trustee on the Record Date at the address of such
registered owners as. they appear on the Bond Register or at such other addresses
as are furnished to the Trustee in "writing by such registered owners not later than
the Record Date. Payment of interest on Bonds bearing interest at a Flexible Rate
shaU be made to the pei'sons appearing on the Bond Register as the registered
owners thereof as of the close of business ofthe Trustee on the Record Date, upon
presentation and surrender of such Bonds at the principal corporate trust office of
the Trustee on the appficable Interest Payment Date. Pajrment of interest on euiy
Bond shall be made to registered owner of One MiUion Dollars ($l,000,000)or more
in aggregate prindpal amount pf Bonds as ofthe close of business of the Trustee on
the Record Date for a particular Interest Payment Date by wire fransfer to such
registered owner on such Interest Payment Date upon written notice from such
•registered owner containing the wfre transfer address within the United States to
which such registered owner wishes to have such wire dfrected, which written
notice is recdved not later than the Business Day next preceding the Record Date;
provided that such wfre fransfer shaU only be made for Bonds bearing interest at
a Flexible Rate upon presentation and surrender of such Bonds at the principal
corporate trust office of the Trustee on the applicable Interest Payment Date.
Payment of interest on Bank Bonds shaU be made to the Bank by wfre fransfer on
each Interest Payment Date at the wfre fransfer address sp>ecified in the Letter of
Credit (or such other wfre fransfer address as is spedfied by the Bank in writing
from time to time).
•
•
Interest accrued on the Bonds during each Rate Period shedl be paid in arrears on
each Interest Payment Date, Interest on the Bonds sh.aU be computed (i) during any
Short Mode upon the basis of a three hundred sixty-five (365) or three hundred
sixty-six (366) day year, as appficable, for the number of days actuaUy elapsed, (ii)
during any Adjustable Long Mode or a Fixed Mode, upon the basis of a three
hundred sixty (360) day year consisting of twelve (12) thirty (30) day months, and
(iii) with respect to Bank Bonds, upon the basis of a three hundred sixty (360) day
year and the actual number of days elapsed.
General. This Bond is one of an authorized series of bonds limited in aggregate

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83363

principal amount to $ •
and designated City of Chicago Variable Rate
Bonds, Series
(the "Bonds") issued pursuant to, under authority of and in fiill
compfiance with the • Constitution and laws of the State of lUinois, particularly
Artide VII, Section 6(a) of the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois and an
ordinance of the City Coundl of the City, and a Trust Indenture dated as of
. 2002 (the "Indenture"),fromthe City to [Name of Trusteej,
Chicago, Illinois, as tmstee (the "Trustee"), for the purpose of
•
•
and paying costs and expenses incidental thereto and
to the issuance of the Bonds.
The Bonds and the interest thereon are dfrect and general obligations ofthe City
[describe pajroent).
Copies of the Indenture are on file at the principal corporate trust office of the
Trustee, and reference to the Indenture and any and aU- supplements thereto and
modifications and amendments thereof is made for a description of the pledge, and
covenants securing the Bonds, the nature, extent and manner of enforcement of
such pledge, the rights and remedies ofthe registered cwners ofthe Bonds, and the
limitations on such rights and remedies.
Definitions. Terms used in this Bond shaU have the same meanings as set forth .
in the Indenture.
Interest Rates. The Bonds shall iiutially hear interest at the Initial Rate specified
in the Indenture for the period specified in the Indenture, and thereafter at a DaUy
Rate as provided in the Indenture until and unless any portion thereof is converted
to a different Interest Mode as provided in the Indenture.
DaUy Mode.. The-Remarketing Agent wiU determine," and is requfred to give
telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the Trustee of, the DaUy Rate in the
manner set forth in the Indenture. Elxcept on an Adjustment Date, in the event that
the DaUy Rate for any Rate Period is not determined by the Remarketing Agent, the
rate of interest home by the Bonds bearing interest at a DaUy Rate shaU be equal
to the BMA Munidpal Index untU the Remarketing Agent next determines the Daily
Rate as required under the Indenture.
Weekly Mode. The Remeuketing Agent wiU determine, and is required to give
telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the Trustee of, the Weekly Rate in the
manner set forth in the Indenture. Except on an Adjustment Date, in the event that
the Weekly Rate for any Rate Period is not determined by the Remarketing Agent on
a Rate Determination Date, the rate of interest borne by the Bonds beeuing interest
at a Weekly Rate shall be equal to the BMA Municipal Index until the Remarketing
Agent next determines the Weekly Rate as requfred under the Indenture.
Flexible Mode. The Remarketing Agent wiU determine, and is required to give
telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the Trustee of, the duration of the Rale

 83364

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Period and the Flexible Rate in the maimer set forth in the Indenture. Except on
an Adjustment Date, in the event that the Flexible Rate for any Bond is not
determined by the Remarketing Agent on any Rate Determination Date, such Bond
shaU bear interest at a Flexible Rate equal to the B.M.A. Munidpal Index for a Rate
Period ofthe shortest possible duration.
Adjustable Long Mode. The Remarketing Agent wiU determine, and is requfred
to give telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy), to the Trustee of, the Adjustable
Long Rate in the manner set forth in the Indenture. In the event that the
Adjustable Long Rate for any Bond is not determined by the Remarketing Agent for
the initial Rate Period, the rate of interest home by such Bonds shaU be determined
pursuant to the Indenture. Except on an Adjustment Date, if the Remarketing
Agent shaU faU to determine an Adjustable Long Rate on a Rate Determination Date
for a Rate Period within an Adjustable Long Mode, the Bonds shaU automaticaUy
convert to a Rate Period of three hundred sixty-seven (367) days and shall bear
interest at an Adjustable Long Rate equal to the Bond Buyer One (1) Year Note
Index as most recentiy pubUshed in The Bond.Buyer prior to the Adjustment Date.
Fixed Mode. From and after the Fixed Rate Conversion Date for a Bond, such
Bond shaU bear interest at the Fixed Rate with respect thereto estabfished as
provided below under "Conversion to a Fixed Rate".
Bank Rate. Each Bank Bond shafi bear interest at the Bank Rate.
Maximum Interest Rate. At no time shafi the Bonds (including Bank Bonds)
bear interest at a rate higher than the Maximum Interest Rate, and at no time shafi
Bonds entitied to the benefit of the Letter of Credit bear interest at a rate higher
than the Interest Coverage Rate.
Purchase On Demand Date. While a Bond (other than a Bank Bond) bears
interest at a DaUy Rate, such Bond (or portion thereof in an Authorized
Denomination) shaU be purchased on a Demand Date therefor upon the demand of
the registered owner thereof, at a purchase price equal to one hundred percent
(100%) of the prindpal amount thereof plus accrued interest, ff any, to such
Demand Date, upon irrevocable telephonic or written notice (which telephonic
notice shaU be confirmed in writing and which "written notice may be given by
telecopy) to both the Trustee's Agent and the Remarketing Agent, which notice must
be received not later than 10:00 A.M., Chicago time, on a Business Day in order to
be effective on that date. Any notice received after 10:00 A.M., Chicago time, on a
Business Day shafi be deemed given on the next succeeding Business Day. Such
notice must specify the principal amount and number of such Bond, the name and
the address of such registered owner and the taxpayer identification number, ff
any, of such registered owner.
WhUe a Bond (other than a Bank Bond) bears interest at a Weekly Rate, such
Bond (or portion thereof in an Authorized Denomination) shall be purchased on a

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83365

Demand Date therefor upon the demand of the registeired ovmer thereof, at a
purchase price equal to one hundred percent (100%) ofthe prindpal amount thereof
plus accrued interest, ff any, to such Demand Date, upon irrevocable written notice
(which may be given by telecopy) to the Trustee's Agen t and the Remarketing Agent,
which notice must be received by the Trustee's Agent and the Remarketing Agent
not later than 4:00 P.M., Chicago time, on a Business Day in order to be effective
on that day (any notice received after 4:00 P.M., Chicago time, on a Business Day
shall be deemed given on the next succeediiig Business Day). Such notice must
specify (i) the principal amount and number of such Bond, the name and the
address of such registered O'wner and the taxpayer identification number, if any,
of such registered owner, and (ii) the Demand Date on which such Bond is to be
purchased.
Purchase On Notice Of Certain Events Of Default Under Credit Agreement
While Letter Of Credit Is Requfred. During the period a Letter of Credit is
requfred by the Indenture, the Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing
interest at a Fixed Rate) are subject to mandatoty tender by the registered owners
thereof to the Trustee when the Trustee gives Immediate Notice to the registered
owners of such Bonds- and the Remarketing Agent of" the occurrence and
continuation of a Credit Agreement Default. In such case, the registered- owner of
any such Bondrequfredto be purchased may not elect to retain its Bond, and by "
the acceptance of such Bond shaU be deemed to have agreed to seU such Bond to
the Trustee on the date spyedfied pursuant to the Indenture.
Purchase WhUe Bonds Bear Flexible Rate. WhUe any Bond (other than a Bank
Bond) bears interest at a Flexible Rate, such Bond shall be purchased on each Rate
Change Date for such Bond, other than the Rate Change Date which is the first (1")
day of a Flexible Mode appficable to such Bond, and on the Adjustment Date
immediately foUowing the last day ofthe Flexible Mode at a purchase price equal to '
one hundred percent (100%) ofthe prindpal amount thereof The registered owner
. of such Bond may not elect to retain its Bond.
Purchase Prior To Stated Termination Date 'When Requfred Substitute Letter
Of Credit Not in Place; Purchase Prior To-Substitution Date; Purchase. FYior
To Letter Of Credit CanceUation Date. During the period a Letter of Credit is
requfred under the Indenture, afi Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds
bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) shaU be purchased (a) on the Business Day prior
to each Stated Termination Date ofthe Credit Agreement, and (b) on the Business
Day immediately preceding each Substitution Date, unless each Rating Agency
then providing a short-term rating on the Bonds confirms that such short-term
rating wiU not be withdrawn or reduced as a result ofthe delivery of such Substitute
Letter of Credit. If a Letter of Credit is no longer requfred pursucuit to the Indenture,
aU Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) shaU
be purchased on the Business Day prior to the Letter of Credit CcinceUation Date.
A purchase of Bonds pursuant to this paragraph shaU be at a purchase price for
each such Bond equal to the principal amount thereof plus accrued interest, ff any.

 83366

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

to the purchase date. The registered owner of such Bond may not elect to retain its
Bond.
Purchase 'WhUe Bonds Bear Adjustable Long Rate. While any Bond (other
than a Bank Bond) bears interest at an Adjustable Long Rate, such Bond shaU be
purchased on each Rate Change Date "within an Adjustable Long Mode for.such
Bond, other than the Rate Change Date which is the ffrst (1") day of an Adjustable
Long Mode appUcable to such Bond, and on the Adjuistment Date immediately
following the last day of such Adjustable Long Mode, at a purchase price equal to
one hundred percent (100%) ofthe prindpal amount thereof. The registered owner
of such Bond may not elect to retain its Bond.
Purchase On Adjustment Date. On each Adjustment Date with respect to a
Bond (other than a Bank Bond), such Bond shaU be purchased at a purchaise price
equal to one hundred percent (100%) ofthe prindpal amount thereof, except that
(i) a Bond 'Which is to be purchased on an Adjustment Date which-immediately
follows the last day of a Flexible Mode shaU be purchased as described under
"Purchase 'WhUe Bonds Bear Flexible Rate" above, and (u) a -Bond which is to be
purchased on an Adjustment Date which immediatdy foUows the scheduled final
day of an Adjustable Long Mode shaU be. purchased as described under "Purchase
•While Bonds Bear Adjustable Long Rate" above. The registered owner of such Bond
may not elect to retain its Bond.
Payment Of Purchase Price. Bonds remarketed by the Remarketing Agent shaU
be defivered by the Trustee or the Ttnstee's Agent as dfrected by the Remarketing
Agent by 11:00 A.M.* Chicago time, on the date of purchase against payment
therefor. The proceeds of sale by the Remarketing Agent shaU be defivered to the
Trustee by H :00 A.M., Chicago time, on the date of purchase. The Trustee's Agent
shafi pay the purchase price of each Tendered Bond from the sources specified in
the Indenture, to the registered owner thereof by 1:30 p.m., Chicago time, oh the
purchase date; provided that the Trustee's Agent shafi have confirmed that such
registered owner has defivered such Tendered Bond (with any necessary
endorsements) to the Principal Office of the Trustee's Agent no later than 12:00
Noon, Chicago time, on such date.
In the event that sufficient monies are on deposit with the Trustee to pay the
applicable purchase price of any Tendered Bond, such Tendered Bond will be
deemed to have been purchased whether or not delivered by the registered owner
thereof on the date such Tendered Bond is to be purchased. In the event any such
purchased Tendered Bond is not so delivered, the City wUl execute and the Trustee
wiU authenticate and defiver a replacement Bond of like date, Maturity Date and
denomination as the Tendered Bond and bearing a number not contemporaneously
outstanding.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83367

Purchase Price of Bank Bonds. The purchase price of remarketed Bank Bonds
shall be one hundred percent (100%) of the principal amount thereof plus accrued
interest, ff any, at the Bank Variable Rate through the Bond Sale Date.
No Remarketing After Certain Defaults. Uidess consented to in "writing by the
City, the Remarketing Agent and the Bank, (a)ffduring the period a Letter of Credit
is required pursuant to the Indenture, there is no Letter of Credit in effect, there
shafi be no remarketing of Tendered Bonds, and (b) ff there shedl have occurred and
be continuing an Event of Default under the Indenture of which an authorized
officer in the principal office ofthe Remarketing Agent or an authorized officer in the
prindped corporate trust office of the Trustee has actual knowledge.
Conversion To An Adjustable Long Mode Or Short. Mode. Tlie City may
designate a different Interest Mode with respect to any Bond during a Flexible Mode
or one (1) or more Adjustable Long Modes on any Rate Chemge Date, and during a
Deuly Mode or a Weekly Mode on any Business Day, upon compfiance with the
Indenture.
• In the event that the Remarketing Agent does not determine the interest rate
appficable to the initial Rate Period during a new Interest Mode vdth respect to any
Bond or tf emy releveuit opinion requfred is not deUvered, the immediately
succeeding Interest Mode with respect to the Bonds in the Interest Mode then
ending shafi be determined as provided in the Indenture.
Designation Of Substitute Adjustment ' Date. The City may designate a
Substitute Adjustment Date (i) for emy Bank Bonds (provided that such Bank
Bonds shaU continue to bear interest at the Bank Rate as long as they remain Bank
Bonds), with Bank Approved, on any Business Day, and (ii) for emy Bonds in an
Adjustable Long Mode, on emy Business Day .on which such Bonds cem be
optioneiUy redeemed at a price, of par plus accrued interest as set forth in the
Indenture. The Substitute Adjustment Date shaU be the next succeeding
Adjustment Date for such Bonds for all purposes of the Indenture.
Fixed Rate Conversion. On any Rate Change Date during a Flexible Mode or em
Adjustable Long Mode, or on any Business Day during a Daily Mode or a Weekly
Mode, the interest rate to be home by all or emy portion of the Bonds in such
Interest Mode shedl be converted to a Fixed Rate, and such Bonds so converted
shaU thereafter bear interest at such Fixed Rate untU payonent of the principed or
redemption price thereof shaU have been made or provided for in accordance with
the provisions of the Indenture.
If the conversion ofthe interest rate of any Bond does not occur for any reason,
including in the event that any condition precedent to the Fixed Rate Conversion
shaU not occur, such Bonds shaU bear interest from and after the proposed Fixed
Rate Conversion Date as provided in the Indenture.

 83368

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Effect Of Notices. Any notice maUed as provided herein shaU be condusively
presumed to have been given, whether or not the registered owner of Bonds
receives the notice..
'
Redemption. The Bonds shaU be subject to redemption prior to their Maturity
Date in the eunounts, at the times and in the manner pro"vided below.
(a) Optional Redemption.
(i) Bonds in a DaUy Mode or a Weekly Mode shafi be subject to redemption
prior to thefr Maturity Date at the. option ofthe City, from Efigible Monies, in
whole or in peurt (and, ff in part, in an Authorized Denomination) on any
Business Day during such DaUy Mode or Weekly Mode, as appficable, at a
redemption price equal to one hundred percent (100%) ofthe principed amount
thereof plus accrued, interest, if any, to the redemption date.
(u) Bonds in an Adjustable Long Mode shafi be subject to redemption prior to
thefr Maturity Date, during each Rate Period therein, at the option ofthe City,
from Efigible Monies, in whole or in peirt (and, ff in pent, in an Authorized
Denomination) on any Business Day eifter the No-CaU Period described below,
at the foUowing redemption prices-(expressed as percentages of the prindpal
amount of Bonds caUed for redemption) plus accrued interest, ff any, to the
redemption date:
Length Of Rate Period

No-CaU Period

Redemption Period

greater than twelve (12)
years

ten (10) years from
the Rate Change Date

one hundred two percent,
(102%) declining one
percent (1%) per twelve
(12) months to one
hundred percent (100%)

less than or equal to
twelve (12) yeeurs and
greater than four (4)
years

untU two (2) years
prior to end of Rate
Period

one hundred percent
(100%)

less than or equed to
four (4) years

length of Rate Period

not subject to optional
redemption

The City may deUver to the Trustee em alternative redemption schedule to the
schedule shown above, ff the City defivers to the Bank and the Trustee an
Opiruon of Bond Counsel to the effect that the alternative schedule of

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83369

redemption wiU not adversely affect the vafidity and enforceablfity of the Bonds
in accordance with their terms, and wiU not have an adverse effect on any
exclusion from gross income of the .interest thereon for Federal income tax
purposes. After the first (1") Rate Change Date succeeding the defivery of such
alternative schedule and Opinion of Bond Counsel, Bonds in em Adjustable Long
Mode shaU be subject to redemption pursuant to the terms of such alternative
schedule.
••
(ui) Bonds in the Fixed Mode shaU be subject to redemption prior to thefr
Maturity Date at the option ofthe City, in whole or in part (and, ff in part, in an
Authorized Denomination) on emy Business Day after the No-CaU. Period
described below, at the follo"wing redemption prices (expressed as percentages
ofthe prindped amount ofthe Bond caUed for redemption) plus accrued interest,
ff any, to the redemption date:
Term Of Maturity

No-CaU Period

greater than twelve (12)
years

ten (10) yeeus from
the Fixed Rate
Conversion Date

one hundred two percent,
(102%) declining one
percent (1%) per twelve
(12) months . to one
hundred percent (100%)

untU two (2) years
prior to the
Maturity Date

one hundred percent
(100%)

term to the Maturity
Date

not subject to optional
redemption

less than or equal to
twelve (12) yeeu-s and
• greater them four (4)
years
less than or equal to
four (4)

Redemption Period

The City may defiver to the Trustee an edtemativc redemption schedule to the
schedule shown above, ff the City delivers to the Bemk and the Trustee an
Opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that the alternative schedule of
redemption wiU not adversely affect the vafidity and enforceabUity ofthe Bonds
in accordance with their terms, and wUl not have an adverse effect on any
exdusion from gross income of the interest thereon for Federal income teix
purposes. Bonds which commence beeuing interest at a Fixed Rate on or after
the defivery of such alternative schedule and Opinion of Bond Counsel shall be
subject to redemption in accordance with the provisions of such alternative
schedule.

 83370

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(iv) Bonds beeuing interest at a Flexible Rate or em Adjustable Long Rate shafi
be subject ;to optional redemption prior to thefr Maturity Date at the option of
the City, from Efigible Monies, in whole or in peut (and, ff in peirt, in an
Authorized Denomination) on any Rate Change Date therefor, at a redemption
price equal to one hundred percent (lGG%).of the prindpal eunount thereof plus
accrued interest, ff any, to the redemption date.
(b) Optional Redemption Of Bank Bonds. Bemk Bonds shedl be subject to
redemption prior to their Maturity Date at the option of the City, in whole or in
part (and, if in part, in an Authorized Denomination) on any Business Day at a
redemption price equal to one hundred percent (100%) ofthe principal amount
thereof plus accrued interest, ff any, to. the redemption date..
(c) Exfraordineuy Redemption Of Bank Bonds. Bemk Bonds shedl be subject
to mandatoty redemption on the dates and in the amounts specified in Section 3.1
of the Credit Agreement. Such redemption shaU be. at a price equal to the
principal amount thereof plus accrued interest thereon to the redemption-date,
without premium. Bank Bonds shaU be redeemed pursuant to the provisions of
this paragraph without any notice from or dfrection by the City.
General Provisions Regeurding Redemptions. (1) No redemption of less than aU
of the Bonds outstanding shaU be made pursuemt to (a) or (b) above unless (i) ff
such redemption is of Bonds beeuing interest at a Short Rate or an Adjustable Long
Rate, the aggregate principal amount of Bonds to be redeemed is equal to One
Hundred Thousand DoUars ($100,000) or integral multiples thereof, emd (u) if such
redemption is "with respect to Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate, the aggregate
prindpal eunount of Bonds to be redeemed is equed to One Hundred Thousemd
DoUars ($100,000) or Five Thousand DoUar ($5,000) multiples in excess thereof
Any redemption of less them edl of the Bonds outstanding shall be made in such a
manner that edl Bonds outstanding after such redemption are in Authorized
Denominations.
(ii) Bonds may be caUed for redemption by the Trustee pursuant to (a) above (A)
in the case of Bonds bearing interest at a Short Rate, upon receipt by the Triistee
at least thirty-five (35) days prior to the redemption date of a written request of the
City requesting such redemption, or (B) in the case of Bonds bearing interest at an
Adjustable Long Rate or a Fixed Rate, upon recdpt by the Trustee at least forty-five
(45) days prior to the redemption date of a written request of the City requesting
such redemption.
(ui) Bonds may be called for redemption by the Trustee pursuant to (b) above
upon receipt by the Trustee at least one (1) Business Day prior to the redemption
date of a written request of the City requesting such redemption. The Trustee or the
Trustee's Agent shall give notice to the Bank one (1) Business Day prior to emy

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83371

redemption of Bank Bonds pursuant to (b) or (c) above.
Notice Of Redemption. Except as otherwise provided "with respect to Bank
Bonds in the Indenture, riotice ofthe caU for any redemption identifying the Bonds
to be redeemed shedl be given by ffrst class maU, postage prepaid, with respect to
Bonds bearing interest at a Short Rate, not less them thirty (30) or more than fortyfive (45) days prior to the date fixed for redemption, and shall be given by first d a s s
maU. postage prepeud, with respect to Bonds bearing interest at an Adjustable Long
Rate or a Fixed Rate, not less than thirty (30) or more them sixty (60) days prior to
the date fixed for redemption, to the registered owners of Bonds to be redeemed at
thefr addresses as sh6"wn on- the Bond Register. Failure to give notice in the
manner prescribed with respect to any Bond, or any defect in such notice, shaU not
affect the vafidity Of the proceedings for redemption for any Bond with respect to
which notice was properly given. Upon the happening ofthe above conditions and •
if sufficient monies are on deposit with the Trustee on the appUcable redemption
' date to redeem the Bonds to be redeemed emd to pay interest due thereon and
preinium, ff any, the Bonds thus caUed shaU not after the appUcable redemption
date bear interest, be protected by the Indenture or be deemed to be outstanding
under the pro"visions of the Indenture.
Selection Of Bonds To Be Redeemed. If less than aU the Bonds shedl be called
for redemption under any pro'vision of the Indenture permitting such partied
redemption, the peirticular . Bonds or portions thereof to be-redeemed shall be
selected by the City and designated to the Triistee; provided, however, that (i) in the
case of - the redemption of less than aU Bonds which bear interest in the seune
Interest Mode at the seune rates for the same Rate Periods and which in the case of
Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate were converted on the same date, such
redemption shaU be by lot in such memner as the Trustee may determine eunong
such Bonds, (u) in the case of the redemption of less than aU Bonds which bear
interest at the same rates for the same Rate Periods, such redemption shedl be by
lot in such rnarmer as the Trustee may determine among such Bonds, and (iu)
subject to other appficable provisions of the Indenture, the portion of any Bond.to
be redeemed shaU be in a principed amount equal to an Authorized Denomination.
Any redemption of less than all ofthe Bonds outstanding shedl be made first (1")
from Bank Bonds.
Letter Of Credit. The City covenants and agrees that at aU times whUe any Bonds
eue outstemding which bear interest at a rate other than the Fixed Rate, the City will
maintain a Letter of Credit in fiiU force and effect with respect to aU Bonds bearing
interest at other than a Fixed Rate except as otherwise provided in the Indenture.
Letter Of Credit Not Requfred In Certeun Cfrcumstances. Prior to the Fixed
Rate Conversion Date therefor, under the drcumstances provided in the Indenture,
the Bonds are not requfred to have the benefit of a Letter of Credit. Bonds bearing
interest at a Fixed Rate shall not be requfred to have the benefit of a Letter of Credit
after the Fixed Rate Conversion Date appficable to such Bonds. In the event of a

 83372

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Letter of Credit Cemcellation Date, the Borids shaU be subject to mandatory tender
pursuemt to the Indenture.
Limited Obfigation. The Bonds eure issued pursuant to em ordinemce adopted by
the City CouncU ofthe City, which ordinance authorizes the execution and. defivery
of the Indenture. The Bonds eire limited" obfigations ofthe City payable solely from
the Trust Estate pledged therefor under the Indenture, monies paid under the Letter
of Credit and other monies legaUy avaUable therefor.
No recourse shaU be had for the payment of the prindpal of, premium,ffany, or
interest on emy of the Bonds or for emy claim based thereon or upon any obfigation,
covenant or agreement in the Indenture contained; against, any past, present or
future oflBcer, employee or agent, or member of the City CouncU; of the City, or emy
successor to the City, as such, either dfrectiy or through the City, or any successor
to the City, under any rule of law or equity, statute or constitution or by the
erfforcement of emy assessment or penalty or otherwise, and aU suchfiabifity.of any
such officer, employee or agent, or member ofthe City CourtcU, as such, is hereby
e7q>ressly waived and released as a condition of emd in consideration for the
execution ofthe Indenture and the issuance of any ofthe Bonds.
Regisfration. This Bond isfransferableby the registered o"wncr.hereof in person
or by such registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing at the prindpal
corporate trust office of the Trustee, but only in the memner and subject to the
limitations provided in the Indenture.
Defeasance. Provision for payment of aU or any portion of the Bonds may be
made, and the Indenture may be discharged, prior to payment of the Bonds in the
manner.provided in the Iiidenture.
MisceUaneous. The registered owner of this Bond shedl have no right to enforce
the pro"visions of the Indenture or to institute action to enforce the covenemts
therein, or to take any action with respect to - any event of default under the
Indenture, or to institute, appeeir in or defend any suit or other proceedings "with
respect thereto, except as provided in the Indenture.

Assignment.
The foUowing abbreviations, when used in the inscription on the face of this
certificate, shaU be construed as though they were written out in full according to
appUcable laws or regulations:

 5/1 / 2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83373

Ten. Com.

—

as tenemts in common

Ten. Ent.

—

as tenants by.the entfreties

Jt. Ten.

—

as joint tenants withrightof survivorship emd not as tenants
in common

Unff. Gift Min. Act

Custodian
(Oust.)

(Minor)
under Uniform Gifts to Minors Act
(State)

Additional abbre"viations may also be used, though not in the above fist.
For Value Received, The undersigned hereby:seUs, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)
this Bond ofthe City of Chicago emd does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
.
:
tofransferseiid Bond
on the books kept for regisfration thereof, with fuU power of substitution in the
premises.

Dated:
Signature:
Signature Guaranteed:
Notice:

The signature to this assignment must correspond with the name as it
appears upon the face of this Bond in evety particuleir, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

 83374

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Notice Of Rate Period.
Rate Change Date on which Current Rate Period Commences:
Next Rate Change Date:
Appficable Interest Rate during Current Rate Period:
Appficable Optional Redemption Provisions during Current Rate Period (if
Adjustable Long Mode):
[Name ofTrustee), as Trustee
By: _

Authorized Signatoty

 STATEOF ILLINOKS )
)SS.
COUNTY OF COOK )

I, SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk ofthe City of Chicago in tJie County of Cook and State
of Illinois, DO HEREB"V CERTIFY that the annexed and foregoing is o true and correct copy of that
certain ordinance now on file in my office authorizing Issuance of City of Chicago General Obligation
Bonds. Series 2012 and Amendments to Commercial Paper Program.
1 DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was passed by the City Council of the said
City of Chicago on the fourteenth (14'^ day of March. 2012.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the vote on the question ofthe passage of the said ordinance by
the said City Council was taken by yeas and nays and recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of
the said City Council, and that the result of said vote so taken was as follows, to wit:
Yeas 47 NaysO
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was delivered to the Mayor of the said City of
Chicago afler the passage thereof by the said City Council, without delay, by the City Clerk of the said
City of Chicago, and that the said Mayor did approve and sign said ordinance on the sixteenth (16'*')
day of March. 2012.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the original, of which the foregoing is a true copy, is entrusted to
my care for safekeeping, and that I am the lawful keeper of the same.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my
hand and affixed the corporate seal of the City of
Chicago aforesaid, al the said City, in the County and
Stale aforesaid, this twentieth (20*) day of February,
2014.
[T.P.]

SUSANA A. MENDOZA, Cit/Clerk

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21707

The following are saicj ordinances as passed
WHEREAS, the City of Chicago (the °C//y') is a body politic and corporate under the laws
of the State of Illinois and a home rule unit under Article Vll of the Illinois Constitution of 1970;
and
WHEREAS, the City has heretofore authorized the issuance of its general olsligation
bonds "and notes and has established a commercial paper program authorizing the issuance of
its general obligation commercial paper from time to time; and
WHEREAS, the City's general obligation bonds and notes currently putstanding and its
general obligation commercial paper currently or hereafter outstanding frorri time to time
(collectively, the 'Outstanding Indebtedness') mature and are subject to optional and mandatory
redemption as provided in the respective proceedings authorizing the Outstanding
Indebteijness; and
WHEREAS, the City has heretofore entered into agreements of the type described in
Section 14 hereof which are in existence as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance (the
'Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements'); and
WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of the inhabitants of the City and necessary for the
welfare of the government and affairs of the City to authorize (i) refunding all or a portion of the
Outstanding Indebtetjness and (ii) terminating, amending or othenA'ise modifying all or any
portion of the Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements and paying any settlement,
breakage or termination amounts that may be due and owing in connection therewith, in order to
achieve, debt service savings for the City, restructure debt service of the Outstanding
Indebtedness or reduce, limit or manage the City's exposure to interest rate risk (collectively,
the 'Refunding Purposes"); and

WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of the inhabitants of the City and necessary for the
welfare of the government and affairs of the City to finance (i) public right-of-way infrastructure
improvements in City neighborhoods, including street and alley construction and improvements,
lighting improvements, sidewalk improvements and replacement, and curb and gutter repairs
'and replacement; (ii) infrastructure improvements to enhance the development of economic
activity, including industrial street constaiction and improvements, streetscaping. median
landscaping, demolition of hazardous, vacant or dilapidated buildings that pose a threat to
pub/ic safety and welfare, shoreline reconstruction, riverbank stabilization, residential and
commercial infrastructure redevelopment and railroad viaduct clearance improvements;
(iii) transportation improvements (to City property and facilities and to property and facilities

 21708

JOURNAL-CfTY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

located within the City limits which are owned by other governmental entities), including street
resurfacing, bridge and freight tunnel rehabilitation, traffic signal modernization, new traffic
signal installation, intersection safety improvements and transit facility improvements; (iv) grants
or loans to assist not-for-profit organizations or educational or cultural institutions, or to assist
other municipal corporations, units of local government, school districts, the State of Illinois or
the United States of America; (v) cash flow needs of the City; (vi) the acquisition of personal
property, including, but not limited to, computer hardware and software, vehicles or other capital
items useful or necessary for City purposes; (vii) the duly authorized acquisition of improved and
unimproved real property within the City for municipal, industrial, commercial or residential
purposes, or any combination thereof, and the improvement, demolition and/or remediation of
any such property; (viii) constructing, equipping, altering and repairing various municipal
facilities including fire stations, police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and other
municipal facilities; (ix) the enhancement of economic development within the City by making
direct grants or loans to, or deposits to funds or accounts to' secure the obligations of,
not-for-profit or for-profit organizations doing business or seeking to do business in the City;
(x) the funding of (A) judgments entered against the Gity. (B) certain settlements or other
payments required to he made by the City as a condition to ttie resolution of litigation or
threatened litigation or arbitration and (C) such escrow accounts or other reserves as shall be
deemed necessary for. any of said purposes; (xi) the payment of certain contributions (the
"Pension Contributions') to the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund, the Firemen's Annuity
and Benefit Fund, the Municipal Employees'. Officers' and Officials' Annuity and Benefit Fund
and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund (collectively, the
'Pension Funds'); (xii) ttie provision of facilities, services and equipment to protect and enhance
public safety, including,, but not limited to. increased costs for police and fire protection services,
emergency medical services, staffing at the City's emergency call center and other City
facilities, and enhanced security measures at.airports and other major City facilities; and (xiii)
acquiring motor vehicles for a term of years or lease period (the purposes described in clauses
(i) through (xiii) above being referred to herein as the 'Projecty, and
WHEREAS, the cost of the Refunding Purposes and the Project is estimated to be not
less than $900,000,000 and the City expects to pay a portion of such costs by borrowing money
and issuing its general obligation bonds in one or more series and at one or more times in the
aggregate principal amount of not to exceed $900,000,000 (plus the amount of any original
issue discount as herein provided); and

the City has determined that it is advisable arid necessary to authorize the
borrowing of the sum necessary at this time for any or all of the purposes of (i) paying costs of
the Refunding Purposes, (ii) paying costs of the Project, including capitalizing or funding such
interest on the bonds herein authorized for said purpose as rnay be necessary, (iii) capitalizing
or funding interest on Outstanding Indebtedness and (iv) paying the expenses of issuing the
bonds herein authorized for the purposes described herein, and in evidence thereof to authorize
the issuance of its General Obligalion Bonds (the 'Bunds'), in one or more series and at one or
WHEREAS,

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21709

more times as herein provided, such borrowing being for a proper public purpose and in the
public interest, and the City, by virtue of its constitutional home rule powers and all laws
applicable thereto, has the power to issue such Bonds; and
WHEREAS, the Bonds may include one or more series of bonds the interest on which is,
as designated by series, either includible or excludable from gross income (or federal income
tax purposes under Section 103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. as amended (the
"Code-); and
WHEREAS, the City-has authorized the issuance of certain bonds, notes and commercial
paper of the City secured by and payable- from a specified revenue source, including, without
limitation, airport revenues, sales tax revenues, motor fuel tax revenues, water system revenues
and sewer system revenues (such bonds and notes being hereinafter referred to as .'Revenue
Bonds and Notes" arid such commercial paper tteing hereinafler"referred
to as "Rever7ue
Commercial Paper"); and
WHEREAS, the .city has determined that it is necessary to provide for various
restructuring-amendments (i) to the Outstanding Indebtedness, (ii) to the Revenue Bonds and
Notes currently outstanding and the Revenue Commercial Paper currently or hereafter
outstanding from lime to time (coJIectiveJy, the'Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness") and (iii) to
the extent issued and outstanding from time to time in the future, the Bonds; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is necessary to amend certain sections of the
Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City of Chicago on May 1. 2002. (the "2002
Ordinance"), which authorized the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes Series A a n d Series B
m an amount not to exceed $200,000,000 and pursuant to which the City proposed to establish
. a commercial, paper program, an auction rate securities program, a variable rate securities
program and a line of credit program (collectively, the "Borrowing Plan"); and
WHEREAS, the Borrowing Plan authorizes the issuance of one or more series of
Authorized Debt (as defined in the 2002 Ordinance) for (i) the payment, or reimbursement o f t h e
City for the payment, of (he cost of all or any portion of any capital project approved by City
Council, (ii) cash flow needs of the City, (iii) the deposit of monies into funds and accounts as
are provided for in any indenture entered into under the Borrowing Plan, and (iv) the payment of
costs of issuance incurred in connection with each series of Authorized Debt; and
W H E R E A S , the City desires to amend the 2002 Ordinance in order to, among other
things, (i) increase the maximum aggregate principal amounl of Authorized Debt (o be
outstanding under the 2002 Ordinance from $200,000,000 to $500,000,000 and (ii) further
delegate authority and establish the borrowing parameters for the line of credit program; now,
therefore.
BE )T O R D A I N E D B Y T H E C I T Y C O U N C I L O F T H E C I T Y O F C H I C A G O :

Section 1.
The City Council of the City (the -City Council'), after a public meeting
heretofore held on this Ordinance by the Committee on Finance of the City Council, pursuant to

 21710

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

proper notice and in accordance with the findings and recommendations of such Committee,
hereby finds that all of the recitals contained in the preambles to this Ordinance are full, true and .
correct and does incorporate them into this Ordinance by this reference.
Sectiori 2.
There shall be borrowed on the credit of and for and on tehalf of the City in
one or more series and at one or more times the sum of not to exceed $900,000,000 plus an
amount equal to the amount of any net original issue discount used in the marketing of the
Bonds (not to exceed 10 percent of the principal amount of each series thereof) for the
purposes aforesaid; and the Bonds shall be issued from time to time in said aggregate principal
amount, or such lesser amount, as may be determined by the City's Chief Financial Officer or
the City Comptroller (each such officer being hereinafter referred to as an 'Authorized
Officer").
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds payable in one payment on a
fixed date ("Capital Appreciation Bonds'). Each series of Capital Appreciation Bonds shall tie
dated the date of issuance thereof and shall also bear the date of authentication, shall be in fully
registered form, shall be numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar (as
hereinafter defined), and shall be in' denominations equal to the original principal amounts of
such Capital Appreciation Bonds or any integral multiple thereof, each such original principal
amount representing Compound Accreted Value (as hereinafter defined) at maturity (the
"Maturity Amount') of such minimum amounts and integral multiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Capital Appreciation-Bonds
(but no
single Bond shall represent Compound Accreted Value maturing on more than one date). As
used herein, the "Compound Accreted Value" of a Capital Appreciation Bond on any date of
determination shall be an amount equal to the original principal amounl (or integral multiple
thereof) plus an investment return accrued to the date of such determination at a semiannual
compounding rate which is necessary to produce the yield lo maturity borne by such Capital
Appreciation Bond (the "Yield to Maturity').
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at fixed rates
and paying interest semiannually as described below (the 'Current Interest Bonds'). Each
series of Current Interest Bonds shall be dated such date as shall be agreed upon by an
Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Current JrJteresf Bonds. shalJ be in fully registered
form, shall tie in such minimum denominations and integral multiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Current Interest Bonds (but no single
Current Interest Bond shall represent installments of principal maturing on more than one date),
and shall be numbered as detenriined by the applicable Bond Registrar.
The Bonds may be initially issiied as Capital Appreciation Bonds containing provisions
for the conversion of the Compound Accreted Value of such Bonds into Current Interest Bonds
(the 'Convertible Bonds') at such time following the initial issuance as shall be approved by an
Authorized Officer. .White in the form of Capital Appreciation Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shall be subject to all of the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance relating to Capital
Appredation Bonds, and while in the fonm of Current Interest Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shall be subject to all of the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance relating to Current
fnteresl Bonds, fn particular, when Convertible Bonds are in the form of Capital Appreciation
Bonds prior to their conversion to Current Interest Bonds, the transfer, exchange and

 3/14/2012

REPORTS

OF COMMITTEES

21711

replacement provisions of this Ordinance with respect to Capital Appreciation Bonds shall apply
to such Convertible Bonds; provided that the Convertible Bonds delivered in the form of Capita)
Appreciation Bonds in connection with any such transfer, exchange or replacement shall have
identical provisions for conversion to Current Interest Bonds as set forth in the Convertible
Bonds being transferred, exchanged or replaced. In connection with the issuance and sale of
any Convertible Bonds, the terms and provisions relating to the conversion of (he Compound
Accreted Value of such Converfible Bonds into Current Interest Bonds shafi be as approved by
an Authorized Officer at the lime of sale of such Convertible Bonds. Notwithstanding any other
provision hereof, any series of Bonds may be issued as Capital Appreciation Bonds, Cun-ent
interest Bonds. Convertible Bonds or any combination thereof
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at variable rates
established by reference to such indices or otherwise and adjustable and payable from lime to
time as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer and as agreed upon by an Authorized
Officer and the purchaser of the Bonds (the "Variable Rate B o n d s ) . Each series of Variable
Rate Bonds shall be dated such date as shall be agreed upon by an Authorized Officer and the
purchasers of such Bonds, shall be in fully registered form, shall be in such denominations as
shall tie agreed upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of the Bonds (but no single
Bond shall represent installments of principal maturing on more than one date), and shall be
numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar. Each series of Variable Rate Bonds
may be issued pursuant to, and have such terms and provisions as are set forth in, a trust
indenture between the City and a bank or tnjst company selected by an Authorized Officer. The
Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into one or more such trust
indentures on behalf of the City. Each such trust indenture shall be in substantially the form of
trust indentures previously entered into by the City in • connection with the sale of general
obligation tionds or.notes bearing interest at variable rates. but v/ith such revisions in text as the
Mayor or the Authorized Officer executing the same shall determine are necessary or desirable,
including such revisions as shall be necessary to incorporate provisions relating lo .the manner
of establishing the interest rate and the payment of interest from time lo lime on the Variable
Rate Bonds, the execution thereof, and any amendment thereto, by Ihe Mayor or such
Auttwrized Officer to evidence the City Council's approval of all such revisions.
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued and sold from time to time on a retail basis
to individual investors (the 'Retail Bonds') or as a direct purchase to holders (the "Direct
Purchase Bonds'). The Retail Bonds and the Direct Purchase Bonds shall t>e sold as provided
in Section 12 hereof
The principal of (he Bonds of each series shall biecome due and payable on or before
the earlier of (i) January 1, 2054. or (ii) 40 years after thie date of issuance thereof. Each series
of Current Interest Bonds shaft bear interest at a rate or rates and each series of Capital
Appreciation Bonds shall have Yields to Maturity not to exceed 15 percent per annum. Each
series of Variable Rate Bonds shall bear interest from time lo time at such rates determined by
such remarketing or other indexing agent as shall be selected by an Authorized Officer for that
purpose or as provided in the related trust indenture referred to above not to exceed 15 percent
per annum. Any portion of the Bonds may be issued as tx)nds the interest on which is not

 21712

JOURNAL-CITY

COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes if
determined by an Authorized Officer to be beneficial to the City.
^
Each Capital Appreciation Bond shall accrue interest from its date at the rate per annum
compounded semiannually on each January 1 and July 1, commencing on such January 1 or
July 1 as determined by an Authorized Officer al the lime of sale of such Capital Appreciation
Bonds, which will produce the Yield to Maturity identified therein until the maturity date thereof.
Interest on the Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be payable only at the respective maturity dates
thereof.
Each Current Interest Bond shall bear interest from the later of its date or the most
recent interest payment date to which interest has been paid or duly provided for, until the
principal amount of such Bond is paid, such interest (computed upon the basis of a 360-day
period of twelve 30-day months) being payable on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
commencing on such January 1 or July 1 as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the
time of the sale, of each series of Current Interest Bonds. Interest on each Current Interest
Bond shall be paid to the person in wtiose name such Bond is registered .at the close of
business on the 15th day of the month next preceding the interest payment date, by check or
draft of the applicable Bond Registrar, or. at the option of any registered owner of $1,000,000 or
more in aggregate principal amount of Current Interest Bonds of a series, by wire transfer of
immediately available funds'to such bank in the continental United States of America as the
registered owrier of such Bonds shall request in writing to the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each series of Variable Rate Bonds shall bear interest (computed from time to time at
such rates and on such basis as shall be detenmined by an Authorized Officer or al the time of
sale of such series of Variable Rate Bonds) payable on such dates as shall be determined by an
Authorized Officer at the time of sate of such Variable Rate Bonds. Any Variabje Rate Bonds
may be made subject to optional or mandatory tender for purchase by the owners thereof at
such times and at such prices (not to exceed 105 percent of the principal amount thereof) as
shall tie determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds. In
connection with the remarketing of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series so tendered for
purchase under the terms and conditions so specified by an Authorized Officer, the Mayor and
each Authorized Offic^er. are hereby authorized to execute on behalf of the City a remarketing
agreement, and any amendment thereto, with respect to such series of Variable Rate Bonds in
substantially the fbnn previously used for variable rate financings of the City wilh appropriate
revisions to reflect this tenms and provisions of such Bonds sold as Variable Rate Bonds and
such other revisions in text as an Authorized Officer shall determine are necessary or desirable
in donnection with the sale of such Bonds as Variable Rale Bonds. The annual fee paid to any
remarketing agent serving in such capacity pursuant to any such remarketing agreement with
respect to a series of Variable Rate Bonds shall not exceed one-quarter of one percent (0.25%)
of the average principal amounl of such Variable Rate Bonds of such series outstanding during
such annual period.
The Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appreciation Bonds, the principal of the
Current Interest Bonds and the Variable Rate Bonds and any redemption premium shall tie

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21713

payable in lawful money of the United States of America upon presentation and surrender
thereof at the designated corporate trust office of the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each of the Bonds shall be designated "General Obligation Bonds. Series
" with
such additions, modifications or revisions as shall be determined to be necessary by an
Authorized Officer at the time of the sale of such Bonds to reflect the calendar year of issuance
of the Bonds, the order of sale of the Bonds, the specific series of the Bonds, whether the
Bonds are being issued on a taxable basis, whether the Bonds are Capital Appreciation Bonds.
Current Interest Bonds, Convertible Bonds. Variable Rate Bonds. Retail Bonds or Direct
Purchase Bonds, whether the Bonds are being issued and sold for the purpose of paying costs
of the Refunding Purposes, paying costs of the Project or a combination thereof and any ottier
authorized features of the Bonds determined by an Authorized Officer as desirable to be
reflected iri (he title of the Bonds being issued and sold.
The seal of the City or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed to or printed on each of the
Bonds, and (he Bonds shall be executed by the manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor and
attested" by the manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk, and in case any officer whose
signature shall appear on any Bond shall cease to tie such officer before the delivery of such
Bond, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all proposes, the same as if
such officer had remained in office until delivery. As used in. this Ordinance; "City Clerk" shall
mean the duly qualified and acting City Clerk of the City or any Deputy City Clerk or other
person that may lawfully lake a specific action or perform a specific duty prescribed for the City
Cler1< pursuant to this Ordinance.
All Bonds shall have thereon a certificate of authentication substantially in the fonm
hereinafter set forth duly executed by the applicable Bond Registrar as authenticating agent of
the City and showing the date of authentication. No Bond shall t>e valid or obligatory for any
purpose or be entitled to any security or benefit under this Ordinance unless and until such
certificate of authentication shall have been duly executed by the applicable Bond Registrar by
manual signature, and such certificate of authentication upon any such Bond shall be conclusive
evidence that siich Bond has been authenticated and delivered under this Ordinance. The.
certificate of authentication on any Bond shall be deemed to have been executed by the
appficable Bond Registrar if signed by an authorized officer of such Bond Registrar, but it shall
not be necessary that the same officer sign the certificate of authentication on all of the Bonds
issued hereunder.
Section 3.
(a) Registration and Transfer The City shall cause books (the "Bond
Register^ for the registration and for the transfer of each series of Bonds as provided in this
Ordinance to be kept at the designated corporate trust office of a bank or trust company
designated by af? Authorized Officer (the ' B o n d Registrar"), as the registrar fpi" the City in
connection vvith such series of Bonds. The City is authorized to prepare multiple Bond blanks
executed by the City for use in the transfer and exchange of Bonds.
Upon surrender for transfer of any Bond at the designated corporate trust office of the
applicable Bond Registrar, duly endorsed by, or accompanied by a written instrument or
instruments of transfer in form satisfactory to such Bond Registrar and duly executed by the

 21714

JOURNAL-CITY

COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

registered owner or its attorney duly authorized in writing, the City shall execute and such Bond
Registrar shall authenticate, date and deliver in the name of Ihe transferee or transferees (a) in
the case of any Capital Appreciation Bond, a new fully registered Cajpital Appreciation Bond or
Bonds of the same series, maturity and yield to maturity of authorized denominations, for a like
aggregate original pnncipal amounl of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same series,
maturity and yield to maturity of other authorized denominations, or (b) in the. case of any other
Bonds, one or more fully registered Bonds of the same series, type (Current Interest Bonds or
Variable Rate Bonds), interest rate (or in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of interest
rate detennination) and maturity of authorized denominations, for a like principal amounl- Any
Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds may be exchanged at said office of the applicable Bond
Registrar for a like aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of
the same series, maturity and yield to maturity of other authorized denominations. Any other
Bond or Bonds may be exchanged at said office of the applicable Bond Registrar for a like
aggregate principal amount of Bonds of the same series, type, interest rate and maturity of other
authorized denominations. The execution by the City of any fully registered Bond shall
constitute full and due authorization of such Bond, and the applicable Bond Registrar shall
thereby be authorized to authenticate, dale and deliver such Bond; provided that (a) the
aggregate original principal amount of outstanding Capital Appreciation Bonds of each series,
maturity and yield to maturity authenticated by the appficable Bond Registrar shaH not exceed
the authorized aggregate original principal amount of Capital-Appreciation Bonds of such series
and maturity less previous retirements and (b) the principal amount of Current tnteresl Bonds or
Variable Rate Bonds of each series, maturity and interest rate (or interest rale determination
method) authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall not exceed the authorized
principal amoLint of Current Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds for such series, maturity and
interest rate (or interest rate detenmination method) less previous retirements.
The applicable Bond Registrar .shall not be required to transfer or exchange (a) any
Bond after notice calling such Bond for redemption has been mailed, or (b) any Bond during a
period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of such Bond; provided,
however, that provisions relating to the transfer or exchange of Variable Rale Bonds of a series
shall be as determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale thereof and may be set
forth in the trust indenture securing such series of Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in
Section 2 hereof.
The person in whose name any Bond shall be registered shall be deemed and regarded
as the absolute owner thereof for all purposes, and payment of the Compound Accreted Value
of. principal o f redemption premium, if any. or interest on any Bond, as appropriate, shall be
made only to or upon the order of the registered owner thereof or its legal representative. All
such payments shall be valid and effectual to satisfy and discharge the liability upon such Bond
to the extent of the sum or sums so paid.
'
No service charge shall be made for any transfer or exchange of Bonds, but the City or
Ihe applicable Bond Registrar may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other
governmental charge that may be imposed in connection with any transfer or exchange of
Bonds, except that no such payment may tie i-equired in the case of the issuance of a Bond or
Bonds for the unredeemed portion of a Bond surrendered for redemption.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21715

(b)
Book-Entry Only System. If so determined and directed by an Authorized Officer in
connection with the sale of any of the Bonds, such Bonds may "be issued in book-entry only
form. In connection with the issuance of Bonds in book-entry only form, an Authorized Officer is
authorized to execute and deliver lo the book-entry depository selected by such Authorized
Officer such depository's standard form of representation letter. If any of the Bonds are
registered in the name of a securities depository which uses a book-entry system, the standing
of the beneficial owner to enforce any of the covenants herein may be established through the
books and records of such securities depository or a participant therein.
(c)
Bonds Lost, Destroyed, etc. If any Bond, whether in temporary or definitive form, is
lost (whether by reasor\ of theft or otherwise), destroyed (whether by mutilation, damage, in
whole or in part, or otherwise) or improperly cancelled, the applicable Bond Registrar may
authenticate a new Bond of like series, dale, maturity date, interest rate (or. in'the case of
Capital Appreciation Bonds, yield to maturity, and in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of
interest rate detennination), denomination and original principal amount (in the case of Capital
Appreciation Bonds) or principal amount (in the case of other Bonds) and bearing a numtier not
contemporaneously outstanding; provided that (i) in (he case of any mutilated Bond, such
rriutilated Bond shall first tie surrendered to the applicable Bond Registrar, and (ii) iri the case of
any lost Bond or Bond destroyed in whole, there shall be first furnished lo the applicable Bond
Registrar evidence of such "loss or destruction, together with indemnification of the City and^
such Bond Registrar, satisfactory (o such Bond Regis(rar. If any tost, .destroyed or improperly
cancelled Bond shall have matured or is about to mature, or has been called for redemption,
instead of issuing a duplicate Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar shall pay the same without
surrender thereof if there shall be first furnished to such. Bond Registrar evidence of such loss,
destruction or cancellation, together with indemnity, satisfactory to it. Upon the issuarxe of any
substitute Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar may require the payment of a sum sufficient to
cover any tax or other governmental charge (hat may be imposed in relation thereto.
(d)
Redemption and Repurchase. The Bonds may be made subject to redemption
prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole or.in part on any date, at such times and at
such redemption prices (to. be expressed as a percentage of the principal amount of Current
Interest Bonds or Variable. Rate Bonds being redeemed or as a formula as described below and
expressed as a percentage of the Compound Accreted Value of Capital Appreciation" Bonds to
be redeemed or as a formula as descritJed below) not to exceed 105 percent, plus, in the case
of Current Interest Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, acqxied interest lo the date of redemption,
as determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale thereof
Notwithstanding the foregoing, such 105 percent limitation on the redemption price of
Bonds shall not apply where the redemption price is based upon a formula designed to
compensate the owner of the Bonds to be redeemed based upon prevailing market conditions
on the date fixed for redemption, commonly known as a "make-whole* redemption price (the
'Malie-Wliole Redemption Price'). At the tirne of sale of the Borids, an Authorized Officer shall
determine the provisions of the formula to be used to establish any Make-Whole Redemption
Price, which may vary depending on whether the Bonds are issued oh a taxable or tax-exempt
basis. An Authorized Officer shall confirm and transmit the applicable Make-Whole Rederinption
Price on such dates and to such parties as shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.

 21716

JOURNAL-CITY

COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

If fewer than all of the outstanding Bonds of a series are to be optionally redeemed, the
Bonds to be called shall be called from such maturities and interest rates of such series as may
be determined by an Authorized Officer.
Certain of the Bonds of a series may be made subject to mandatory redemption, at par
and accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption, as determined by an Authorized Officer at
the time of the sale thereof Further, an Authorized OfTcer is hereby authorized to sell (at a
price determined by such Authorized Officer to be in the best interests of the City) or waive any
right the City may have to call any of the Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness for optional
redemption, in whole or in part, and is hereby further authorized to expend the proceeds of any
such sales for any purpose for which the proceeds of Ihe Bonds are authorized to be expended
and for the payment or prepayment of any City debt obligations, al  as determined by an
Authorized Officer; provided however, to the extent that interest on such Bonds or Outstanding
Indebtedness is excluded from gross income for federal income tax purposes, such
expenditures shall not adversely affect such exclusion. If determined lo be necessary or
appfopriate, an Authorized Officer is authorized to solicit the consent of holders of outstanding
Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness to any such sale or waiver.
Retail Bonds may be made subject to repurchase by (he City upon the demand of
certain holders thereof at a price of not to exceed 105 percent of par, as more fully described in
Section 12 hereof
At the time of sale of Bonds of a series, an Authorized Officer is authorized to determine
the manner of redeeming sijch Bonds, either by lot in the manner hereiriafter provided or
pro-rata in the manner determined by an Authorized Officer at the lime of sale, in the event less,
than all of the Bonds of the same series, maturity and interest rale are to be redeemed.
The Current Interest Bonds shall be redeemed only in amounts equal to the respective
minimum authorized denominations and integral multiples thereof and the Capital Appreciation
Bonds shall be redeemed only in amounts represenling the respective minimum authorized
Maturity Amounts and integral multiples thereof In the event of the redemption of fewer than all
the Bonds of the same series, maturity and interest rale by lol. the aggregate principal amount
or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) thereof to be redeemed shall be the minimum authorized
denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for such series or an integral multiple thereof,
and the applicable Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of such series, maturity and
interest rate, a distinctive number for each minimum authorized denomination or Maturity
Amount (as appropriate) of such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as
many numbers as, al such minimum atjthorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) for each number, shall equal the principal amount or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of such Bonds to be redeemed. In such case, the Bonds to be redeemed shall be
those to which were assigned numbers so selected; provided that only so much of (he principal
amount or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall equal
such minimum authorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for each number
assigned to it and so selected. In the event of the redemption of fewer than all Bonds of the
same series, maturity and interest rale on a pro-rata basis, if the Bonds are held in book-entry
form at the time of redemption, at the time of sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21717

authorized to direct the Bond Registrar to instruct the book-entry depository to select the
specific Bonds within such maturity and interest rate for redemption pro-rata among such
Bonds. The City shall have no responsibility or obligation to ensure that the book-entry
depository properly selects such Bonds for redemption. •
The City shall, at least 45 days prior to any optional redemption date (unless a shorter
time period shall be satisfactory to Ihe applicable Bond Registrar), notify the applicable Bond
Registrar of such redemption date and of the principal amount or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of Bonds of such series to be redeemed.
In conriection wilh any mandatory redemption of Bonds of a series as authorized above,
the principal amounts of Bonds (or the Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appreciation
Bonds) of such series to be mandatorily redeemed in each year may be reduced through the
eariier'optional redemption thereof, with any partial optional redemptions of such Bonds of such
series' credited against future mandatory redemption requirements in such order of the
mandatory redemption dates as an Authorized Officer may determine. In addition, on or prior to
the 60th day preceding any" mandatory redemption date of Bonds of a series, the applicable
Bond Registrar may. and if directed by an Authorized Officer shall, purchase Bonds of such •
series required to be retired on such mandatory redemption date at such prices as an
Authorized Officer shall determine. Any such Bonds so purchased shall be cancelled and the
principal amount (or Compound Accreted Value, as appropriate) thereof shall be credited
against the payment required on such next mandatory redemption date with respect to such
series of Bonds.
The applicable Bond Registrar shall promptly notify the City in writing of the Bonds, or
portions thereof, selected for redemption and, in the case of any Bond selected for partial
redemption, the principal amount. Compound Accreted Value or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) thereof, and the interest rate thereof to be redeemed.
Subject to the limitation on redemption price set forth above, in the case of redemption of
any Variable Rale Bonds, the terms of such redemption shall be determined by an Authorized
Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds and may be set forth in the tmst
indenture securing such Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof.
Section 4.
Except as may otherwise be determined as provided below for Variable
Rate Bonds, unless waived by any owner of Bonds to be redeemed, notice of the call for any
such redemption shall be given by the applicable Bond Registrar on behalf of the City by mailing
the redemption notice by first class mail at least 30 days and not more than 60 days prior to the
date fixed for redemption to the registered owner of the Bond or Bonds to be redeemed at the
address shown on the applicable Bond Register or at such other address as is furnished in
writing by such registered owner to such Bond Registrar, but the failure to mail any such notice
or any defect (herein as lo any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the
redemption of any other Bond. Any notice of redemption mailed as provided in this Sectiori
shall be conclusively presumed to have been given whether or not actually received by the
addressee, in the case of redemption of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series, the time and
manner of giving such notice shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of

 21718

JOURNAL-CITY

COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

such Variable Rate Bonds and may be set forth in the trust indenture securing such Variable
Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof
All notices of redemption shall state.
(1)

the series designation of the Bonds lo be redeemed,

(2)

the redemption date,

(3)
the redemption price, or in the case of.a. redemption of Bonds at a
Make-Whole Redemption Price, a description of the formula by which the redemption
price shall be determined,
(4)
if less than all outstanding Bonds of a series are to be redeemed, the
identification (and, in the case of partial redemption, the respective principal amounts
and interest rates. Compound Accreted Values or Maturity Amounts) of the Bonds to be
redeemed,
(5)
that on the redemption date the redemption price will become due and
payable upon each such Bond or.portion thereof called for redemption, and that interest
thereon shall cease to accrue or compound from and after said date,
(6)
the place where such Bonds are to be "surrendered for payment of the
redemption price, which place of payment shall be thie designated corporate trust office
of the applicable Bond Registrar, and
(7)
such other infonnation as shall be deemed necessary b y the applicable
Bond Registrar at the time such notice is given to comply with law. regulation or industry
standard.
With respect to an optional redemption of any series of Bonds, such notice may state
that said redemption is conditioned upon the receipt by the applicable Bond Registrar on or prior
to the date fixed for redemption of moneys sufficient to pay the redemption price of the Bonds of
such series. If such moneys are not so received, sucfi redemption notice shall be of no force
and effect, the City shall not redeem such Bonds and the applicable Bond Registrar shall give
notice, in the same manner in which the notice of redemption was given, that such moneys were
not so received and that such Bonds will not be redeemed. Unless the notice of redemption
stiall be made conditional as provided above, on or prior lo any redemption date for a series of
Bonds, the City shall deposit with the applicable Bond Registrar an amount of money sufficient
to pay the redemption price of all the Bonds or portions thereof of such series which are to be
redeemed oh that date.
Notice of redemption having been given as aforesaid, the Bonds, or portions thereof, so
to be redeemed shall, on the redemption date, become due and payable at the redemption price
therein specified, and from and after such date (unless the City shall default in the payment of
the redemption price or unless, in the event of a conditional notice as described above, the

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21719

necessary moneys were not deposited) such Bonds, or portions thereof, shall cease to bear,
accrue or compound interest. Upon surrender of such Bonds for redemption in accordance wilh
said notice, such Bonds shall be paid by (he applicable Bond Registrar a( Ihe redemption price.
Installments o( interest due on or prior to the redemption dale shall be payable as herein
provided for payment of interest. Upon surrender for any partial redemption (i) of any Current
Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond, there shall be prepared for the registered owner a new
Bond or Bonds of the same series, type (Current Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds),
interest rate or. in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of interest rate determination, and
maturity in the amount of the unpaid principal or (ii) of any Capital Appreciation Bond, there shall
be prepared for the registered owner a new Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same
series. Yield to Maturity and maturity date in the amounl of the unpaid Maturity Amount.
If any Current Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond, or portion thereof, called for
redemption shall not be so paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the principal shall, until
paid, bear interest from the redemption date at the rate borne by such Bond, or portion thereof,
so called for redemption. If any Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof, called for
redemption shall not be so paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the Compound Accreted
Value at such redemption date shall continue to accrue interest from such redemption date at
the Yield to (Maturity borne by such Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof, so called for
redemption. All Bonds which have been redeemed shall be cancelled and destroyed by the
applicable Bond Registrar and shall not be reissued.
If any Bond is not presented for payment when the principal amount. Compound
Accreted Value or Maturily Amounl thereof becomes due, either at maturity or at a date fixed (or
redemption thereof or otherwise, and if moneys sufficient lo pay such Bond are held by the
applicable Bond Registrar for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond, such Bond
Registrar shall hold such moneys for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond without
liability to the registered owner for interest. The registered owner of such Bond thereafter shall
be reslricted exclusively to such funds for satisfaction of any claims relating to such Bond.
Section 5. The Capital Appreciation Bonds and the Cun^ent Interest Bonds of each
series shall be prepared in substantially the following forms with such insertions and revisions
as shall be necessary to reflect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Bonds of such series
pursuant to Section 12 hereof; provided that if the text of any Bond is to be printed in its entirety
on the front side of such Bond, then the text shown or appearing on the reverse side of such
Bond shall replace paragraph (2} and the legend. "See Reverse Side for Additional Provisions,"
shall be omitted. The Convertible Bonds shall be prepared incorporating the provisions of the
forms of Capital Appreciation Bonds and Current Interest Bonds set forth below as necessary to
reflect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Convertible Bonds pursuant to Section 12
hereof. The Variable Rate Bonds shall be prepared in substantially the torm of the Cuneni
Interest Bonds set forth below, or as provided in the applicable tnjst indenture securing such
Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof, with such insertions and revisions as
shall be necessary (o reflect the tenms and provisions of the sale of the Variable Rate Bonds
pursuant to Section 12 hereof.
All Bonds may be prepared with such insertions and revisions as shall be necessary in
connection with the issuance of such Bonds as Retail Bonds or Direct Purchase Bonds.

 3/14/2012

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

21720

(Form of Capital Appreciation Bond — Front Side]

REGISTERED
No.

$_
Compound Accreted
Value at Maturity
{^'Maturity Amount)
UNITED S T A T E S O F A M E R I C A

STATE O F ILLINOIS

CITY OF CHICAGO

GENERAL O B U G A T I O N B O N D
SERIES

Sec Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
ORIGINAL
PRINCtPAL
AMOUNT P E R
$
000
Y I E L D TO

MATURITY

DATED

MATURHY

MATURITY

AMOUNT:

DATE

20

%

$

CUSIP
20

Registered Owner;
The City of Chicago (the 'City") hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for. value,
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registisred assigns as
hereinafter provided, on (he Maturity Date identified above, the Maturity Amount identified
above. The amount of interest payable on this Bond on the Maturity Date hereof is the amount
of interest accrued from the Dated Date hereof at a semiannual compounding rate necessary to
produce the Yield to Maturity set forth above, compounded semiannually on each January 1 and
July 1, commencing
:
1, 20 . The Maturity Amount of this Bond is payable
in lawful rnoney of the United States of America'upon presentation and surrender of this Bond at
the designated corporate trust office of
Chicago. Illinois, or its
successor, as bond registrar and paying agent (the 'Bond Registrar"). The Compound Accreled
Value of this Bond per $
.000 Maturity Amount on January 1 and July 1 of each year.
commencing
1, 20 . determined by the semiannual compounding described in
this paragraph shall be as set forth in the Table of Compound Accreted Value Per $
.000
of Compound Accreted Value at Maturity contained herein.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21721

Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth at
this place.
.
.
. It is hereby certified and recited that all conditions, acts and things required by law to
exist or to be done precedent lo and in the issuance of this Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and due fonm and tirne as required by law; that the
indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Bonds of which this is one, does" not exceed any
limitation imposed by law; and that provision has been made for the collection of a direct annual
tax sufficient to pay the Maturity Amount hereof at maturity.
This Bond shall not be valid or become obligatory for any purpose until the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Bond Registrar.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by ihe.City Council has caused its corporate
seal to be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Bond to be signed by the duly authorized
facsirnile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Cleric, all as
of the Dated Date identified above.

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest;

(Facsimile Signature)
City Cleri<
City of Chicago
(SEAL)

Date of Authentication;
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Bond is one of the Bonds described in the within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of the General Obligation Bonds, Series
. of the City of Chicago.

(Manual Signature)
Authorized Officer

 21722

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

[Form of Capital Appreciation Bond — Reverse Side]
C I T Y OF C H I C A G O
GENERAL OBLIGATION B O N D
SERIES

For the prompt payment of.the Maturity Amounl of this Bond as the same becomes due,
and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full faith, credit and resources of the City
are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the original principal amounl of
issued pursuant to the constitutional home rule powers of the City for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Purposes described in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described in the Bond Ordinance, and
(iii) paiying expenses incidental to the issuance of the Bonds, and was authorized by an
Ordinance adopted by (he Cify Council of the City on
, 20
(tbe "Bond
Ordinance").
The Bonds maturing on or after January 1 ,
, are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the City, in whole or in part on any date on or after
1.
, and if
less than all of the outstanding Bonds are to be redeemed, the Bonds to be called shall be
called from such maturities as shall be determined by the City., and if less than all of the Bonds
of the same maturity and yield to maturity are lo be redeemed, then [by lot) (pro-rata] for the
Bonds of the same maturity and yield to. maturity in the manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds
to be redeemed at the redemption prices (being expressed as a percentage of the Compound
Accreled Value of the Bonds to be redeemed) set forth below:
D A T E S OF R E D E M P T I O N

REDEMPTION PRICE

(Redemption by lot] In the event of Ihe redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and yield to maturity, the aggregate Maturity Amount thereof lo be redeemed shall be
S,
.000 or an integral multiple thereof, and the Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of
such maturify and yield to maturity a distinctive number for each $
.000 Maturity Amount of
such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as, at
5.
,,000 for each number, shall equal the Maturity Amount of such Bonds to be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so selected;
provided that only so much of the Maturity Amount of each. Bond shall t>e redeemed as shall
equal $
,000 for each number assigned to it and so selected.
(Redemption pro-rata] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and yield to maturity, the Bonds to be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
determined pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21723

Notice of any such redemption shall be sent by first class mail not fewer than 30 days
nor more than 60 days prior to (he date fixed for redemption to the Registered Owner of each
Bond to be redeemed at (he address shown on the registration tiooks of the City maintained by
the Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner
to the Bond Registrar; provided lhal the failure to mail any such notice or any defecl therein as
to any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Bond.
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease to accrue interest on the specified
redemption date; provided that funds for redemption are on deposit al the place of payment at
that time, and shall not be deemed to be outstanding.
This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly authorized in writing at the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago, Illinois, but only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon such transfer a new Bond or Bonds of authorized denominations, of the same maturity
and yield to maturity and for the same aggregate Original Prindpal Amount will be issued to the
transferee in exchange therefor. The Bond Registrar shall not be required to transfei- oi"
exchange this Bond (A) after notice cafdng this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.
The Bonds are issued in fully registered form in Original Principal Amounts representing
$
.000 Maturity Amount or any integral multiple thereof This Bor>d may be exchanged at
the designated corporate trust office of (he Bond Registrar for a like aggregate Original Principal
Amount of. Bonds of the same series and maturily. upon the terms set forth in the Bond
Ordinance.
.
^
The City and tfie Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment of or on account of the Maturity
Amount hereof and redemption premium, if any. hereon and for all other purposes and neither
the City nor the Bond Registrar shall be affected by any notice to the contrary.

TABLE OF COMPOUND ACCRETED VALUE
PER $

. .000 OF COMPOUND ACCRETED VALUE A T MATURITY

(ASSIGNMENT)
FOR VALUE RECEIVED,

the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)

(he within Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said "Bond on the books kept for registration thereof with full power of
substitution in the premises.

 JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

21724

3/14/2012

Dated:
Signature guaranteed:
NOTICE;

The signature to this assignment must correspond with the name of the Registered
Owner as it appears upon the face of the wilhin Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.
[Fomn of Current Interest Bond — Front Side]

REGISTERED

NO.
UNriED STATES O F AMERICA
STATE OF I L U N O I S
. CITY OF C H I C A G O
GENERAL O B U G A T ( O N B O N O
SERIES

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
Interest
Rate;

^%

Maturity Date:
January 1. 20

Dated Date:
20

CUSIP:

Registered Owner:
Priricipal Amount:
The City of Chicago (Ihe "O"//) hereby acknowledges ilseff to owe and for vafue
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as
hereinafter provided, on (he Ma(urity Date identified above, the Principal Amount identified
above and to pay interest (compuled on the basis of a 360-day year of (welve 30-day months)
on such Principal Amount from tfie later of the date of this Bond or the most recent interest
payment date to which interest has been paid at the Interest Rate per annuni set forth above on
January 1 and July 1 of each year commencing
1, 20 . until said Principal
Amount is paid. Principal of this Bond and redemption premium, if any. shall be payable in
lawful money of Ihe United Stales of America upon presentation and surrender al the
designated corporate tmst office of
,
•
. Chicago, Illinois, as bond
registrar and paying agent (the 'Bond Registrar'). Payment of the installments of interest shall
be made to the Registered Owner hereof as shown on the registration books of the City
maintained by the Bond Registrar at the close of business on the 15th day of the month next
preceding each interest payment date and shall be paid by check or draft of the Bond Registrar
mailed to the address of such Registered Owner as it appears on such registration books or at
such other address furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to the Bond Registrar or, at
the option of any Registered Owner of $1,000,000 or more in aggregate principal amount of the
Bonds, by wire transfer of immediately available funds to such bank in the continental Unfted
States of America as the Registered Owner hereof shall request in writing to the Bond Registrar.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21725

Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth al
this place.
• It is hereby certified and recited (hat all conditions, acts and things required by law to
exist or to be done precedent lo and in the issuance of this Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and due form and lime as required by law; that the
indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Bonds of which this is one; does not exceed any
limitation imposed by law; and that provision has beeri made for the collection of a direct annual
tax sufficient to pay the interest hereon as it falls due and also to pay and discharge the
principal hereof at maturily.
This Bond shall not be valid or become obligatory for any purpose until the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Bond Registrar.
IN WrTNESs WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by the City Council has caused its corporate
seal lo be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Bond lo be signed' by the duly authorized
facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Clerk, all as'
of the Dated Date identified above.

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature)
City Clerk
City of Chicago
(SEAL]
Date of Authentication:
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Bond is one of the Bonds described in the within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of the General Obligation Bonds, Series
of the City of Chicago.
>
By:

(Manual Signature)
Authorized Officer

 21726

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(Form of Current Interest Bond — Reverse Side]
CITY OF C H I C A G O
GENERAL O B L I G A T I O N B O N D
SERIES

For the prornpt payment of this Bond, both principal and interest, as aforesaid, as the
same become due. and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full faith, credit and
resources of the City are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the principal amount of
$
issued pursuant to the constitutional home rule powers of the City for the
purposes- of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Purposes described in the tiereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described in the Bond Ordinance, and
(iii) paying expenses incidental to the issuance of the Bonds, and was authorized by an
Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on
. 20
(the "Bond
Ordinance').
The Bonds maturing on or after January 1 ,
. are redeemable prior to maturity al the
option of the City, in whole or in part on any date on or after
1.
. and if less
than all of the outstanding Bonds are to be redeemed, the Bonds to be called shall be called
from such maturities and interest rates as shall be determined by the City and if less than all of
the Bonds of" a single maturity and the same interest rate are to be redeemed then (by lot]
. [pro-rata] within such maturity and interest rate in the manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds to
be redeemed at the redemption prices (being expressed as a percentage of the principal
aiTiounl) set forth below, plus accrued interest lo the date of redemption:
D A T E S OF REDEMPTION

REDEMPTION PRICE

The Bonds maturing on January 1,
. are subject to mandatory redemption^ prior to
maturity on January 1 of the-years ^
to
, inclusive, and (he Bonds maturing on
January 1.
, are subject to mandatory redemption prior to maturity on January 1 of the
years
to
. inclusive, in each case at par and accrued interest to the dale fixed for
redemption.
^
[Redemption by lot] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the aggregate principal amount thereof to be redeemed shall be
$
000 or an integral multiple thereof, and the Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of
such maturity and interest rate a distinctive number for each $
,000 principal amount of
such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as, at
$
.000 for each numtjer. shall equal the principal amount of such Bonds to be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so selected;
provided that only so much of the principal amount of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall
equal $
,000 for each numt>er assigned to it and so selected.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21727

(Redemption pro-rata] In the event of the redemption of less than all of the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the Bonds to be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
determined pursuant lo the Bond Ordinance.

Notice of any such redemption shall be sent by first class mail not less than 30 days nor
more than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption to the Registered Owner of each Bond
to be redeemed at the address shown on the registration books of the City maintained by the
Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to
the Bond Registrar; provided that the failure to mail any such notice or any defect therein as to
any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Bond.
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease to tiear interest on the specified
redemption date, provided lhal funds for redemption are on deposit at the place of payment at
that time, and shall not be deemed to be outstanding.

This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly autfiorized in writing at the designated corporate trust Office of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago, Illinois, but only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon such transfer a new Bond or Bonds of authorized denominations, of the same interest
rate, series and maturity and for the same aggregate principal amount will be issued to the
transferee in exchange therefor. The Bond Registrar shall not be required lo transfer or
exchange this Bond (A) after notice calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.

The Bonds are issued in fully registered form in the denomination of %
.000 each or
authorized integral multiples thereof This Bond may be exchanged at the designated corporate
trust office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate principal amount of Bonds of the same
interest rate, series and maturity of other authorized denominations, upon the terms set forth in
the Bond Ordinance.

The City and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment of or on account of principal
hereof and interest due hereon and redemption premium, if any, and for all other purposes and
neither the City nor the Bond Registrar shall be affected by any notice to the contrary.

 21728

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(ASSIGNMENT)

FOR V A L U E RECEIVED, the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)
the vvithin Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Bond on the books kept for registration thereof with full power of
substitution in the premises.
Dated:
Signature guaranteed:
NOTICE:

The signature to this assignment must correspond with the name of the Registered
Owner as il appears upon the face of the within Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

. Section 6.
Each Bond shall be a direct and general obligation of the City for the
payment of which (as lo Compound Accreted Value, principal, interest and redemption
premium, if any, as appropriate) the. City pledges its full faith and credit. Each Bond stiall be
payable (as to Compound Accreted" Value, principal, interest and redemption premium, if any,
as appropriate) from any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City legally
available for such purpose, including but not limited lo the proceeds of the Pledged. Taxes (as
defined in Section 7 hereof).
Section 7.
For the purpose of providing the funds required to pay as the same
become due (i) the principal of and interest and redemption premium, if any, on the Bonds
(including the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds), (ii) the purchase
price of Bonds that are subject to optional or mandatory tender for purchase by (he owners
thereof, to the extent not otherwise provided for pursuant to the terms of a Credit Facility (as
defined in Section 12 hereof), (iii) such amounts as may be payable under Interest Rate"
Exchange Agreements (as defined in Section 14 hereoO from the direct annual tax described
below, (iv) amounts (other than periodic fees and expenses) payable to providers of Credit
Facilities as described in Section 12 hereof and (v) to the extent determined by an Authorized
Officer to be necessary or desirable, periodic fees and expenses payable to parties involved in
the provision of ongoing services relating to the Bonds, the Outstanding Indebtedness, the
Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements or Interest Rate Exchange Agreements, including
parties such as those identified by an Authorized Officer in a notification of sale as described in
Section 12 hereof and parties providing similar ongoing services, such as rating agencies and
entities providing financial market information to be used in connection wilh the structuring and
sale of the Bonds (the 'Ongoing Financing Services'), there is hereby levied and there shall be
collected a direct annual tax upon all taxable property^ in the City for the years and in the
amounts as follows:

 3/14/2012

YEAR

2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027.
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032

21729

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

AMOUNT

$150,000,000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150.000,000
150,000.000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.00.0
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
. 150.000.000
150.000,000
. 150,000,000
150,000.000.

YEAR

2033
2034
2035
2036
2037 ,
2038 '
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
2051
2052

AMOUNT

$150,000,000
150,000.000
150.000.000
150,000,000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150,000.000
150.000.000
150,000.000
150,000.000
150.000.000
150,000.000
150.000.000
150,000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150,000.000
150,000,000
150.000.000

; provided that collections of such levy for any year in an amoUnt in excess of that necessary to
make the payments described in clauses (i). (ii). (iii), (iv) and (v) above (a) may be used for any
lawful public purpose designated by the City Council or (b) may be reduced and abated by an
Authorized Officer if such reduction is deemed desirable by an Authorized Officer in connection
with the sale or sales of the Bonds, in each case as detertnined from time lo lime by a n
Authorized Officer as provided in Section 12 hereof.
The tax levy made in this Section is not subject to the "Aggregate Levy" limitation
contained in the Chicago Property Tax Limitation Ordinance contained in Chapter 3-92 of the
Municipal Code of Chicago (the "Municipal Code'), and Section 3 - 9 2 ^ 2 0 of the Municipal Code
is hereby superseded to exclude the tax levy tierein from the definition of 'Aggregate Levy"
contained therein.
The term 'Pledged Taxes' means (i) the taxes hereinabove levied for collection for the
purpose of providing (he funds necessary to make (he payments described in clauses (i). (ii),
(iii). (iv) and (v) of the first paragraph of this Section 7. and (ii) subject to the provisions of
Section 15 hereof, the proceeds of taxes levied for the years fnDm and after 2011 in connection
with' the issuance of the Outstanding Indebtedness to the extent such lax collections are not
necessary for ( h c p a y m e n t of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein "or pursuant to any other authorization, and the term 'Pledged Taxes" shall
also indOde any amounts deposited into the hereinafter-defined Bond Fund or deposited with

 21730

JOURNAL-CITY

COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent (as hereinafter defined) by an Authorized Officer for the
purpose of paying principal of and interest on the Bonds and any accrued interest received and
deposited in the Bond Fund or the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Account, if established pursuant lo
Section 9 hereof
>
As provided in Section 12 or otheowise. the City reserves the right lo abate all or a
portion of the Pledged Taxes required to be levied in any year if and to the extent on or before
March 31 ofthe next succeeding calendar year (or such eariier date as may be required by law),
the City has on hand amounts dedicated to the paymenls described in clauses (i). (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of the first paragraph of this Section 7. due during the one-year period commencing on
January 2 of such succeeding, calendar year. The City may. but shall not be required lo, cause
the levy or extension in any year of taxes for the payment of the costs of Ongoing Financing
Services.
Section 8.
The City shall appropriate or otherwise provide amounts sufficient to pay
(i) principal of and interest on the Bonds (including the Compound A c a e t e d Value of any Capital
Appredation Bonds), (ii) amounts (other than periodic fees and expenses) payable to providers
of Credit Facilities as described in Section 12 hereof to the payment of which the City b a s
pledged its full faith and credit and (iii) Interest Rate Exchange Agreements to the payment of
which the City has pledged its full faith and credit for the years such amounts are due, and the
City hereby covenants to lake timely , action as required by law lo carry out the provisions of this
Section, but, if for any such year it fails to do so. this Ordinance shall constitute a continuing
appropriation ordinance of such amounts without any further action on the part of the City
Council.
Section s.
Each Authorized Officer is authorized lo establish one or more special
accounts, if determined to be necessary in connection with the sale of any of the Bonds,
separate and segregated from all other funds and accounts of the City, which shall either be
(i) held by an Authorized Officer (each a 'Bond Fund') or (ii) maintained with a bank or" trust
company to be designated by an Authorized Officer (each an "Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Account") pursuant to an escrow agreement (each an "Ad Valorem Tax E s c m w Agreement"),
between the City and the applicable Escrow Agent named therein (each an ' A d Valorem Tax
Escrow Agent"), and one or more of the Mayor or an Authorized Officer are hereby authorized to
. execute and deliver one or more Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreements in connection with the
. sale of the Bonds in such fonm as the officers so executing such agreement may deem
appropriate in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
In lieu of the proceeds of such taxes being deposited with the City Treasurer, any such
Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreement may authorize the County Collectors of Cook and DuPage
Counties, Illinois to deposit the proceeds of such taxes directly into the applicable Ad Valorem
Tax Escrow Account; if such Account has been created.
Section 10.
If the Pledged Taxes to be applied to the payment of the Bonds are not
available in time to make any payments of principal of or interest on the Bonds when due. then
the appropriate fiscal officers of the City are hereby directed to make such payments from any
other moneys, revienues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City that are legally available

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF C O M M I T T E E S

21731

for that purpose in advancement of the colleclion of such Pledged Taxes, and when the
proceeds thereof are received, such other funds shall be replenished, all to the end that the
credit of the City may be preserved by the prompt payment of the principal of and interest on the
Bonds as the same become due.
Section 11. A copy of this Ordinance, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed in
the respective offices of the County Clerics of Cook and DuPage Counties. Illinois (the "County
Clerks"), and such filing shall constitute the authority for and it shall be the duty of said County
Clerks, in each year beginning in 2013, to and including 2053, to extend the taxes levied
pursuant to Section 7 hereof for collection in such year, such taxes to be in addition to and in
excess of all other taxes heretofore or hereafter authorized to be levied by the City on its behalf.
A copy of this Ordinance, duly certified by the City Cleric, shall also be filed with.each
applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, if any, each applicable Bond Registrar, and if the
County Collectors of Cook and DuPage Counties are authorized to deposit the proceeds of the
taxes levied pursuant to Section 7 hereof directly wilh an A d Valoreni Tax Escrow Agent
pursuant to Section 9 hereof, with such County Collectors.
Section 12.
Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell all or any portion of the
Bonds, other than the Retail Bonds and the Direct Purchase Bonds which shall be sold as
provided in the following tvvo paragraphs, from time to time to or at the direction of an
underwriter or group of underwriters to be selected" by such Authorized Officer (the
"Underwriters"), with the concunrence of the Chairman of the Committee on Finance of the City
Council (the 'Chaimian"), on such terms as such Authorized Officer may deem to be in the best
interests of the City within the limitations set forth in this Ordinance.
Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell Retail Bonds from lime to time on
such terms as such Authorized Officer may deem to be in the. best interests cjf Ihe City within
the limitations contained in this Ordinance and. in connection therewith, to. appoint an agent or
group of agents to be selected by such Authorized Officer (the 'Selling Agents"), with the
concurrence of the Chairman, for the purpose of soliciting purchases of Ihe Retail Bonds by
individual investors, each sale of Retail Bonds solicited by the Selling Agents to be made with
the concurrence of the Chairman.
The Bonds rhay be sold as Direct Purchase Bonds in a manner and containing such
terms authorized, by an Authorized Officer, including pursuant to a placement agent
arrangement, lo a purchaser or purchasers other than the Underwriters (the 'Direct
Purchasers'), such Direct Purchasers lo be selected by an Aulhorized Officer and such sale
being permitted either at par or with a discount or premium. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer
is hereby authorized to do all such things and to execute and deliver such additional documents,
agreements and certificates as shall be necessary in connection with the sale of Direct
Purchase Bonds.
The principal amount of and the interest on the Bonds (including the Compound
Accreted Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds and based o n reasonable estimates of the
interest (o be paid on Variable Rate Bonds) sold of each series and maturity in the aggregate

 21732

JOURNAL-CITY

COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(after taking into account mandatory redemptions) shall not exceed the amount levied therefor
as specified in Section 7 hereof. The Bonds may be sold from time lo time as an Aulhorized
Officer shall determine that the proceeds of such sales are needed.
Subsequent to the sale of any series of Bonds or, in the case of the Retail Bonds,
subsequent to the sale of all Bonds that are the subject of a Selling Agent Agreement (as
hereinafter defined), an Authorized Officer shall file in the office of the City Clerk a notification of
sale directed to the City Council setting forth (i) the series designation, the aggregate principal
amount and authorized denominations of, rnaturity schedule and redemption provisions for the
Bonds sold, (ii) the principal amounts of the Bonds sold as Current Interest Bonds. Capital
Appreciation Bonds, Convertible Bonds and Variable Rale Bonds, respectively, and whether
any of the Bonds are sold as Retail Bonds, (iii) in the case of the sale of the Retail Bonds or
Direct Purchase Bonds, the principal amounts of such Bonds sold as Cuneni Interest Bonds,
Capitalized Appreciation Bonds, Convertible. Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respectively,
(iv) in Ihe case of Bonds sold as Capital Appreciation Bonds, (A) the Original Principal Amounts
of andl Yields to Maturity on the Capital Appreciation Bonds being sold and (B) a table of
Compound Accreted Values per minimum authorized Compound Accreted Value at maturity for
any Capital Appreciation Bonds being sold, setting forth the Compound Accreted Value of each .
such Capital Appreciation Bond on each semiannual compounding date, (v) the interest rates on
the Cuneni Interest Bonds sold or, in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, a description of the
method of determining the interest rate applicable to such Variable Rate Bonds from time to
time, (vi) the specific maturities, series and amounts of the Outstanding Indebtedness lo be
refurxJed with proceeds of the Bonds, (vii) a description of any Existing Interest Rate Exchange
Agreements to be terminated, amended or otherwise modified in connection with the refunding
of such Outstanding Indebtedness and identifying any settlement, breakage or termination
amount to be- paid in connectiori with each such termination, amendment or modification,
(viii) the date on and price at which the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding s h a l l .
be redeemed (if such redemption shall occur prior to stated maturity or pursuant lo mandatory
sinking fund redemption), (ix)(he disposition pf the taxes levied for the years from and after
2011 for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness or any Existing Interest Rate Exchange
Agreements as authorized by Section 15 hereof, (x) the identity of the insurer or insurers issuing
the. insurance policy or policies, if any. referred to below, and the identity of the provider or
providers of one or more Credit Facilities, if any, for such Bonds, (xi) the identity of the
Undenfl/riters (or. in the case of Retail Bonds, the Selling Agents and in the case of Direct
Purchase Bonds, the Direct Purchasers) selected for such Bonds, (xii) the identity of the
applicable Bond FRegistrar and any trustee or trustees selected by an Authorized Officer for such
Bonds, (xiii) the identity of any remarketing agent retained in, connection with the issuance of
Variable Rate Bonds, if any. (xiv) the compensation paid lo the Underwriters (or, in the case of
Retail Bonds, the Selling Agents) in connection with such sale, (xv) the identity of any Refunding
Escrow Agent (as defined in Section 13(b) hereof) appointed by an Authorized Officer in
connection with the refunding of Outstanding Indebtedness, and (xvi) any other matter
authorized by this Ordinance lo be determined by an Authorized Officer at the lime of the sale of
the Bonds of each series.

Either Authorized Officer is hereby authorized and directed to cause all necessary
notices of redemption of the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding as provided

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21733

above to be given-in accordance with the terms of (he respective ordinances or indentures, as
applicable, authorizing the Outstanding Indebtedness.
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver a
contract of purchase with respect to each sale of the Bonds to, or at the direction of. the
Underwriters in substantially the form previously used for similar general obligation bonds of the
City or to the Direct Purc:hasers, with appropriate revisions to reflect the terms and provisions of
the Bonds and such other rewsions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer shall determine
are necessary or desirable in connection with the sale of the Bonds. The compensation paid to
the Underwriters in connection with any sale of Bonds shall not exceed three percent of the
principal amount of the Bonds being sold. Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall limit the
sale of the Bonds or any maturity or maturities thereof al a price or pric^es in excess of the
principal amount thereof
The Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver a
contract with Selling Agents pursuant to which the Selling Agents shall solicit purchases of (he
Retail Bonds by individual investors (a "Selling Agent Agreemenf) substantially in the. form of
the selling agent agreement previously entered into by the City in connection with the sale of
Retail Borids. but with such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer executing the
same shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or such
Authorized Officer to evidence the City Council's'approval of all such revisions. The aggregate
compensation paid to the Selling Agents pursuant to any Selling Agent Agreement shall not
exceed three percent of the principal amount of the Retail Bonds sold pursuant to such Selling
Agent Agreement. The terms of any Selling Agent Agreement may provide for the delegation by
an Authorized Officer to one or moire Deputy Comptrollers of authority to approve the final terms
of sale of any Retail Bonds pursuant to such Selling Agent Agreement within parameters
established by an Authorized Officer consistent with the temis and limitations of Ihis Ordinance.
Any Selling Agent Agreement may also cohtain provisions pursuant to which a person receiving
an ownership interest in any Retail Bonds through the death of a Bondholder shall have the right
lo sell such Retail Bonds back lo the City at a price of not lo exceed 105 percent of par and
setting forth the terms and conditions of the exercise of such right: The Mayor or an Authorized
Officer (or.delegate as authorized above) is hereby authorized to do all such things and to
execute and deliver such additional documents, agreements and certificates as shall be
necessary in connection with Ihe sale of Retail Bonds from time to time pursuant to a Selling
Agent Agreement, induding any such document, agreement or certificate necessary to describe
the terms of Retail Bonds then being sold.
In connection with any sale of (he Bonds, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to
obtain one or more policies of bond insurance from recognized bond insurers selected by an
Authorized Officer, if such Authorized Officer determines such bond insurance to be desirable in
connection with such sale of the Bonds. Either Authorized Officer may, on behalf of the City,
make covenants writh such bond insurer that are not inconsistent wrth the provisions of this
Ordinance and are necessary l o carry out the purposes of this Ordinance.
In connection w^th any sale of the Bonds, the Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby
authorized to obtain one or more letters of credit, lines of credit, standby bond purchase

 21734

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

agreements, or similar credit or liquidity facilities (a 'Credit Facility') with one or more financial
institutions. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer, is hereby authorized to enter into a
reimbursement agreement and/or standby bond purchase agreement and lo execute and issue
a promissory note in connection with the provisions of each Credit Facility. Any Credit Facility,
reimbursement agreement or standby bond purchase agreement shall be in substantially the
form ofthe credit facilities, reimbursement agreements and standby tiond purchase agreements
previously entered into by the City in connection with the sale of general obligation bonds or
notes, but with such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer executing the same
shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by tbe Mayor or an Authorized
Officer lo evidence the City Council's approval of all such revisions. The annual fee paid lo any
financial institution that provides a Credii Facility with respect to all or a portion of a series of the
Bonds shall not exceed one and one-half percent of the average principal amount of such
Bonds outstanding during such annual period. The final form of any reimbursement agreement
and/or standby bond purchase agreement entered into by the City with respect to the Bonds
shall be attached to the notification of sale filed in the office of the City Clerk pursuant to this
section. Each such promissory note shafi be a general obligation of the City for the payment of
which, both principal and interest, the City pledges its full faith, credii and resources. Each
promissory note, and any Bond owned or held as collateral by any such financial institution in its
capacity as a provider of a Credit Facility shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding 15 percent
per annum and shall mature not later than the final maturity date of the relaled Bonds secured
by such reimbursement agreement or standby bond purchase agreemeni. The Mayor or an
Authorized Officer is hereby aulhorized to execute and deliver any such reimbursement
agreement or standby bond purchase agreemeni. and any amendment thereto or replacement
thereof, under the seal of the City affixed arid attested by the City Clerk.
In the event that Bonds are sold so as lo require the levy of taxes for any year specified
in Section 7 hereof for the purpose of making the paymenls described in clauses (i). (ii). (iii) and
(iv) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof in an amount less than the amount specified for
such year in the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, then an Authorized Officer shall, on or prior
to March 31 of the calendar year next succeeding such year, notify the City Council of the
determination made pursuant lo clauses (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof
regarding the application of any resulting excess levy colledkjns. and, in addition, in connection
with a determination made pursuant to clause (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, an
Authorized Officer shall file in the respective offices of the County Clerks certificates of tax
abatement for such year. In the event that upon the final sale of the Bonds of all series, such
Bonds have been sold so as to require the levy of taxes in any year specified in Section 7
hereof for the purpose of making the payments described in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of the
first paragraph of Section 7 hereof in an amount less than the amount specified for such year in
Section 7 hereof, then there shall be included, in the final notification of sale lo the City Council
described in the fourth (4*^) paragraph of this Section 12, the detenmination made pursuant to
clauses (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof regarding the application of any
resulting excess levy collections for such year and any succeeding year and, in addition, in
connection with a detenmination made pursuant to clause (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7
hereof an Authorized Officer shall file in the respective offices of the County Clerics certificates
of tax abatement for such year or years. If any of the Bonds are not to be sold and issued as
provided herein and no levy collections are to be applied for the purposes of paying the costs of

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21735

Ongoing Financing Services as determined by an Authorized Officer, the corresponding taxes
herein levied to pay debt sen/ice thereon shall be abated in full. Any certificate of abatement
delivered pursuant to this paragraph shall refer to the amount of taxes levied pursuant to
Section 7 hereof, shall indicate the amount of reduction in the amount of taxes levied by the City
resulting from the sale or sales of the Bonds or the non-issuance thereof, which reduced
amount is to be abated from such taxes, and shall further indicate the remainder of such taxes
which is to be extended for collection by said County Clerks
The preparation, use and distribution of a preliminary official statement, an official
statement or any other disclosure document relating lo each sale and issuance of the Bonds are
hereby ratified and approved. The Mayor and each Authorized. Officer are each hereby
authorized to execute and deliver an official statement or other disdosure document relating to
each sale and issuance of the Bonds on behalf of the City. The preliminary official statement,
official statement "and other disdosure ctocuments herein aulhorized shall be substantially
similar to those previously used for general obligation bonds of the City. and shall contain the
terms and provisions of the Bonds, the mariner in which the Bonds shall be sold, the use of
proceeds of the Bonds, finandal infonnation for the City, and such other information as the
Mayor or any Authorized Officer determines to be advisable under the circumstances.
In connedion with any sale of the Bonds, an Aulhorized Officer is hereby authorized to
execute and deliver one or more Continuing Disclosure Undertakings (eac:h a "Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking') evidencing the City's agreement to comply with the requirements of
Section (b)(5) .of Rule 15c2-12, adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the
"SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, in a form approved by. the Corporation
Counsiel. Upon , its execution and delivery on behalf of the City as herein provided, each
Coritinuing Disclosure Undertaking will be binding on the,City, and the officers, employees and
agents of the City are hereby authorized to do all .such acts and things and to execute aH such
documents as may be necessary to carry out and comply with.lhe provisions of each Continuing
Disdosure Undertaking as executed. Either Authorized Officer is liereby further authorized to
amend each Continuing Disclosure Undertaking in accordance with its respective tenms from
time to time following its execution and delivery as said officer shall deem necessary. In
addition, an Authorized" Officer is authorized, to make all future filings with the Electronic
Municipal Market Access system operated by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board or
such other municipal securities information repository as shall be designated by the SEC, all in
accordance wilh the provisions of Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 15c2-12(b)(5)
promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this Ordinance, the sole remedies for any failure by the City lo comply with any Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking shall be the ability of the beneficial owner of any applicable Bond to
seek mandamus or specific performance by court order to cause the City to comply with its
obligations under such Continuing Disdosure Undertaking.
The Bonds shall be duly prepared and executed in the form and manner provided herein
and delivered to the purchasers in accordance with the applicable terms of sale.
The Mayor, each Authorized Officer, the City Treasurer and the City Clerk are each
hereby authorized to execute and deliver such other documents and agreements (including

 21736

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

such conlracts, such intergovemmental agreements or such grant agreements with not-for-profit
organizations^ educational or cultural institutions or for-profit organizations or to assist the State
of Illinois, (he United States of America, or other municipal corporations, units of local
government or school districts in the State of Illinois, receiving proceeds of the Bonds as an
Authorized Officer shall deem necessary and appropriate) and perfonm such other a d s prior to
or following (he issuance of the Bonds as may be necessary or desirable in connection with the
issuance of ihe Bonds and any transadions contemplated herein related to the applic:ation of
the proceeds of the Bonds or collections or application of taxes levied for Ihe payment of the
Bonds or (he Ou(standing Indebtedness or other purposes hereunder, but subject to any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth, and any such actions
heretofore taken by the Mayor, an Authorized Officer, the City Treasurer or the City Clerk in
- accordance vuilh the provisions hereof are hereby ratified and approved. Wrth resped to each
grant of BoncJ proceeds, each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to designate in writing,
with the written concurrence of the Budget Director of the City (the "Budget Director"), (i) one or
more City departments or agencies to administer such grant, and (ii) the head of the City
department or agency who shall be authorized to execute a grant agreement and such other
documents, agreements or instruments as shall be deemed nec:essary or desirable by such City
departrnent o r agency head. Upon any such written designation by an Authorized Officer with
respect to a grant of Bond proceeds, such City department or agency shall be authorized to
administer such grant and the head of such City department or agency shall be authorized lo
execute a grant agreement and such other documents, agreements or instrumenis as sucb
offidal shall deem necessary or desirable.
Sec/(on 13.
follows:

The proceeds from the sale of any series of the Bonds shall be used as

(a) " " The sum representing the accrued interest received; if any, shall be used
to pay the first interest becoming due on the Bonds sold, and to that end, shall be
deposited in the applicable Bond Fund or the applicable A d Valorem Tax Escrow
Account, if established.
(b)
From the sale proceeds derived from any such sate of a series of the
Bonds; (i) such sum as may be determined by an Authorized Ofric:er to tie necessary to
pay not more than three years of interest on the Bonds issued to pay costs of the P r o j e d
may be used to pay such interest, and to that end. may be deposited in the applicable
Bond Fund or the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Account., if established; (ii)lhe
sum determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary to pay the costs of the Project
shall be set aside, held and invested at the direction of an Authorized Officer, as
separate funds of the City pending such payment, provided that prcx;eeds of the Bonds
issueq to fmanc^e the Pension Contributions shall be paid into the Pension Funds as and
vvhen required by law; (iii) Ihe sum determined by an Authorized Officer to capitalize or
fund ihterest on Outstanding Indebtedness shall be deposited into the respective debt
service funds established for the Outstanding Indebtedness; (iv) (he sum determined by
an Authorized Officer to be sufficient to pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being
refunded at or prior to their respective maturities, at a price of par, the applicable
redemption premium and accrued interest thereon up lo and including said redemption

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21737

or maturity dates shall be deposited into the respedive debt service funds established
for the Outstanding Indebtedness or into one or more "Refunded Bonds Escrow
Accounts" to be held by one or more banks or trust companies to be designated by an
Authorized Officer (each a "Refunding Escrow Agent'), each pursuant lo the tentis of an
escrow agreemeni (each a "Refunding Escrow Agreemenf), and the Mayor, an
Authorized Officer and the City Clerk, or any of them, are hereby authorized to execute
and deliver each Refunding Escrow Agreement, and any amendment thereto, in such
fonm as the officer so executing shall deem appropriate to e f f e d the refunding or
refundings described in this paragraph and (v) the sum determined by an Authorized
Officer lo be sufficient to provide for the payment of any settlement, breakage or
termination amount payable i n . connection with the termination, amendment or
.. modification of an Existing Interest Rale Exchange Agreement shall be paid to the City's
counterparty or counterparties thereunder.
Notwithstanding any provision of the
Municipal Code, investments acquired with proceeds of the Bonds or investment income
thereon may mature beyond ten years from the date of ac^quisition. and may include but
are.not limited lo agreements entered into behveen the City and provkJers of securities
under which agreements such providers agree to purchase from or sell to the City
specified securities on specific dates al predetermined prices, all as established at the
time of execution of any such agreement and as set forth in such agreemeni. and
guaranteed investment contracts, forward purchase agreements and other similar
investment vehicles.
Such guaranteed investment contracts, forward purchase
agreements and other similar investment vehicles may, to the extent permitted by
operative authorizing documents and by applicable law, be assigned or transferred from
one bond transaction to another or apply to the proceeds of more than one bond'-'
transadion on a commingled or non-commingled basis, as determined by ian Authorized
Officer. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into any
-' ' amendments to or restatements of existing documents or to execute new documents, to
consent to adions being taken by others or to obtain (he consent of other parties, as
may be necessary or desirable in this respect. Investment incxime derived from Bond
proceeds may be (w) expended for the same purposes fqr which Bond proceeds may be
expended, (x) used for the payment or prepayment of City debt obligations, (y) deposited
in the Corporate Fund of the City or (z) rebated lo the United Stales of Americ:a as
provided in Sedion 16 hereof, ail as determined by an Authorized Officer or the Budget
Diredor. Any commingled investment income from guaranteed investment contracts,
forward purchase agreements and other similar investment vehicles shall be apportioned
among bond transadions as determined by an Authorized Officer or as otherwise
required by operative authorizing documents and applic:able law.
(c)
Froin the sale proceeds of a series of the Bonds not applied as provided
in paragraphs (a) and (b), above, the amount deemed necessary by an Aulhorized
Offic:er shall be applied lo the payment of the costs of issuance of such Bonds, including
the premium or fee for bond insurance or other credit or liquidity enhanc:ement. if any.
and any unexpended portion of the sale proceeds shall be paid to the City.
The costs of the P r o j e d may be paid directly by the City or may be financed by the
making of grants for the implementation of the Projed lo (i) not-for-profit organizations.

 21738

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

educational or cultural institutions or for-profit organizations, (ii) the United Stales of America,
(iii) the State of Illinois or (iv) other units of local government, political subdivisions, municipal
corporations or school districts in the State of Illinois, including any operating division thereof, all
as determined by an Authorized Officer.
An Authorized Officer shall report lo the City Council wnth respect to the expenditure of
the proceeds of each series of the Bonds issued hereunder to pay the costs of the Projed.
Such reports shall be made no later than August 1 of each year, commencing August 1. 2013.
with respect to expenditures,made during the preceding calendar year. No report shall be
. required hereunder following any calendar year in which no proceeds of any series of the Bonds
are expended to pay costs of the Project.
Section 14.
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and
deliver, with respect to all or any portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness, the Bonds, and any
General Obligation Indebtedness (as defined below) that may be issued in the future
(collectively, 'City Indebtedness'), from time to time one or more agreements, or options to
enter into such agreements, with counterparties selected by an Authorized Officer, the jsurpose
of which is to provide to the City (i) an interest rate basis, cash flow basis, or other basis
differeiil from that'provided in the related City Indebtedness for the payment of interest or
(ii) with resped to a future delivery of general obligation bonds, notes or commercial paper
(collectively. 'General Obligalion Indebtedness"), one or more of a guaranteed interest rate,
interest rate basis, cash flow basis, or purchase price (such agreements or options to enter into
such agreements being collectively referred to as "Interest Rate Exchange Agreements').
Interest Rate Exchange Agreements indude without limitation agreements or contracts
commonly known as interest rate exchange, swaps, including forward starting swaps, collar,
caps; or derivative agreements, forward payment conversion agreernents. interest rale locks,
forward bond" purchase agreements, bond warrant agreernents. or bond "purchase option
agreements and also include agreements granting to the City or a counterparty an option to
enter into any of the foregoing and agreements or contracts providing for payments based on
levels of or changes in interest rates, including a change in an interest rate index, to exchange
cash flows or a series of payments, or to hedge payment, rate spread, or similar exposure. The
staled aggregate notional amounl (net of offsetting transactions) under all Interest Rate
ExcJiange Agreements related to certain City Indebtedness shall not exceed the principal
amount of such City Indebtedness to which such interest Rate Exchange Agreements relate.
For purposes o f t h e immediately preceding sentence, 'offsetting transactions" shall indude any
transaction which is intended to hedge, modify or otherwise affect another outstanding
transaction or its economic results. The offsetting transadion need not be based on the same
index or rate option as the relaled City Indebtedness or the transaction being offset and need
not be with the same counterparty as the transaction being offset Examples of offsetting
transadions include, without limitation, a floating-lo-fixed rate interest rale swap being offset by
a fixed-to-floating rate interest rate swap, and a fixed-to-floating rate interest rate swap being
offset by a floating-to-fixed rate interest rate swap or an interest rate cap or floor or a
floating-to-floating interest rate swap.
Any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement to the extent practicable shall be in substantially
the form of either the 2002 ISDA Waster Agreement or the Local Currency — Single Jurisdiction

 21740

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

Section 15. The taxes levied for the years from and after 2011 for the payment of the
Outstanding Indebtedness or amounts due under any Existing interest Rate Exchange
Agreement, to the extent the collection of such taxes is not necessary for the payment of all or a
portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof or for the payment of
• amounts due under an Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreement due to the termination of
such Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreemeni as aulhorized herein or pursuant lo any other
authorization, may. at Ihe diredion of an Authorized Officer, be applied (A) as set forth in the
next paragraph or (B) to any other lawful public purpose of the City designated by the City
Council including (i) the purposes set forth in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of the first paragraph of.
Section 7 of this Ordinance, (ii) the payment of the costs of any capital projects for which funds
have been lavi^fully appropriated or (iii) the abatement of such taxes. There shall be prepared by
an Authorized Officer and filed v^th the County Clerks, a certificate of reduction of taxes
heretofore levied for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding by an
Authorized Officer as provided in Sections 12 and 13 hereof and direding the abatement of the
taxes heretofore levied to pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being refunded, including the taxes
levied for the years from and after 2012, if so detemiined by an Aulhorized Officer as provided
in the preceding sentence.X In addition, any proceeds of Ihe Outstanding Indebtedness being
held for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness, to the extent such proceeds are not
necessary for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein or pursuant lo any other authorization, may, at the direction of an Authorized
Officer, be applied to any lawful public purpose of the City designated by the City Council,
induding the payment of the Bonds (but in the c:ase of Bonds the interest on which is excluded
from gross income for federal income tax purposes, only upon receipt by the City of an opinion
. of Bond Counsel to the effed that such will not adversely affect the tax-exempt status of the
Bonds)."
Furthermore, notwithstanding any other provision hereof, taxes levied for the years 2011
to 2013, indusive, for the payment of Outstanding Indebtedness, to the extent the collection of
such taxes is not necessary for the payment of all or a portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness
due to the refunding thereof with the proceeds of the Bonds may. in addition lo the other
purposes set forth above, be applied to the payment of the principal of and interest due on
general obligation commerdal paper notes due.on or before January 31, 2016, at the diredion
of an Authorized Officer. Any directions or determinations by an Aulhorized Officer pursuant lo
this paragraph shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than the date a levy is applied lo the
payment of commercial paper as provided herein.
Section 16. The City covenants that it will take no adion in the investment of the
proceeds of the Bonds (other than Bonds issueci as bonds the interest on which is not
excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes) which
would result in making the interest payable on any of such Bonds subject lo federal income
taxes by reason of such Bonds being classified as "arbitrage bonds' within the meaning of
Section 148 of the Code.
The City further covenants that it will act with respect to the proceeds of Bonds (other
than Bonds issued as bonds the interest on which is not excludable from the gross income of
the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes), the earnings on the proceeds of such Bonds

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21741

and any other moneys on deposit in any fund or account maintained in resped of such Bonds,
including, if necessary, a rebate of such earnings to the United States of America, in a manner
which would cause the interest on such Bonds to continue to be exempt from federal income
taxation under Section 103(a) of the Code.
Eac:h Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute such c:ertifications. tax returns,
covenants and agreements as shall be necessary, in the opinion of nationally recognized bond
counsel, or in the best interest of the City, as determined by an Authorized Officer, to evidence
the City's compliance with the covenants contained in this sedion. Each Authorized Officer is
hereby authorized lo execute one or more declarations of intent to reimburse costs of the
Project in accordance with the CocJe and the Treasury Regulations thereunder.
Section 17.
This Ordinanc:e is prepared in accordance with the powers of the City as a
home rule unit under Article Vll of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. The appropriate officers of the
City are hereby authorized to take such adions and do such things as shall be necessary to
. perform, carry out, give e f f e d to and consummate the transactions contemplated by this
Ordinance and the Bonds, including, but not limited to. the exercise following the delivery date
of any of the Bonds of any power or authority delegated to such offidal of the City under this'
Ordinance with resped to the Bonds upon the initial issuance thereof, but subjed lo any
limitations on or reslridions of such power or authority as herein set forth, and any adions
heretofore taken by such officers of the City in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby ratified and approved.
Section 18.
The Mayor and each Aulhorized Offic:er may each designate another to act
as their respective proxy and, as applicable, to affix their respedive signatures to the Bonds
whether in temporary or definitive form, and any other instrument, certificate or document
required to be signed by the Mayor or an Authorized Officer pursuant to this Ordinanc^e and any
instrument, certificate or docximent required thereby. In such case, each shall, send to the City
Council written notice of the person so designated by each, such notice slating the name of the
•person so seleded and identifying the instruments, certificates and documents which such
person shall be authorized to sign as proxy for the Mayor and each Authorized Officer,
respectively. .A written signature of (he Mayor or of an Authorized Officer, respectively,
executed by the person so designated underneath, shall be attached to each notice. Each
notice, with the signatures attached, shall be recorded in the Journal of Proceedings of the City
Coundl lor such date and filed in the office of the City Clerk. When the signature of the Mayor
is placed on an instrument, certificate or document at the direction of the Mayor in the specified
manner, the same, in all respects, shall be as binding on the City as if signed by the Mayor in
person. When the signature of an Authorized Officer is so affixed to an instrument, certificate or
document at the diredion of sucfi Authorized Officer, the same, in all respects, shall be as
binding on (he City as if signed by such Authorized Officer in person.
Section 19.
If requested by the Bond Registrar, the Mayor, each Authorized Officer and
the City Clerk are each authorized to execute the standard forrfi of agreement between the City
and the Bond Registrar with r e s p e d to the obligations and duties thereof

 21742

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

Section 20.
If payment or provision for payment is made, lo or for the registered
owners of all or a portion of the Bonds, of the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital..
Appreciation Bond and the principal of and interest due and to become due on any Current
Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond at the times and in the manner stipulated therein, and there
is paid or caused to be paid to the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax
Escrow Agent as provided in Section 9 hereof or such bank or (rust company as shall be
designated by an Authorized Officer (such bank or trust company hereinafter referred to as a
'Defeasance Escrow Agent"), all sums of money due and to become due according to the
provisions hereof, then these presents and the estate and rights hereby granted shall c»ase, ,
terminate and be void as to those Bonds or portions thereof except for purposes of registration,
transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such.payment from such moneys or obligations. Any
Bond shall be deemed lo be paid within the meaning of this section when payment of the
Compound Accreted Value of any such Capital Appredation Bond or the principal of any such
Current Interest Bond, plus interest thereon to the due dale thereof (whether such due date be
by reason of maturity or upon redemption as provided in this Ordinance or otherwise), either
(a) shall have been made or caused to have been made in accordance with the terms thereof,
or (b) shall have been provided for by irrevocably depositing wilh the applicable Bond Registrar,
the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent as provided in Sedion 9 hereof or a Defeasance
Escrow Agent, in trust and exclusively for such payment. (1) moneys sufficient to make such
payment or (2)(A) dired obligations of the United States of America; (B) obligations of agencies
of the United States of America, the timely payment of principal of and interest on which are
guaranteed by the United States of America; (C) obligations of the following agencies: Federal
Home Loan Mortgage'Corp. (FHLMC) debt obligations. Farm Credit System (fonnerty: Federal
Land Banks. Federal Intermediate Credit Banks, and Banks for Cooperatives) debt obligations.
Federal Home Loan Banks (FHL Banks) debt obligations, Fannie Mae debt'Obligations.
Finandng Corp. (FICO) debt obligations. Resolution Funding Corp. (REFCORP) debt
obligations, and U.S. Agency for International Development (U.S. A.I.D.) Guaranteed notes;
(D) pre-refunded municipal obligations defined as follows: any bonds or other obligations of any
state of the United Stales of America or of any agency, instrumentality or local governmental
unit of any such state which are not callable al the option of the obligor prior to maturity or as to
. which irrevoc:able instmctions have been given by the obligor to call on the date specified in the
nofice; or (E) instruments evidencing an ownership interest in obligations described in the
preceding clauses (A), (B) and (C). or (3) a combination of the investments. described in
clauses (1) and (2) above, such amounts so deposited being available or maturing as to
principal and interest in such amounts and at such times, without (Consideration of any
reinvestment thereof, as will insure the availability of sufficient moneys to make such payment
(all as confirmed by a nationally recognized firm of independent public accountants). At such
times as a Bond shall be deemed to be paid hereunder, as aforesaid, it sliall no longer be
secured by or entitled to the benefits of this Ordinance, except for the purposes of registration,
transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations.
No such deposit under this section shall be made or accepted hereunder and no use
made of any such deposit unless, in the case of Bonds (other than Bonds issued as bonds the
interest on which is not excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal
income tax purposes), the applicable Bond Registrar, (he applicable A d Valorem Tax Escrow
Agent or the applicable Defeasance Escrow Agent, as the case may tie, shall have received an

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21743

opinion of nationally recognized municipal bond counsel to the effect that such deposit and use
would not cause any of such Bonds to be ireated as 'arbitrage bonds' within the meaning of
Section 148 of the Code or any successor provision thereto.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit a defeasance deposit of escrow securities as
provided in this section or a defeasance deposit with respect to the Outstanding Indebtedness
pursuant to any Refunding Escrow Agreement authorized by Sedion 13(b) hereof from being
subject to a subsequent sale of such escrow securities and reinvestment of all or a portion of
the proceeds of that sale in escrow securities which, together with money to remain so held in
trust, shall be sufficient to provide for payment of principal, redemption premium, if any. and
interest on any of the defeased Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness, as appropriate. Amounts
held by the applicable Bond Registrar,'(he applicable A d Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, any
Defeasance Escrow Agen( or any Refunding Escrow Agent in excess of the amounts needed so
to provide for payment of the defeased Bonds or Outstanding Inciebtedness, as appropriate,
rhay be subject to withdrawal by the City. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver from time t o time one or more agreements (and amendments
thereto) with counterparties selected by an Authorized Officer, with respect to the investment
and use of such excess amounts held by the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable A d
Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, a Defeasance Escrow Agent or a Refunding Escrow Agent.
Section 21.
Nobvithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, the lerms and
provisions of the trust indenture securing a series of Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in
Sedion 2 hereof with respect to (a) the authentication, registration, transfer and destruction or .
loss of such Variable Rate Bonds, (b) subjed to the limitation on redemption price set forth in
Section 3(d) hereof the redemption of such Variable Rate Bonds, oi- (c) the method of payment
or defeasance of such Variable Rate Bonds, shall apply to such Variable Rate Bonds issued
pursuant to this Ordinance. With resped lo thei Direct Purchase Bonds, an Aulhorized Officer is
authorized to negotiate the lerms and provisions of such Dired Purchase Bonds in addition to or
as an alternative to the (erms and provisions of the trust indenture securing a series of Variable
Rale Bonds.
Section 22.
Any series of the Bonds, the Outstanding Indebtedness or the Outstanding
Revenue Indebtedness may be restrudured in a manner authorized by the Mayor or an
•Authorized Officer, including bul not limited to (a) tenninafing credit enhancement or liquidity
facilities f o r , a series of Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness, (b) repladng credit enhancement or liquidity facilities for a series of Bonds,
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness with similar credii
enhancement or liquidity from a different provider, (c) replacing credit enhancement or liquidity
facilities for a series of Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness with different fomns of credit enhancement or liquidity from the same or a different
provider, (d) adding additional ca-edit enhancement or liquidity supplemental to that securing a
series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness,
(e) removing or amending provisions for a series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness, or in financing documents related thereto, lo or for the
benefit of credit enhancers or liquidity providers or adding provisions for the benefit of new or
replacement credit enhancers or liquidity providers, (0 replacing an existing remariceting agent

 21744

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

or remarketing agents for Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness with a remariceting agent or remarketing agients selected by an Aulhorized Officer
or assigning an existing remariceting agreement to a remarketing agent or remarketing agents
selected by an Authorized Officer, (g) converting to or adding a different interest rate mode or
modes under the documents pursuant to which such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness were issued, (h) adding a floating rate note (FRN) mode to
any document pursuant to vyhich such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding
Revenue Indebtedness were issued or refunding such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness using an FRN structure, or (i) selling or remarketing
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness pursuant to a dired purchase
arrangement to one or more purchasers seleded by an Authorized Officer either at par or with a
discount or premium, subjed (o any limitations or reslridions with respect to such adions being
taken contained in this Ordinance with resped to the Bonds or an ordinance pursuant to which
suc:h Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued, but.
provided, that if detiermined by an Aulhorized Officer to be necessary to achieve the financial
interests of the City, such (imitations or reslridions contained in an ordinance pursuant to which
such Outstanding Indebtedness, or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued may be
exceeded, but not in excess of the comparable limitations set forth in this Ordinance. The
Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized lo enter into any amendments l o or
restatements of existing documents or to execute new documents, to consent to adions being
taken by others or to obtain the consent of ottier parties, and to cause to be prepared such
remarketing documents, including disdosure documents, as may be necessary or desirable lo
effect any such debt restmduring and facilitate the remarketing, of the Bonds. Outstanding
Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness, and lo pay the fees, costs and expenses
relating thereto, as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer executing the same determines is
necessary and desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or an Authorized Officer to
evidence the City Council's approval of all such amendments.
Section 23.
Any funds heretofore or hereafter received by the City, pursuant to any
Interest Rate Exchange Agreement and in connedion with Outstanding Indebtedness, are
hereby authorized to be expended for the payment or prepayment of any City Indebtedness;
provided however, notwithstanding the foregoing, such authorization shall not apply to any
funds the expenditure of which shall have been herelcifore aulhorized by other applicable law.
Section 24.
For purposes of Treasury Regulation Section 1.150-2. the City Council
hereby states its intent lo finance, or to reimburse the City for the. payment of the costs
described in Exhibit A attached hereto by the issuance of tax-exempt obligations in an amount
not to exceed $200,000,000. No funds from sources other than such obligations are, or are
expected to be, reserved or allocated, or otherwise set aside, for the payment of such costs,
except as permitted by the Code. This declarafion is consistent with the budgetary practices of
the City.
Section 25.
read as follows;

A.

Section 3 of the 2002 Ordinance is hereby amended in its entirety to

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

Section 3. Maximum Amount and Term. Without further authorization of this City
Council, the maximum aggregate princijjal amount of all Aulhorized Debt outstanding
under this ordinance at any' fime shall not exceed Five Hundred Million Dollars
($500,000,000) (exclusive of unpaid interest and fees). All Authorized Debt shall mature
on or prior to January 1. 2030.
B.

Section 18 of the 2002 Ordinance is hereby amended in its entirety to read

as follows:
Section 18. The Line of Credit Program, (a) The Mayor or the City's Chief
Financial Officer or the City Comptroller (the Chief Financial Officer and the City
Comptroller each being hereinafter referred to as an "Authorized Officer") is hereby
aulhorized to execute and deliver one (1) or more line of credit agreements (each, a
"Line of Credit Agreement") wilh one (1) or more commercial banks and other finandal
institutions and in the form customarily used lo provide governmental borrowers with a
revolving line of credit lo meet their need for working capital or interim financing for
capital projeds and with such lerms and provisions as an Authorized Officer shall
determine to be in the besi interest of the City. The City Cleric is authorized to attest the
same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof the execxition
and delivery thereof lo cxinstitute conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval of
each such Line of Credit Agreement.
(b) To evidence borrowings under each Line of Credii Agreement, the City is
authorized to issue from lime to time one (1) or more Line of Credit Notes, each to be
designated "Line of Credit Note". Each Line of Credit Note shall bear interest from its
date at a rate or rates not in excess of eighteen percent (18%) per annum. As
determined by a n Authorized Officer at the time of issuance of each Line of Credit Note,
the Line of Credit Notes may be issued as notes the interest on which is either includible
or excludable from gross income for federal income tax purposes under Section 103 of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. as amended (the "Code").
(c) The Line of Credit Notes shall be executed on behalf of the City with the
manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor of the City, and shall be attested with the
manual or fac:simile signature of the City Clerk of the City, and shall have impressed or
imprinted thereon the official seal of the City (or a facsimile thereoQ- In case any officer
of the City whose signature or facsimile signature shall appear on the Line of Credii
Notes shall cease lo be such officer before the delivery of such Line pf Credit Notes,
such signature or facsimile signature thereof shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for
all purposes the same as if such officer had remained in office until delivery.
(d) S u b j e d to the limitafions contained in this ordinance, authority is hereby
delegated to the Mayor or an Authorized Officer to determine (i) the aggregate principal
amount of each Line of Credit Note to be issued, (ii) the date or dates thereof (iii) the
maturities thereof, (iv) the rate or rates of interest payable thereon or the method for
determining such rate or rates, and (v) the one (1) or more commercial banks and other
financial institutions to provide the credit under each Line of Credit Agreement.

 21746

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(e) To evidence the exercise of the authority delegated to the Mayor or an
Authorized Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or an Authorized Officer, as the case
may be, is hereby directed to execute and file with the City Clerk a copy of each l-ine of
Credit Agreement, each Line of Credit Note issued in connection with each borrowing
under any Line of Credit Agreement, and a certificate setting forth the determinations
made pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate shall constitute
conclusive evidence of the proper exercise by them of such authority. Upon the filing of
such Line of Credii Agreement. Line of Credii Note and. such certificate, the City Clerk
shall dired a copy of such filing to (he City Coundl.

Section 26. To the extent that any ordinance, resolution, rule, order or provision of the
Municipal Code, or part thereof, is in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions
of this .Ordinance shall be controlling. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such sedion. paragraph.- dause or provision
shall not gffed ariy of the other provisions of this Ordinance. No provision of the Municipal
Code or violation of any provision of the Municipal Code shall be deemed to render voidable at
the option of the City any document, instrument or agreemeni aulhorized hereunder or lo impair
the validity of this Ordinance or the instruments authorized by this Ordinance or to impair the
rights of the owners of the Bonds to receive payment of the principal of or interest on the Bonds
or to impair the security for the Bonds; provided fudher lhal the focegoing shall not be deemed
to affed the availability of any other remedy or penalty for any violation of any provision of the
Municipal Code.
Section 27. This Ordinance shall be publistied by the City Clerk, by causing to be
printed in spedal pamphilet form at least five copies hereof, v/hich copies are lo be made
available in her office for public inspection and distribution to members of the public who may
wish to avail themselves of a copy of this Ordinance.

Section 28. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption,
approval by the Mayor and pubdc^ation as provided herein.

Exhibit "A" referred to in this ordinance reads as follows:

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21747

Exhibit "A".
(To Ordinance)
Section 24 Costs.
1. Public right-of-way infrastructure improvements in City neighborhoods, including street
and alley construction and improvements, lighting improvements, sidewalk improvements and
replacement, and curb and gutter repairs and replacement.
2. Infrastructure improvements to enhance the development of economic activity, including
industrial street construction and improvements, streetscaping, median landscaping,
demolition of hazardous, vacant or dilapidated buildings that pose a threat to public safety
and welfare, shoreline reconstruction, riverbank stabilization, residential and commercial
infrastructure redevelopment and railroad viaduct clearance improvements.
3. Transportation improvements (to City facilities and to facilities located within the City
limits which are owned by other governmental entities), including street resurfacing, bridge
and freight tunnel rehabilitation, traffic signal modernization, new traffic signal installation,
intersection safety improvements and transit facility improvements.
4. Grants or loans to assist not-for-profit organizations or educational or cultural
institutions, or to assist other municipal corporations, units of local government, school
districts, the State of Illinois or the United States of America.
5. Cash flow needs of the City.
6. The acquisition of personal property, including, but not limited to, compuler hardware
and software, vehicles or other capital items useful or necessary for City purposes.
7. The duly authorized acquisition of improved and unimproved real property within the City
for municipal, industrial, commercial or residential purposes, or any combination thereof, and
the improvement, demolifion and/or remediation of any such property.
8 Constructing, equipping, altering and repairing various municipal facilities including fire
stations, police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and other municipal facilities.
9. The enhancement of economic development within the City by making direct grants or
loans to, or deposits to funds or accounts to secure the obligations of, not-for-profit or
for-profit organizations doing business or seeking to do business in the City.
10. The funding of (a) judgments entered against the City, (b) certain settlements or other
payments required lo be made by the City as a condition to ihe resolution of litigation or
threatened litigation and (c) such escrow accounts or other reserves as shall be deemed
necessary for any of said purposes.

 21748

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

11. The payment of certain contributions to the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund, the
Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund, the Municipal Employees". Officers' and Officials'
Annuity and Benefit Fund, and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and
Benefit Fund.
12. The provision of facilities, services and equipment to protect and enhance public safety,
including, but not limited to. increased costs for police and fire protection services, emergency
medical services, staffing at the City's emergency call center and other City facilities, and
enhanced security measures at airports and other City facilities.

  

 

 

 

STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS.
COUNTY OF COOK )

1, SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk ofthe City of Chicago in the County of Cook and State
of Illinois, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the annexed and foregoing is a true and correct copy of that
certain ordinance now on file in my office authorizing Issuance of General Obligation and Refunding
Bonds and Associated Amendment regarding Commercial Paper Debt and Amendment of Municipal
Code Section 2-32-031 regarding Debt Management Policies.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was passed by the City Council ofthe said
City of Chicago on fifth fS"") day of February. 2014.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the vote on the question of the passage of the said ordinance by
the said City Council was taken by yeas and nays and recorded in the Journal ofthe Proceedings of
the said City Council, and that the result of said vote so taken was as follows, to wit:
Yeas 44 Nays 4
1 DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was delivered to the Mayor ofthe said City of
Chicago after the passage thereof by the said City Council, without delay, by the City Clerk of the said
City of Chicago, and that the said Mayor did approve and sign said ordinance on the seventh (7^'') day
of February. 2014.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the original, of which the foregoing is a true copy, is entrusted to
my care for safekeeping, and that I am the ]avdu\ keeper of the same.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my
hand and affixed the corporate seal of the City of
Chicago aforesaid, at the said City, in the County and
State aforesaid, this nineteenth (19"') day of February,
2014.
[T.P.]

SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk

 ORDINANCE

providing for the issuance of General Obligation
Bonds of the City of Chicago, for the levy and collection of a direct
annual tax sufficient to pay the principal of and interest on said
Bonds, for the selection and retention of one or more Qualified
Independent Representatives in connection with certain Interest
Rate Exchange Agreements as described herein; authorizing the
execution and delivery of certain financial security and credit
enhancement agreements in connection with existing agreements
and transadions involving City assets; and providing for the
amendment of certain provisions of the Municipal Code and
existing ordinances and financing documents, including but not
limited to the ordinance adopted by the City Council on May 1,
2002, which proposed the establishment of a commercial paper
program, an auction rate securities program, a variable rate
securities program and a line of credit program.

A N ORDINANCE

WHEREAS, the City of Chicago (the "City") is a body politic and corporate under the laws
of the State of Illinois and a home rule unit under Article Vll of the Illinois Constitution of 1970;
and
WHEREAS, the City has heretofore (i) authorized the issuance of its general obligation
bonds and notes (the "Authorized General Obligation Bonds and Notes'), (ii) authorized the
borrowing of money pursuant to one or more line of credit agreements to provide funds for
working capital or interim financing for capital projects, including the Revolving Line of Credit
Agreement dated as of March 1. 2013 between the City and Bank of America, N.A. (the "Line of
Credit Indebtedness') and (iii) established a commercial paper program authorizing the
issuance of its general obligation commercial paper notes from time to time (the "General
Obligation Commercial Paper Notes'); and
WHEREAS, (1) the Authorized General Obligation Bonds and Notes currently outstanding,
(ii) the Line of Credit Indebtedness incurred and outstanding from time to time and (iii) tbe
General Obligation Commercial Paper Notes currently or hereafter outstanding from time to time
(collectively, the "Outstanding Indebtedness") mature and are subject to optional and mandatory
redemption as provided in the respective proceedings authorizing the Outstanding
Indebtedness; and
WHEREAS, the City has heretofore entered into Interest Rate Exchange Agreements (as
described and defined in Section 14(a) hereof) which are in existence as of the date of adoption
of this Ordinance (the "Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements'); and
WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of the inhabitants of the City and necessary for the
welfare of the government and affairs of the City to authorize (i) refunding all or a portion of the
Outstanding Indebtedness and (ii) terminating, amending or otherwise modifying all or any
portion of the Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements and paying any settlement,

General Obligation Bond ordinance (final)

 breakage or termination amounts that may be due and owing in connection therewith, in order to
achieve debt service savings for the City, restructure debt service of the Outstanding
Indebtedness or reduce, limit or manage the City's exposure to interest rate risk (collectively,
the "Refunding Purposes'); and
WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of the inhabitants of the City and necessary for the
welfare of the government and affairs of the City to finance (i> public right-of-way infrastructure
improvements in City neighborhoods, including street and alley construction and improvements,
lighting improvements, sidewalk improvements and replacement, and curb and gutter repairs
and replacement; (ii) infrastructure improvements to enhance the development of economic
activity, including industrial street construction and improvements, streetscaping. median
landscaping, demolition of hazardous, vacant or dilapidated buildings that pose a threat to
public safety and welfare, shoreline reconstruction, riverbank stabilization, residential and
commercial infrastructure redevelopment and railroad viaduct clearance improvements;
(iii) transportation improvements to City property and facilities and to property and facilities
located within the City limits which are owned by other governmental entities, including street
resurfacing, bridge and freight tunnel rehabilitation, traffic signal modernization, new traffic
signal installation, intersection safety improvements and transit facility improvements; (iv) grants
or loans to assist not-for-profit organizations or educational or cultural institutions, or to assist
other municipal corporations, units of local government, school districts, the State of Illinois or
the United States of America; (v) cash flow needs of the City; (vi) the acquisition of personal
property, including, but not limited to, computer hardware and software, vehicles or other capital
items useful or necessary for City purposes; (vii) the duly authorized acquisition of improved and
unimproved real property within the City for municipal, industrial, commercial or residential
purposes, or any combination thereof, and the improvement, demolition and/or remediation of
any such property; (viii) constructing, equipping, altering and repairing various municipal
facilities including fire stations, police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and other
municipal facilities; (ix) the enhancement of economic development within the City by making
direct grants or loans to, or deposits to funds or accounts to secure the obligations of,
not-for-profit or for-profit organizations doing business or seeking to do business in the City;
(x) the funding of (A) judgments entered against the City, (B) certain settlements or other
payments required to be made by the City as a condition to the resolution of litigation or
threatened lifigation or arbitration and (C) such escrow accounts or other reserves as shall be
deemed necessary for any of said purposes; (xi)the payment of certain contributions (the
"Pension Contributions') to the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Firemen's
Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of
Chicago and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of
Chicago (collectively, the "Pension Funds'); (xii) the provision of facilities, services and
equipment to protect and enhance public safety, including, but not limited to, increased costs for
police and fire protection services, emergency medical servic^es, staffing at the City's emergency
call center and other City facilities, and enhanced security measures at airports and other major
City facilities; and (xiii) acquiring motor vehicles for a lerm of years or lease period (the
purposes described in clauses (i) through (xiii) above being referred to herein as the "Project');
and

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (Final)
-2-

 the cost of the Refunding Purposes and the Project is estimated to be not
less than $900,000,000 and the City expects to pay a portion of such costs by borrowing money
and issuing its general obligation bonds in one or more series and al one or more times in the
aggregate principal amount of not to exceed $900,000,000 (plus the amount of any original
issue discount as herein provided); and
WHEREAS,

WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is advisable and necessary to authorize the
borrowing of the sum necessary at this time for any or all of the purposes of (i) paying costs of
the Refunding Purposes, (ii) paying costs of the Project, including capitalizing or funding such
interest on the bonds herein aulhorized for said purpose as may be necessary, (iii) capitalizing
or funding interest on Outstanding Indebtedness and (iv) paying the expenses of issuing the
bonds herein authorized for the purposes described herein, and in evidence thereof to authorize
the issuance of its General Obligation Bonds (the "Bonds'), in one or more series and at one or
more times as herein provided, such borrowing being for a proper public purpose and in the
public interest, and the City, by virtue of its constitutional home rule powers and all laws
applicable thereto, has the power to issue such Bonds; and

the Bonds may include one or more series of bonds the interest on which is,
as designated by series, either includible or excludable from gross income for federal income
tax purposes under Section 103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the
"Code"); and
WHEREAS,

WHEREAS, the City has authorized the issuance of certain bonds, notes and commercial
paper of the City secured by and payable from a specified revenue source, including, without
limitation, airport revenues, sales tax revenues, motor fuel tax revenues, water system revenues
and sewer system revenues (such bonds and notes being hereinafter referred to as "Revenue
Bonds and Notes" and such commercial paper being hereinafter referred to as "Revenue
Commercial Paper"); and

the City has determined that it is necessary to provide for various
restructuring amendments (i) to the Outstanding Indebtedness, (ii) to the Revenue Bonds and
Notes currently outstanding and the Revenue Commercial Paper currently or hereafter
outstanding from time to time (collectively, the "Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness") and (iii) to
the extent issued and outstanding from fime to time in the future, the Bonds; and
WHEREAS,

Title Vll of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
(the "Dodd-Frank Act') addresses the regulation of swap and other derivatives transactions
such as the Interest Rate Exchange Agreements and pursuant to which the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission (the "CFTC") has promulgated regulations, including new business
conduct standards (the "CFTC Regulations'), applicable to providers of Interest Rate Exchange
Agreements (the "Swap Providers'); and
WHEREAS.

WHEREAS, for purposes of the CFTC Regulafions, the City is a "Special Entity," entitled
to certain duties from the Swap Providers with whom they conduct or propose to conduct
business; and

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-3-

 /
WHEREAS, in order to avail itself of the services of Swap Providers and other financial
advisors under the statutory and regulatory regime contained in the Dodd-Frank Act and the
CFTC Regulations, whether in connection with amendments, terminations or other modifications
of Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements, the negotiation or execution of Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements as authorized in Section 14 hereof, or to provide advice with respect to
financial products and debt obligations purchased, entered into and/or issued by the City, it is
necessary for the City to, among other things, (i) rely on advice from a Qualified Independent
Representative, being an independent professional having demonstrated experience in the field
of swap and other derivative transactions executed by States, State agencies, municipalities or
other units of local government or political subdivisions and meeting tbe applicable qualifications
of the Dodd-Frank Act and the CFTC Regulations (a "QIR'), (ii) approve the retention of one or
more advisors to serve as QlRs and financial advisors in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act and the CFTC Regulations and (iii) approve and authorize the
execution of agreements with QIRs and other financial advisors, including but not limited to
certain documents and agreements published by the International Swaps and Derivatives
Association, Inc. ("ISDA') as part of its Dodd-Frank Documentation Initiative to assist swap
market participants in complying with the CFTC Regulations (the 7SDA Protocol
Documentation') and certain bilateral agreements with the City's counterparties on the Existing
Interest Rate Exchange Agreements; and

WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is advisable and necessary in furtherance of
compliance with federal securifies and tax laws to adopt written policies which shall address the
management of the City's bond, note and other debt issuances, including the entering into of
Interest Rate Exchange Agreements and hiring QIRs in connection therewith; and

the City has determined that it is advisable and necessary, in order to provide
increased financial flexibility and protection to the City in connection with existing long-term
concession agreements for City assets and existing sale/ieaseback and lease/leaseback
transactions involving City assets (each, a "Financing Transaction'), to authorize the execution
and delivery of certain financial security and credit enhancement agreements to secure payment
of amounts due from the City in connection with each such Financing Transaction and the
incurrence of general obligation indebtedness in connection therewith; and
WHEREAS,

WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is necessary to amend Section 3 of the
ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City of Chicago on May 1, 2002, as heretofore
amended (the "2002 Ordinance'), which authorizes the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes
Series A and Series B in an amount not to exceed $500,000,000 and pursuant to which the City
proposed to establish a commercial paper program, an auction rate securities program, a
variable rate securities program and a line of credit program (collectively, the "Borrowing Plan');
and
WHEREAS, the Borrowing Plan authorizes the issuance of one or more series of
Authorized Debt (as defined in the 2002 Ordinance) for (i) the payment, or reimbursement of the
City for the payment, of the cost of all or any portion of any capital project approved by City
Council, (ii) cash flow needs of the City, (iii) the deposit of monies into funds and accounts as

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-4-

 are provided for in any indenture entered into under the Borrowing Plan, and (iv) the payment of
costs of issuance incurred in connedion with each series of Authorized Debt; and
WHEREAS, the City desires to amend Section 3 of the 2002 Ordinance in order to (i)
increase the maximum aggregate principal amount of Authorized Debt to be outstanding under
the 2002 Ordinance from $500,000,000 to $1 billion and (ii) extend the maximum maturity of
Authorized Debt outstanding under the 2002 Ordinance from January 1, 2030 to January 1,
2032; now, therefore,
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHICAGO:

Section 1. The City Council of the City (the "City Council'), after a public meeting
fieretofore held on this Ordinance by the Committee on Finance of the City Council, pursuant to
proper notice and in accordance with the findings and recommendations of such Committee,
hereby finds that all of the recitals contained in the preambles to this Ordinance are full, true and
correct and does incorporate them into this Ordinance by this reference.
Section 2.
There shall be borrowed on the credit of and for and on behalf of the City in
one or more series and at one or more times the sum of not to exceed $900,000,000 plus an
amount equal to the amount of any net original issue discount used in the markefing of the
Bonds (not to exceed 10 percent of the principal amount of each series thereof) for the
purposes aforesaid; and the Bonds shall be issued from time to fime in said aggregate principal
amount, or such lesser amount, as may be determined by the City's Chief Financial Officer or
the City Comptroller (each such officer being hereinafter referred to as an "Authorized Officer").
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds payable in one payment on a
fixed date {"Capital Appreciation Bonds'). Each series of Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be
dated the date of issuance thereof and shall also bear the date of authenficafion, shall be in fully
registered form, shall be numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar (as
fiereinafter defined), and shall be in denominations equal to the original principal amounts of
such Capital Appreciation Bonds or any integral multiple thereof, each such original principal
amount represenfing Compound Accreted Value (as hereinafter defined) at maturity (the
"Maturity Amount') of such minimum amounts and integral multiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Capital Appreciafion Bonds (but no
single Bond shall represent Compound Accreted Value maturing cn more than one date). As
used herein, the "Compound Accreted Value" of a Capital Appreciation Bond on any date of
determination shall be an amounl equal to the original principal amount (or integral multiple
thereof) plus an investment return accrued to the date of such determination at a semiannual
compounding rate which is necessary to produce the yield to maturity borne by such Capital
Appreciation Bond (the "Yield to Maturity').
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at fixed rates
and paying interest semiannually as described below (the "Current Interest Bonds'). Each
series of Current Interest Bonds shall be dated such date as shall be agreed upon by an
Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Current Interest Bonds, shall be in fully registered

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-5-

 form, shall be in such minimum denominations and integral multiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Current Interest Bonds (but no single
Current Interest Bond shall represent installments of principal maturing on more than one date),
and shall be numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar.
The Bonds may be initially issued as Capital Appreciation Bonds containing provisions
for the conversion of the Compound Accreted Value of such Bonds into Current Interest Bonds
(the "Convertible Bonds') al such time following the initial issuance as shall be approved by an
Authorized Officer. While in the form of Capital Appreciation Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shall be subject to all of the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance relating to Capital
Appreciation Bonds, and while in the form of Current Interest Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shall be subject to all of the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance relating to Current
Interest Bonds. In particular, when Convertible Bonds are in the form of Capital Appreciation
Bonds prior to their conversion to Current Interest Bonds, the transfer, exchange and
replacement provisions of this Ordinance with respect to Capital Appreciation Bonds shall apply
to such Convertible Bonds; provided that the Convertible Bonds delivered in the form of Capital
Appreciation Bonds in connection with any such transfer, exchange or replacement shall have
identical provisions for conversion to Current Interest Bonds as set forth in the Convertible
Bonds being transferred, exchanged or replaced. In connection with the issuance and sale of
any Convertible Bonds, the terms and provisions relating to the conversion of the Compound
Accreted Value of such Convertible Bonds into Current Interest Bonds shall be as approved by
an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Convertible Bonds. Notwithstanding any other
provision hereof, any series of Bonds may be issued as Capital Appreciation Bonds, Current
Interest Bonds, Convertible Bonds or any combination thereof
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at variable rates
established by reference to such indices or otherwise and adjustable and payable from time to
time as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer and as agreed upon by an Authorized
Officer and the purchaser of the Bonds (the "Variable Rate Bonds'). Each series of Variable
Rate Bonds shall be dated such date as shall be agreed upon by an Aulhorized Officer and the
purchasers of such Bonds, shall be in fully registered form, shall be in such denominations as
shall be agreed upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of the Bonds (but no single
Bond shall represent installments of principal maturing on more than one date), and shall be
numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar. Each series of Variable Rale Bonds
may be issued pursuant to, and have such terms and provisions as are set forth in, a trust
indenture between the City and a bank or trust company selected by an Authorized Officer. The
Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into one or more such trust
indentures on behalf of the City. Each such trust indenture shall be in substantially the form of
trust indentures previously entered into by the City in connection with the sale of general
obligation bonds or notes bearing interest at variable rates, but with such revisions in text as the
Mayor or the Authorized Officer executing the same shall determine are necessary or desirable,
including such revisions as shall be necessary to incorporate provisions relating to the manner
of establishing the interest rate and the payment of interest from time to time on the Variable
Rate Bonds, the execution thereof, and any amendment thereto, by the Mayor or such
Authorized Officer to evidence the City Council's approval of all such revisions.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-6-

 All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued and sold from time to time on a retail basis
to individual investors (the "Retail Bonds') or as a direct purchase to holders (the "Direct
Purchase Bonds'). The Retail Bonds and the Direct Purchase Bonds shall be sold as provided
in Section 12 hereof
The principal of the Bonds of each series shall become due and payable on or before
the eariier of (i) January 1, 2056, or (ii) 40 years after the date of issuance thereof Each series
of Current Interest Bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates and each series of Capital
Appreciation Bonds shall have Yields to Maturity not to exceed 15 percent per annum. Each
series of Variable Rate Bonds shall bear interest from fime to time at such rates determined by
such remarketing or other indexing agent as shall be selected by an Authorized Officer for that
purpose or as provided in the related trust indenture referred to above not to exceed 15 percent
per annum. Any portion of the Bonds may be issued as bonds the interest on which is not
excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes if
determined by an Authorized Officer to be beneficial to the City.
Each Capital Appreciation Bond shall accrue interest from its date at the rate per annum
compounded semiannually on each January 1 and July 1, commencing on such January 1 or
July 1 as determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Capital Appreciation
Bonds, which will produce the Yield to Maturity identified therein until the maturity date thereof
Interest on the Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be payable only at the respective maturity dates
thereof.
Each Current Interest Bond shall bear interest from the later of its date or the most
recent interest payment date to which interest has been paid or duly provided for, until the
principal amount of such Bond is paid, such interest (computed upon the basis of a 360-day
period of twelve 30-day months) being payable on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
commencing on such January 1 or July 1 as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the
time of the sale of each series of Current Interest Bonds. Interest on each Current Interest
Bond shall be paid to the person in whose name such Bond is registered at the close of
business on the 15th day of the month next preceding the interest payment date, by check or
draft of the applicable Bond Registrar, or, at the option of any registered owner of $1,000,000 or
more in aggregate principal amount of Current Interest Bonds of a series, by wire transfer of
immediately available funds to such bank in the confinental United States of America as the
registered owner of such Bonds shall request in writing to the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each series of Variable Rate Bonds shall bear interest (computed from time to time at
such rates and on such basis as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer or at the time of
sale of such series of Variable Rate Bonds) payable on such dates as shall be determined by an
Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds. Any Variable Rate Bonds
may be made subject to optional or mandatory tender for purchase by the owners thereof at
such times and at such prices (not to exceed 105 percent of the principal amount thereof) as
shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds. In
connection with the remarketing of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series so tendered for
purchase under the terms and conditions so specified by an Authorized Officer, the Mayor and

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-7-

 each Authorized Officer are hereby authorized to execute on behalf of the City a remarketing
agreement, and any amendment thereto, with respect to such series of Variable Rate Bonds in
substantially the form previously used for variable rate financings of the City with appropriate
revisions to reftect the terms and provisions of such Bonds sold as Variable Rate Bonds and
such other revisions in text as an Authorized Officer shall determine are necessary or desirable
in connection with the sale of such Bonds as Variable Rate Bonds. The annual fee paid to any
remarketing agent serving in such capacity pursuant to any such remarketing agreement with
respect to a series of Variable Rate Bonds shall not exceed one-quarter of one percent (0.25%)
of the average principal amount of such Variable Rate Bonds of such series outstanding during
such annual period.
The Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appreciation Bonds, the principal of the
Current Interest Bonds and the Variable Rate Bonds and any redemption premium shall be
payable in lawful money of the United States of America upon presentafion and surrender
thereof al the designated corporate trust office of the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each of the Bonds shall be designated "General Obligation Bonds. Series
with
such additions, modifications or revisions as shall be determined to be necessary by an
Authorized Officer at the time of the sale of such Bonds to reflect the calendar year of issuance
of the Bonds, the order of sale of the Bonds, the specific series of the Bonds, whether the
Bonds are being issued on a taxable basis, whether the Bonds are Capital Appreciation Bonds,
Current Interest Bonds, Convertible Bonds. Variable Rate Bonds, Retail Bonds or Direct
Purchase Bonds, whether the Bonds are being issued and sold for the purpose of paying costs
of the Refunding Purposes, paying costs of the Project or a combination thereof and any other
authorized features of the Bonds determined by an Authorized Officer as desirable to be
reflected in the title of the Bonds being issued and sold.
The seal of the City or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed to or printed on each of the
Bonds, and the Bonds shall be executed by the manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor and
attested by the manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk, and in case any officer whose
signature shall appear on any Bond shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such
Bond, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all proposes, the same as if
such officer had remained in office until delivery. As used in this Ordinance. "City Clerk" shall
mean the duly qualified and acting City Clerk of the City or any Deputy City Clerk or other
person that may lawfully take a specific action or perform a specific duty prescribed for the City
Clerk pursuant to this Ordinance.
All Bonds shall have thereon a certificate of authentication substantially in the form
hereinafter set forth duly executed by the applicable Bond Registrar as authenticating agent of
the City and showing the date of authentication. No Bond shall be valid or obligatory for any
purpose or be entitled to any security or benefit under this Ordinance unless and until such
certificate of authentication shall have been duly executed by the applicable Bond Registrar by
manual signature, and such certificate of authentication upon any such Bond shall be conclusive
evidence that such Bond has been authenficated and delivered under this Ordinance. The
certificate of authentication on any Bond shall be deemed to have been executed by the

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-8-

 applicable Bond Registrar if signed by an authorized officer of such Bond Registrar, but it shall
not be necessary that the same officer sign the certificate of authentication on all of the Bonds
issued hereunder.
Section 3.
(a) Registration and Transfer. The City shall cause books (the "Bond
Register") for the registration and for the transfer of each series of Bonds as provided in this
Ordinance to be kept at the designated corporate trust office of a bank or trust company
designated by an Authorized Officer (the "Bond Registrar"), as the registrar for the City in
connection with such series of Bonds. The City is authorized to prepare multiple Bond blanks
executed by the City for use in the transfer and exchange of Bonds.
Upon surrender for transfer of any Bond at the designated corporate trust office of the
applicable Bond Registrar, duly endorsed by, or accompanied by a written instrument or
instruments of transfer in form satisfactory to such Bond Registrar and duly executed by the
registered owner or its attorney duly authorized in writing, the City shall execute and such Bond
Registrar shall authenticate, date and deliver in the name of the transferee or transferees (a) in
the case of any Capital Appreciation Bond, a new fully registered Capital Appreciation Bond or
Bonds of the same series, maturity and yield to maturity of authorized denominations, for a like
aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same series,
maturity and yield to maturity of other authorized denominations, or (b) in the case of any other
Bonds, one or more fully registered Bonds of the same series, type (Current Interest Bonds or
Variable Rate Bonds), interest rate (or in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of interest
rate determination) and maturity of authorized denominations, for a like principal amount. Any
Capital Appreciafion Bond or Bonds may be exchanged at said office of the applicable Bond
Registrar for a like aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of
the same series, maturity and yield to maturity of other authorized denominations. Any other
Bond or Bonds may be exchanged at said office of the applicable Bond Registrar for a like
aggregate principal amount of Bonds ofthe same series, type, interest rate and maturity of other
authorized denominations. The execution by the City of any fully registered Bond shall
constitute full and due authorization of such Bond, and the applicable Bond Registrar shall
thereby be authorized to authenticate, date and deliver such Bond; provided that (a) the
aggregate original principal amount of outstanding Capital Appreciation Bonds of each series,
maturity and yield to maturity authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall not exceed
the authorized aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciafion Bonds of such series
and maturity less previous retirements and (b) the principal amount of Current Interest Bonds or
Variable Rate Bonds of each series, maturity and interest rate (or interest rate determination
method) authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall not exceed the authorized
principal amount of Current Interest Bonds or Variable Rale Bonds for such series, maturity and
interest rate (or interest rate determination method) less previous retirements.
The applicable Bond Registrar shall not be required to transfer or exchange (a) any
Bond after notice calling such Bond for redemption has been mailed, or (b) any Bond during a
period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of such Bond; provided,
however, that provisions relating to the transfer or exchange of Variable Rate Bonds of a series
shall be as determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale thereof and may be set

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-9-

 forth in the trust indenture securing such series of Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in
Section 2 hereof
The person in whose name any Bond shall be registered shall be deemed and regarded
as the absolute owner thereof for all purposes, and payment of the Compound Accreted Value
of principal of redemption premium, if any, or interest on any Bond, as appropriate, shall be
made only to or upon the order of the registered owner thereof or its legal representative. All
such payments shall be valid and effectual to satisfy and discharge the liability upon such Bond
to Ihe extent of the sum or sums so paid.
No service charge shall be made for any transfer or exchange of Bonds, but the City or
the applicable Bond Registrar may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other
governmental charge that may be imposed in connection with any transfer or exchange of
Bonds, except that no such payment may be required in the case of the issuance of a Bond or
Bonds for the unredeemed portion of a Bond surrendered for redemption.
(b)
Book-Entry Only System. If so determined and directed by an Authorized Officer in
connection with the sale of any of the Bonds, such Bonds may be issued in book-entry only
form. In connection with the issuance of Bonds in book-entry only form, an Authorized Officer is
authorized to execute and deliver to the book-entry depository selected by such Authorized
Officer such depository's standard form of representation letter. If any of the Bonds are
registered in the name of a securities depository which uses a book-entry system, the standing
of the beneficial owner to enforce any of the covenants herein may be established through the
books and records of such securities depository or a participant therein.
(c)
Bonds Losf, Destroyed, etc. If any Bond, whether in temporary or definitive form, is
lost (whether by reason of theft or otherwise), destroyed (whether by mutilation, damage, in
whole or in part, or otherwise) or improperiy cancelled, the applicable Bond Registrar may
authenticate a new Bond of like series, date, maturity date, interest rate (or, in the case of
Capital Appreciation Bonds, yield to maturity, and in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of
interest rate determination), denominafion and original principal amount (in the case of Capital
Appreciation Bonds) or principal amount (in the case of other Bonds) and bearing a number not
contemporaneously outstanding; provided that (i) in the case of any mutilated Bond, such
mutilated Bond shall first be surrendered to the applicable Bond Registrar, and (ii) in the case of
any lost Bond or Bond destroyed in whole, there shall be first furnished to the applicable Bond
Registrar evidence of such loss or destruction, together with indemnification of the City and
such Bond Registrar, satisfactory to such Bond Registrar. If any lost, destroyed or improperly
cancelled Bond shall have matured or is about to mature, or has been called for redemption,
instead of issuing a duplicate Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar shall pay the same without
surrender thereof if there shall be first furnished to such Bond Registrar evidence of such loss,
destruction or cancellation, together with indemnity, satisfactory to it. Upon the issuance of any
substitute Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar may require the payment of a sum sufficient to
cover any tax or other governmental charge that may be imposed in relation thereto.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-10-

 (d) Redemption and Repurchase. The Bonds may be made subject to redemption
prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole or in part on any date, at such fimes and at
such redemption prices (to be expressed as a percentage of the principal amount of Current
Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds being redeemed or as a formula as described below and
expressed as a percentage of the Compound Accreted Value of Capital Appreciation Bonds to
be redeemed or as a formula as described below) not to exceed 105 percent, plus, in the case
of Current Interest Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, accrued interest to the date of redemption,
as determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale thereof.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, such 105 percent limitation on the redemption price of
Bonds shall not apply where the redemption price is based upon a formula designed to
compensate the owner of the Bonds to be redeemed based upon prevailing market conditions
on the date fixed for redemption, commonly known as a "make-whole" redemption price (the
"Make-Whole Redemption Price"). At the lime of sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer shall
determine the provisions of the formula to be used to establish any Make-Whole Redemption
Price, which may vary depending on whether the Bonds are issued on a taxable or tax-exempt
basis. An Authorized Officer shall confirm and transmit the applicable Make-Whole Redemption
Price on such dates and to such parties as shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.
If fewer than all of the outstanding Bonds of a series are to be optionally redeemed, the
Bonds to be called shall be called from such maturities and interest rates of such series as may
be determined by an Authorized Officer.
Certain of the Bonds of a series may be made subject to mandatory redemption, at par
and accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption, as determined by an Authorized Officer at
the time of the sale thereof.
An Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell (at a price determined by such
Authorized Officer to be in the best interests of the City) or waive any right the City may have to
call any of the Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness for optional redemption, in whole or in part,
and is hereby further authorized to expend the proceeds of any such sales for any purpose for
which the proceeds of the Bonds are authorized to be expended and for the payment or
prepayment of any City debt obligations whether issued before or after the date of adoption of
this Ordinance, all as determined by an Authorized Officer; provided however, to the extent that
interest on such Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness is excluded from gross income for federal
income tax purposes, such expenditures shall not adversely affect such exclusion.
If
determined to be necessary or appropriate, an Authorized Officer is authorized to solicit the
consent of holders of outstanding Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness to any such sale or
waiver.
Retail Bonds may be made subject to repurchase by the City upon the demand of
certain holders thereof at a price of not to exceed 105 percent of par, as more fully described in
Section 12 hereof.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-11-

 At the fime of sale of Bonds of a series, an Authorized Officer is authorized to determine
the manner of redeeming such Bonds, either by lot in the manner hereinafter provided or
pro-rata in the manner determined by an Authorized Officer at the fime of sale, in the event less
than all of the Bonds of the same series, maturity and interest rale are to be redeemed.
The Current Interest Bonds shall be redeemed only in amounts equal to the respective
minimum authorized denominations and integral muifiples thereof and the Capital Appreciafion
Bonds shall be redeemed only in amounts representing the respective minimum authorized
Maturity Amounts and integral muifiples thereof In the event of the redemption of fewer than all
the Bonds of the same series, maturity and interest rate by lot, the aggregate principal amount
or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) thereof to be redeemed shall be the minimum authorized
denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for such series or an integral multiple thereof
and the applicable Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of such series, maturity and
interest rate, a distinctive number for each minimum aulhorized denomination or Maturity
Amount (as appropriate) of such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as
many numbers as, at such minimum authorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) for each number, shall equal the principal amount or Maturily Amount (as
appropriate) of such Bonds to be redeemed. In such case, the Bonds to be redeemed shall be
those to which were assigned numbers so selected; provided that only so much of the principal
amount or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall equal
such minimum authorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for each number
assigned to it and so selected. In the event of the redempfion of fewer than all Bonds of the
same series, maturity and interest rate on a pro-rata basis, if the Bonds are held in book-entry
form al the time of redempfion, at the time of sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is
authorized to direct the Bond Registrar to instruct the book-entry depository to select the
specific Bonds within such maturity and interest rate for redemption pro-rata among such
Bonds. The City shall have no responsibility or obligation to ensure that the book-entry
depository properly selects such Bonds for redemption.
The City shall, at least 45 days prior to any opfional redemption date (unless a shorter
time period shall be satisfactory to the applicable Bond Registrar), notify the applicable Bond
Registrar of such redemption date and of the principal amount or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of Bonds of such series to be redeemed.
In connection with any mandatory redemption of Bonds of a series as authorized above,
the principal amounts of Bonds (or the Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appreciation
Bonds) of such series to be mandatorily redeemed in each year may be reduced through the
earlier optional redemption thereof with any partial opfional redemptions of such Bonds of such
series credited against future mandatory redemption requirements in such order of the
mandatory redemption dates as an Authorized Officer may determine. In addition, on or prior to
the 60th day preceding any mandatory redempfion date of Bonds of a series, the applicable
Bond Registrar may, and if directed by an Authorized Officer shall, purchase Bonds of such
series required to be retired on such mandatory redemption date at such prices as an
Authorized Officer shall determine. Any such Bonds so purchased shall be cancelled and the
principal amount (or Compound Accreted Value, as appropriate) thereof shall be credited

General Obligation Borids ordinance (final)

-12-

 against the payment required on such next mandatory redemption date with respect to such
series of Bonds.
The applicable Bond Registrar shall promptly notify the City in writing of the Bonds, or
portions thereof selected for redemption and, in the case of any Bond selected for partial
redemption, the principal amount. Compound Accreted Value or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) thereof and the interest rate thereof to be redeemed.
Subject to the limitation on redemption price set forth above, in the case of redemption of
any Variable Rate Bonds, the terms of such redemption shall be determined by an Authorized
Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds and may be set forth in the trust
indenture securing such Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof
Section 4.
Except as may othenvise be determined as provided below for Variable
Rate Bonds, unless waived by any owner of Bonds to be redeemed, notice of the call for any
such redemption shall be given by the applicable Bond Registrar on behalf of the City by mailing
the redemption notice by first class mail at least 30 days and not more than 60 days prior lo the
date fixed for redemption to the registered owner of the Bond or Bonds to be redeemed at the
address shown on the applicable Bond Register or at such other address as is furnished in
writing by such registered owner to such Bond Regisfrar, but the failure to mail any such notice
or any defect therein as to any Bond shall not affect Ihe validity of the proceedings for the
redemption of any other Bond. Any notice of redemption mailed as provided in this Section
shall be conclusively presumed to have been given whether or not actually received by the
addressee. In the case of redemption of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series, the fime and
manner of giving such notice shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the fime of sale of
such Variable Rate Bonds and may be set forth in the trust indenture securing such Variable
Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof
All notices of redemption shall state:
(1)

the series designation of the Bonds to be redeemed,

(2)

the redemption date,

(3)
the redemption price, or in the case of a .redempfion of Bonds at a
Make-Whole Redemption Price, a description of the formula by which the redemption
price shall be determined,
(4)
if less than all outstanding Bonds of a series are to be redeemed, the
identification (and, in the case of partial redemption, the respective pnncipal amounts
and interest rates, Compound Accreted Values or Maturity Amounts) of the Bonds lo be
redeemed.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-13-

 Value at such redemption date shall continue to accrue interest from such redemption date at
the Yield to Maturity borne by such Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof, so called for
redemption. All Bonds which have been redeemed shall be cancelled and destroyed by the
applicable Bond Registrar and shall not be reissued.
If any Bond is not presented for payment when the principal amount, Compound
Accreted Value or Maturity Amount thereof becomes due, either at maturity or at a date fixed for
redemption thereof or otherwise, and if moneys sufficient to pay such Bond are held by the
applicable Bond Registrar for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond, such Bond
Registrar shall hold such moneys for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond without
liability to the registered owner for interest. The registered owner of such Bond thereafter shall
be restricted exclusively to such funds for satisfaction of any claims relating to such Bond.
Section 5.
The Capital Appreciation Bonds and Ihe Current Interest Bonds of each
series shall be prepared in substantially the following forms with such insertions and revisions
as shall be necessary to reflect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Bonds of such series
pursuant to Section 12 hereof; provided that if the text of any Bond is to be printed in its entirety
on the front side of such Bond, then the text shown or appearing on the reverse side of such
Bond shall replace paragraph [2] and the legend, "See Reverse Side for Addifional Provisions,"
shall be omitted. The Convertible Bonds shall be prepared incorporafing the provisions of the
forms of Capital Appreciation Bonds and Current Interest Bonds set forth below as necessary to
reflect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Convertible Bonds pursuant to Section 12
hereof The Variable Rate Bonds shall be prepared in substanfially the form of the Current
Interest Bonds set forth below, or as provided in the applicable trust indenture securing such
Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof, with such insertions and revisions as
shall be necessary to reflect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Variable Rate Bonds
pursuant to Secfion 12 hereof
All Bonds may be prepared with such insertions and revisions as shall be necessary in
connection with the issuance of such Bonds as Retail Bonds or Direct Purchase Bonds.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)
-15-

 [Form of Capital Appreciation Bond — Front Side]

REGISTERED

No.

$
Compound Accreted
Value at Maturity
("Maturily Amount')
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF ILLINOIS
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION B O N D
SERIES

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL
A M O U N T PER

$
MATURITY

20_
Registered Owner:

000

YIELD TO

MATURITY

DATED

MATURITY

AMOUNT:

DATE

$

•%

CUSlP
20

The City of Chicago (the "City') hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for value
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Dale idenfified above, the Maturity Amounl identified
above. The amount of interest payable on this Bond on the Maturity Date hereof is the amount
of interest accrued from the Dated Date hereof at a semiannual compounding rate necessary to
produce the Yield to Maturity set forth above, compounded semiannually on each January 1 and
July 1, commencing
1, 20 . The Maturity Amount of this Bond is payable
in lawful money of the United States of America upon presentation and surrender of this Bond at
the designated corporate trust office of
, Chicago, Illinois, or its
successor, as bond registrar and paying agent (the "Bond Registrar"). The Compound Accreted
Value of this Bond per $
,000 Maturity Amount on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
commencing
;
1, 20 , determined by the semiannual compounding described in
this paragraph shall be as set forth in the Table of Compound Accreled Value Per $
,000
of Compound Accreted Value at Maturity contained herein.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-16-

 Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth at
this place.
It is hereby certified and recited that all conditions, acts and things required by law to
exist or to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and due form and fime as required by law; that the
indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Bonds of which this is one, does not exceed any
limitation imposed by law; and that provision has been made for the colleclion of a direct annual
tax sufficient to pay the Maturity Amount hereof at maturily.
This Bond shall not be valid or become obligatory for any purpose until the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Bond Registrar.
IN W I T N E S S WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by the City Council has caused its corporate
seal to be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Bond to be signed by the duly authorized
facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Clerk, all as
of the Dated Date identified above.

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature)
City Clerk
City of Chicago
[SEAL]
Date of Authentication:
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Bond is one of the Bonds described in the within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of the General Obligafion Bonds, Series
, of the City of Chicago.

(Manual Signature)
Authorized Officer

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-17-

 [Form of Capital Appreciation Bond — Reverse Side]
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION B O N D
SERIES

For the prompt payment of the Maturily Amount of this Bond as the same becomes due,
and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full faith, credit and resources of the City
are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the original principal amount of
$
issued pursuant to the constitutional home rule powers of the City for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Purposes described in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described in the Bond Ordinance, and
(iii) paying expenses incidental to the issuance of the Bonds, and was aulhorized by an
Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on
, 20
(the "Bond
Ordinance').
The Bonds maturing on or after January 1,
, are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the City, in whole or in part on any date on or after
1,
, and if
less than all of the outstanding Bonds are to be redeemed, the Bonds lo be called shall be
called from such maturities as shall be determined by the City, and if less than all of the Bonds
of the same maturity and yield to maturity are to be redeemed, then (by lot] [pro-rata] for the
Bonds of the same maturity and yield to maturity in the manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds
to be redeemed at the redemption prices (being expressed as a percentage of the Compound
Accreted Value of the Bonds to be redeemed) set forth below:
DATES OF REDEMPTION

REDEMPTION PRICE

[Redemption by lot] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and yield lo maturily, the aggregate Maturily Amount thereof lo be redeemed shall be
$
,000 or an integral multiple thereof and the Bond Registrar shall assign lo each Bond of
such maturity and yield to maturity a disfinctive number for each $
,000 Maturity Amount of
such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as, at
$
,000 for each number, shall equal the Maturity Amounl of such Bonds to be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so selected;
provided that only so much of the Maturity Amount of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall
equal $
,000 for each number assigned to il and so selected.
[Redemption pro-rata] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and yield to maturity, the Bonds to be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
determined pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-18-

 Notice of any such redemption shall be sent by first class mail not fewer than 30 days
nor more than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redempfion to the Registered Owner of each
Bond to be redeemed at the address shown on the registration books of the City maintained by
the Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner
to the Bond Registrar; provided that the failure to mail any such notice or any defect therein as
to any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redempfion of any other Bond.
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease to accrue interest on the specified
redemption date; provided that funds for redemption are on deposit at the place of payment at
that time, and shall not be deemed to be outstanding.
This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly authorized in writing at the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago, Illinois, but only in the manner, subject to the limitafions and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon such transfer a new Bond or Bonds of aulhorized denominations, of the same maturily
and yield to maturity and for the same aggregate Original Principal Amount will be issued lo the
transferee in exchange therefor. The Bond Registrar shall not be required to transfer or
exchange this Bond (A) after notice calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.
The Bonds are issued in fully registered form in Original Principal Amounts represenling
$
,000 Maturity Amount or any integral multiple thereof This Bond may be exchanged at
the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate Original Principal
Amount of Bonds of the same series and maturity, upon the terms set forth in the Bond
Ordinance.
The City and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment of or on account of the Maturity
Amount hereof and redemption premium, if any, hereon and for all other purposes and neither
the City nor the Bond Registrar shall be affected by any notice to the contrary.

TABLE OF COMPOUND ACCRETED VALUE
PER $

000 OF COMPOUND ACCRETED VALUE A T MATURITY

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-19-

 (ASSIGNMENT)
FOR VALUE RECEIVED,

the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)

the within Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Bond on the books kept for registration thereof with full power of
substitution in the premises.

Dated:
Signature guaranteed:
NOTICE:

The signature lo this assignment must correspond wilh the name of the Registered
Owner as it appears upon the face of the within Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-20-

 [Form of Current Interest Bond — Front Side]
REGISTERED

No
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF ILLINOIS
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENEFJAL OBLIGATION B O N D
SERIES

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
Interest
Rate:

%

Maturity Dale:
January 1, 2 0 _

Dated Date:
.20_

CUSIP:

Registered Owner:
Principal Amount:
The City of Chicago (the "Cily") hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for value
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as
hereinafter provided, cn the Maturity Date identified above, the Principal Amount identified
above and lo pay interest (computed on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months)
on such Principal Amount from the later of the date of this Bond or the most recent interest
payment date lo which interest has been paid at the Interest Rate per annum set forth above on
January 1 and July 1 of each year commencing
1. 20 . unfil said Principal
Amount is paid. Principal of this Bond and redemption premium, if any, shall be payable in
lawful money of the United Stales of America • upon presentation and surrender al the
designated corporate trust office of
, Chicago, Illinois, as bond
registrar and paying agent (the "Bond Registrar"). Payment of the installments of interest shall
be made lo the Registered Owner hereof as shown on the registration books of the City
maintained by the Bond Registrar at the close of business cn the 15lh day of the month next
preceding each interest payment date and shall be paid by check or draft of the Bond Registrar
mailed to the address of such Registered Owner as il appears on such registrafion books or at
such other address furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to the Bond Registrar or, at
the opfion of any Registered Owner of $1,000,000 or more in aggregate principal amounl of the
Bonds, by wire transfer of immediately available funds to such bank in the confinental United
States of America as the Registered Owner hereof shall request in writing to the Bond Registrar.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-21-

 Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth at
this place.
It is hereby certified and recited thai all conditions, acts and things required by law to
exist or to be done precedent lo and in the issuance of this" Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and due form and lime as required by law; that the
indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Bonds of which this is one, does not exceed any
limitation imposed by law; and that provision has been made for the collecfion of a direct annual
tax sufficient to pay the interest hereon as il falls due and also to pay and discharge the
principal hereof at maturity.
This Bond shall not be valid or become obligatory for any purpose unfil the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Bond Registrar.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by the City Council has caused its corporate
seal to be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Bond to be signed by the duly aulhorized
facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Clerk, all as
of the Dated Date identified above.

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature)
City Clerk
City of Chicago
[SEAL]

Date of Authenficafion:
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Bond is one of the Bonds described in the within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of the General Obligation Bonds, Series
, of the City of Chicago.

By:

(Manual Signature)

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-22-

  

 

Authorized Of?cer

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (?nal)
-2 3-

[Form of Current Interest Bond — Reverse Side]
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND
SERIES

For the prompt payment of this Bond, both principal and interest, as aforesaid, as the
same become due, and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full faith, credit and
resources of the City are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the principal amounl of
$
issued pursuant to the constitutional home rule powers of the City for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Purposes described in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described in the Bond Ordinance, and
(iii) paying expenses incidental to the issuance of the Bonds, and was aulhorized by an
Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on
, 20
(the 'Bond
Ordinance').
The Bonds maturing on or after January 1,
, are redeemable prior to maturity at the
opfion of the City, in whole or in part on any date on or after
1.
, and if less
than all of the outstanding Bonds are to be redeemed, the Bonds to be called shall be called
from such maturities and interest rates as shall be determined by the City and if less than all of
the Bonds of a single maturity and the same interest rate are to be redeemed then [by lot]
[pro-rata] within such maturity and interest rate in the manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds lo
be redeemed at the redemption prices (being expressed as a percentage of the principal
amounl) set forth below, plus accrued interest to the date of redemption:
DATES OF REDEMPTION

REDEMPTION PRICE

The Bonds maturing on January 1,
, are subject to mandatory redemption prior to
maturity on January 1 of the years
i_ to
. inclusive, and the Bonds maturing on
January 1,
, are subject lo mandatory redemption prior to maturity on January 1 of the
years
to
, inclusive, in each case al par and accrued interest to the date fixed for
redemption.
[Redempfion by lot] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the aggregate principal amount thereof to be redeemed shall be
$
,000 or an integral multiple thereof and the Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of
such maturity and interest rate a distinctive number for each $
,000 principal amount of
such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as, al
$
,000 for each number, shall equal the principal amount of such Bonds to be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so selected;

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-24-

 provided that only so much of the principal amounl of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall
equal $
,000 for each number assigned to it and so selected.
[Redemption pro-rata] In the event of the redemption of less than all of the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the Bonds lo be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
determined pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.
Notice of any such redempfion shall be sent by first class ma/I not less than 30 days nor
more than 60 days prior lo the date fixed for redemption lo the Registered Owner of each Bond
lo be redeemed al the address shown on the registration books of the City maintained by the
Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to
the Bond Registrar; provided that the failure lo mail any such nofice or any defect therein as to
any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redempfion of any other Bond.
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease to bear interest on the specified
redemption date, provided that funds for redemption are on deposit at the place of payment at
that time, and shall not be deemed to be outstanding.
This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly authorized in wrifing at the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago, Illinois, bul only in the manner, subject to the limitafions and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon such transfer a new Bond or Bonds of authorized denominations, of the same interest
rate, series and maturity and for the same aggregate principal amounl will be issued lo the
transferee in exchange therefor. The Bond Registrar shall not be required lo transfer or
exchange this Bond (A) after notice calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a nofice of redemption of this Bond.
The Bonds are issued in fully registered form in the denomination of $
,000 each or
authorized integral multiples thereof This Bond may be exchanged at the designated corporate
trust office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate principal amount of Bonds of the same
interest rate, series and maturity of other authorized denominations, upon the terms set forth in
the Bond Ordinance.
The City and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment of or on account of principal
hereof and interest due hereon and redemption premium, if any, and for all other purposes and
neither the City nor the Bond Registrar shall be affected by any notice to the contrary.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-25-

 (ASSIGNMENT)
FOR VALUE RECEIVED,

the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)

the within Bond and does hereby irrevocably consfilute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Bond on the books kept for registration thereof with full power of
substitution in the premises.
Dated:
Signature guaranteed:
NOTICE:

The signature to this assignment must correspond with the name of the Registered
Owner as it appears upon the face of the within Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

Section 6.
Each Bond shall be a direct and general obligalion of the City for the
payment of which (as to Compound Accreted Value, principal, interest and redemption
premium, if any, as appropriate) the City pledges its full faith and credit. Each Bond shall be
payable (as lo Compound Accreted Value, principal, interest and redemption premium, if any,
as appropriate) from any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds ofthe City legally
available for such purpose, including but not limited to the proceeds of the Pledged Taxes (as
defined in Section 7 hereof).
Section 7. for the purpose of providing the funds required to pay as the same
become due (i) the principal of and interest and redempfion premium, if any, on the Bonds
(including the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds), (ii) the purchase
price of Bonds that are subject to optional or mandatory tender for purchase by the owners
thereof lo the extent not otherwise provided for pursuant to the terms of a Credit Facility (as
defined in Section 12 hereof), (iii) such amounts as may be payable under Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements (as defined in Secfion 14(a) hereoQ from the direct annual tax described
below, (iv) amounts (other than periodic fees and expenses) payable to providers of Credit
Facilifies as described in Section 12 tiereof (v) any Line of Credit Indebtedness, (vi) the
principal of and interest on General Obligafion Commercial Paper Notes and (vii) lo the extent
determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary or desirable, periodic fees and expenses
payable to parties involved in the provision of ongoing services relating to the Bonds, the
Outstanding Indebtedness, the Exisfing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements or Interest Rale
Exchange Agreements, including any QIR and parties such as those idenfified by an Aulhorized
Officer in a notification of sale as described in Secfion 12 hereof and parties providing similar
ongoing services, such as rating agencies and entities providing financial market information to
be used in connection with the structuring and sale of the Bonds (the "Ongoing Financing

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-26-

 Services"), there is hereby levied and there shall be collected a direct annual lax upon all
taxable property in the City for the years and in the amounts as follows:
YEAR

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033

AMOUNT

$150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000.000
150.000,000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000.000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150.000,000
150,000,000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150,000,000

YEAR

AMOUNT

2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
2051
2052
2053
2054

$150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000.000
150,000.000
150,000.000
150,000.000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150.000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000.000
150,000.000
150,000.000
150.000.000

; provided that collections of such levy for any year in an amount in excess of that necessary lo
make the payments described in clauses (i) through (vii). above (a) may be used for any lawrful
public purpose designated by the City Council or (b) may be reduced and abated by an
Aulhorized Officer if such reduction is deemed desirable by an Authorized Officer in connection
with the sale or sales of the Bonds, in each case as determined from lime to fime by an
Authorized Officer as provided in Section 12 hereof.
The tax levy made in this Section is not subject to the "Aggregate Levy" limitation
contained in the Chicago Property Tax Limitation Ordinance contained in Chapter 3-92 of the
Municipal Code of Chicago (the "Municipal Code"), and Section 3-92-020 of the Municipal Code
is hereby superseded to exclude the tax levy herein from the definition of "Aggregate Levy"
contained therein.
The term "Pledged Taxes" means (i) the taxes hereinabove levied for collection for the
purpose of providing the funds necessary to make the paymenls described in clauses (i)
through (vii) of the first paragraph of this Section 7, and (ii) subject lo the provisions of
Section 15 hereof the proceeds of taxes levied for the years from and after 2012 in connection
with the issuance of the Outstanding Indebtedness to the extent such lax collections are not

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-27-

 necessary for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein or pursuant to any other authorization, and the term "Pledged Taxes" shall
also include any amounts deposited into the hereinafter-defined Bond Fund or deposited with
the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent (as hereinafter defined) by an Authorized Officer for the
purpose of paying principal of and interest on the Bonds and any accrued interest received and
deposited in the Bond Fund or the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Account, if established pursuant to
Section 9 hereof
As provided in Section 12 or otherwise, the City reserves the right to abate all or a
portion of the Pledged Taxes required lo be levied in any year if and to the extent on or before
March 31 of the next succeeding calendar year (or such eariier date as may be required by law),
the City has on hand amounts dedicated to the payments described in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of the first paragraph of this Section 7 due during the one-year period commencing on
January 2 of such succeeding calendar year. The City may, but shall not be required to, cause
the extension and colleclion of the Pledged Taxes for the payment when due of any Line of
Credit Indebtedness or the principal of and interest on General Obligation Commercial Paper
Notes or cause the levy or extension in any year of taxes for the payment of the costs of
Ongoing Financing Services.
Section 8.
The City shall appropriate or otherwise provide amounts sufficient to pay
(i) principal of and interest on the Bonds (including the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital
Appreciation Bonds), (ii) amounts (other than periodic fees and expenses) payable to providers
of Credit Facilifies as described in Section 12 hereof to the payment of which the City has
pledged its full faith and credit and (iii) Interest Rate Exchange Agreements to the payment of
which the City has pledged its full faith and credit for the years such amounts are due, and the
City hereby covenanis to take timely action as required by law to carry out the provisions of this
Section, bul. if for any such year it fails lo do so, this Ordinance shall constitute a confinuing
appropriation ordinance of such amounts without any further action on the part of the City
Council.
Section 9.
Each Authorized Officer is authorized to establish one or more special
accounts, if determined to be necessary in connection wilh the sale of any of the Bonds,
separate and segregated from all other funds and accounts of the City, which shall either be
(j) held by an Authorized Officer (each a "Bond Fund') or (ii) maintained with a bank or trust
company to be designated by an Authorized Officer (each an "Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Account') pursuant to an escrow agreement (each an "Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreement'),
between the City and the applicable Escrow Agent named therein (each an "Ad Valorem Tax
Escrow Agent'), and one or more of the Mayor or an Authorized Officer are hereby authorized to
execute and deliver one or more Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreements in connection wilh the
sale of the Bonds in such form as the officers so executing such agreement may deem
appropriate in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
In lieu of the proceeds of such taxes being deposited wilh the City Treasurer, any such
Ad Valorem "fax Escrow Agreement may authorize the County Collectors of Cook and DuPage

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-28-

 Counties, Illinois to deposit the proceeds of such taxes direcfiy into the applicable Ad Valorem
Tax Escrow Account, if such Account has been created.
Section 10.
If the Pledged Taxes lo be applied to the payment of the Bonds are not
available in time to make any payments of principal of or interest on the Bonds when due, then
the appropriate fiscal officers of the City are hereby directed lo make such payments from any
other moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City that are legally available
for lhal purpose in advancement of the collection of such Pledged Taxes, and when the
proceeds thereof are received, such other funds shall be replenished, all lo the end that the
credii of the City may be preserved by the prompt payment of the principal of and interest on the
Bonds as the same become due.
Section 11. A copy of this Ordinance, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed in
the respective offices of the County Clerks of Cook and DuPage Counfies, Illinois (the "County
Clerks"), and such filing shall constitute the authority for and il shall be the duly of said County
Clerks, in each year beginning in 2014, to and including 2055, to extend the taxes levied
pursuant to Section 7 hereof for colleclion in such year, such taxes to be in addition lo and in
excess of all other taxes heretofore or hereafter aulhorized lo be levied by the City on its behalf
A copy of this Ordinance, duty certified by the City Clerk, shall also be filed wilh each
applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, if any, each applicable Bond Registrar, and if the
County Collectors of Cook and DuPage Counties are authorized to deposit the proceeds of the
taxes levied pursuant to Section 7 hereof directly with an Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent
pursuant lo Secfion 9 hereof with such County Collectors.
Section 12.
Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell all or any portion of the
Bonds, other than the Retail Bonds and the Direct Purchase Bonds which shall be sold as
provided in the following hvo paragraphs, from lime to lime lo or at the direction of an
underwriter or group of underwriters to be selected by such Authorized Officer (the
"Underwriters'), with the concurrence of the Chairman of the Committee on Finance of the City
Council (the "Chairman"), on such terms as such Authorized Officer may deem to be in the best
interests of the City within the limitations set forth in this Ordinance.
Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized lo sell Retail Bonds from lime to time on
such terms as such Aulhorized Officer may deem to be in the best interests of the City wilhin
the limitations contained in this Ordinance and, in connection therewith, to appoint an agent or
group of agents to be selected by such Authorized Officer (the "Selling Agents'), wilh the
concurrence of the Chairman, for the purpose of solicifing purchases of the Retail Bonds by
individual investors, each sale of Retail Bonds solicited by the Selling Agents to be made with
the concurrence of the Chairman.
The Bonds may be sold as Direct Purchase Bonds in a manner and containing such
lerms authorized by an Authorized Officer, including pursuant lo a placement agent
arrangement, to a purchaser or purchasers other than the Underwriters (the "Direct
Purchasers'), such Direct Purchasers to be selected by an Authorized Officer and such sale

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-29-

 being permitted al a price of not less than 97 percent of the principal amount of the Direct
Purchase Bonds being sold. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized lo do all
such things and to execute and deliver such additional documents, agreements and certificates
as shall be necessary in connection with the sale of Direct Purchase Bonds.
The principal amounl of and the interest on the Bonds (including the Compound
Accreled Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds and based on reasonable estimates of the
interest lo be paid on Variable Rate Bonds) sold of each series and maturily in the aggregate
(after taking into account mandatory redemptions) shall not exceed the amount levied therefor
as specified in Section 7 hereof. The Bonds may be sold from fime to time as an Authorized
Officer shall determine that the proceeds of such sales are needed.
Either Authorized Officer is hereby authorized and directed to cause all necessary
notices of redemption of the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding as provided
above lo be given in accordance with the terms of the respective ordinances or indentures, as
applicable, authorizing the Outstanding Indebtedness.
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver a
contract of purchase with respect to each sale of the Bonds (i) lo, or at the direction o f the
Underwriters or (ii) lo the Direct Purchasers, in substantially the form previously used for similar
general obligation bonds of the City (the "Contract of Purchase'), with appropriate revisions to
reflect the terms and provisions of the Bonds and such other revisions in text as Ihe Mayor or an
Authorized Officer shall determine are necessary or desirable in connecfion with the sale of the
Bonds. The compensation paid to the Underwriters in connection with any sale of Bonds shall
not exceed three percent of the principal amount of the Bonds being sold. Nothing contained in
this Ordinance shall limit the sale of the Bonds or any maturity or maturities thereof al a price or
prices in excess of the principal amount thereof
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver a
contract with Selling Agents pursuant to which the Selling Agents shall solicit purchases of the
Retail Bonds by individual investors (a "Selling Agent Agreement') substantially in the form of
the selling agent agreement previously entered into by the City in connection wilh the sale of
Retail Bonds, but wilh such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer execufing the
same shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execufion thereof by the Mayor or such
Authorized Officer to evidence the City Council's approval of all such revisions. The aggregate
compensation paid to the Selling Agents pursuant lo any Selling Agent Agreement shall not
exceed three percent of the principal amount of the Retail Bonds sold pursuant lo such Selling
Agent Agreement. The terms of any Selling Agent Agreemeni may provide for the delegation by
an Authorized Officer to one or more Deputy Comptrollers of authority to approve the final terms
of sale of any Retail Bonds pursuant lo such Selling Agent Agreement within parameters
established by an Authorized Officer consistent with the terms and limitations of this Ordinance.
Any Selling Agent Agreement may also contain provisions pursuant to which a person receiving
an ownership interest in any Retail Bonds through the death of a Bondholder shall have the right
to sell such Retail Bonds back to the City at a price of not to exceed 105 percent of par and
setting forth the terms and condifions of the exercise of such right. The Mayor or an Authorized

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-30-

 Officer (or delegate as authorized above) is hereby authorized to do all such things and to
execute and deliver such additional documents, agreements and certificates as shall be
necessary in connection with the sale of Retail Bonds from time to time pursuant to a Selling
Agent Agreement, including any such document, agreement or certificate necessary to describe
the terms of Retail Bonds then being sold.
In connection with any sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to
obtain one or more policies of bond insurance from recognized bond insurers selected by an
Authorized Officer, if such Authorized Officer determines such bond insurance to be desirable in
connection with such sale of the Bonds. Either Authorized Officer may. on behalf of the City,
make covenants with such bond insurer that are not inconsistent wilh the provisions of this
Ordinance and are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance.
In connection with any sale of the Bonds, the Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer is hereby
authorized to obtain one or more letters of credit, lines of credit, standby bond purchase
agreements, or similar credii or liquidity facilities (a "Credit Facility') with one or more financial
institutions. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into a
reimbursement agreement and/or standby bond purchase agreement and to execute and issue
a promissory note in connection with the provisions of each Credit Facility. Any Credit Facility,
reimbursement agreement or standby bond purchase agreement shall be in substantially the
form of the credit facilities, reimbursement agreements and standby bond purchase agreements
previously entered into by the City in connection with the sale of general obligalion bonds or
notes, but with such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer executing the same
shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execufion thereof by the Mayor or an Authorized
Officer to evidence the City Council's approval of all such revisions. The annual fee paid lo any
financial institufion that provides a Credit Facility with respect to all or a portion of a series of the
Bonds shall not exceed three percent of the average principal amount of such Bonds
outstanding during such annual period. The final form of any reimbursement agreement and/or
standby bond purchase agreemeni entered into by the City with respect to the Bonds shall be
attached to the notification of sale filed in the office of the City Clerk pursuant to this section.
Each such promissory note shall be a general obligafion of the City for the payment of which,
bolh principal and interest, the City pledges its full faith, credit and resources. Each promissory
note, and any Bond owned or held as collateral by any such financial insfitulion in its "capacity as
a provider of a Credit Facility shall bear interest at a rale not exceeding 15 percent per annum
and shall mature not later than the final maturity date of the related Bonds secured by such
reimbursement agreemeni or standby bond purchase agreement. The Mayor or an Authorized
Officer is hereby authorized lo execute and deliver any such reimbursement agreement or
standby bond purchase agreemeni, and any amendment thereto or replacement thereof under
the seal of the City affixed and attested by the City Clerk.
In the event that Bonds are sold so as to require the levy of taxes for any year specified
in Section 7 hereof for the purpose of making the payments described in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of the first paragraph of Secfion 7 hereof in an amount less than the amount specified for
such year in the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, then an Authorized Officer shall, on or prior
to March 31 (or such earlier date as may be required by law) of the calendar year next

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-31-

 succeeding such year, notify the City Council of the determination made pursuant to clauses (a)
and (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof regarding the application of any resulting
excess levy collections, and, in addition, in connection with a determination made pursuant to
clause (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, an Authorized Officer shall file in the
respective offices of the County Clerks certificates of tax abatement for such year. In the event
that upon the final sale of the Bonds of all series, such Bonds have been sold so as to require
the levy of taxes in any year specified in Section 7 hereof for the purpose of making the
payments described in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof in
an amount less than the amount specified for such year in Secfion 7 hereof then there shall be
included, in the final notification of sale to the City Council described below in this Section 12,
the determination made pursuant to clauses (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7
hereof regarding the application of any resulting excess levy collections for such year and any
succeeding year and, in addition, in connection with a determination made pursuant to
clause (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof an Authorized Officer shall file in the
respective offices of the County Clerks certificates of tax abatement for such year or years. If
any of the Bonds are not to be sold and issued as provided herein and no levy collections are to
be applied for the purposes of paying the costs of Ongoing Financing Services as determined
by an Authorized Officer, the corresponding taxes herein levied lo pay debt service thereon
shall be abated in full. Any certificate of abatement delivered pursuant to this paragraph shall
refer to the amount of taxes levied pursuant to Section 7 hereof shall indicate the amount of
reduction in the amount of taxes levied by the City resulting from the sale or sales of the Bonds
or the non-issuance thereof, which reduced amount is lo be abated from such taxes, and shall
further indicate the remainder of such taxes which is to be extended for collection by said
County Clerks.
The preparafion, use and distribution of a preliminary official statement, an official
statement or any other disclosure document relating to each sale and issuance of the Bonds are
hereby ratified and approved. The Mayor and each Authorized Officer are each hereby
authorized to execute and deliver an official statement or other disclosure document relating to
each sale and issuance of the Bonds on behalf of the City. The preliminary official statement,
official statement and other disclosure documents herein authorized shall be substantially
similar to those previously used for general obligalion bonds of the City, and shall contain the
terms and provisions of the Bonds, the manner in which the Bonds shall be sold, the use of
proceeds of the Bonds, financial information for the City, and such other information as the
Mayor or any Authorized Officer determines to be advisable under the circumstances.
Subsequent to the sale of any series of Bonds or, in the case of the Retail Bonds,
subsequent lo the sale of all Bonds that are the subject of a Selling Agent Agreement, an
Authorized Officer shall file in the office of the City Clerk a notification of sale directed lo the City
Council setting forth (i) the series designation, the aggregate principal amount and authorized
denominations of maturity schedule and redempfion provisions for the Bonds sold, (ii) the
principal amounts of the Bonds sold as Current Interest Bonds, Capital Appreciafion Bonds,
Convertible Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respectively, and whether any of the Bonds are
sold as Retail Bonds, (iii) in the case of the sale of the Retail Bonds or Direct Purchase Bonds,
the principal amounts of such Bonds sold as Current Interest Bonds, Capitalized Appreciation

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-32-

 Bonds, Convertible Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respectively, (iv) in the case of Bonds sold
as Capital Appreciation Bonds, (A) the Original Principal Amounts of and Yields to Maturity on
the Capital Appreciafion Bonds being sold and (B) a table of Compound Accreted Values per
minimum authorized Compound Accreted Value at maturity for any Capital Appreciation Bonds
being sold, setting forth the Compound Accreted Value of each such Capital Appreciafion Bond
on each semiannual compounding date, (v) the interest rates on the Current Interest Bonds sold
or, in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, a description of the method of determining the interest
rate applicable to such Variable Rale Bonds from time to time, (vi) the specific maturities, series
and amounts'of the Outstanding Indebtedness to be refunded with proceeds of the Bonds,
(vii) a description of any Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements lo be terminated,
amended or otherwise modified in connection with the refunding of such Outstanding
Indebtedness and identifying any settlement, breakage or termination amount to be paid in
connection with each such termination, amendment or modification, (viii) the dale on and price
at which the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding shall be redeemed (if such
redemption shall occur prior to staled maturity or pursuant to mandatory sinking fund
redemption), (ix) the disposition of the taxes levied for the years from and after 2012 for the
payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness or any Exisfing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements
as aulhorized by Secfion 15 hereof (x) the identity of the insurer or insurers issuing the
insurance policy or policies, if any. referred to below, and the identity of the provider or providers
of one or more Credit Facilities, if any, for such Bonds, (xi) the identity of the Underwriters (or, in
the case of Retail Bonds, the Selling Agents and in the case of Direct Purchase Bonds, the
Direct Purchasers) selected for such Bonds, (xii) the identity of the applicable Bond Registrar
and any trustee or trustees selected by an Authorized Officer for such Bonds, (xiii) the identity of
any remarketing agent retained in connection with the issuance of Variable Rate Bonds, if any,
(xiv) the compensation paid to the Underwriters (or, in the case of Retail Bonds, the Selling
Agents) in connection with such sale, (xv) the identity of any Refunding Escrow Agent (as
defined in Section 13(b) hereof) appointed by an Authorized Officer in connection with the
refunding of Outstanding Indebtedness, and (xvi) any other matter authorized by this Ordinance
to be determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale of the Bonds of each series.
In connection wilh any sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to
execute and deliver one or more Continuing Disclosure Undertakings (each a "Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking') evidencing the City's agreement to comply with the requirements of
Section (b)(5) of Rule 15c2-12, adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the
"SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, in a form approved by the Corporation
Counsel. Upon its execution and delivery on behalf of the City as herein provided, each
Continuing Disclosure Undertaking will be binding on the City, and the officers, employees and
agents of the City are hereby authorized to do all such acts and things and to execute all such
documents as may be necessary to carry out and comply with the provisions of each Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking as executed. Either Authorized Officer is hereby further authorized to
amend each Continuing Disclosure Undertaking in accordance with its respective terms from
time to time following its execution and delivery as said officer shall deem necessary. In
addition, an Authorized Officer is authorized to make all future filings with the Electronic
Municipal Market Access system operated by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board or
such other municipal securities information repository as shall be designated by the SEC, all in

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-33-

 accordance with the provisions of Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 15c2-12(b)(5)
promulgated under the Securifies Exchange,Act of 1934. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this Ordinance, the sole remedies for any failure by the City to comply with any Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking shall be the ability of the beneficial owner of any applicable Bond to
seek mandamus or specific performance by court order to cause the City to comply wilh its
obligations under such Continuing Disclosure Undertaking.
The Bonds shall be duly prepared and executed in the form and manner provided herein
and delivered to the purchasers in accordance with the applicable terms of sale.
The Mayor, each Authorized Officer, the City Treasurer and the City Clerk are each
hereby authorized to execute and deliver such other documents and agreements (including
such contracts, such intergovernmental agreements or such grant agreements with not-for-profit
organizafions. educational or cultural institutions or for-profit organizations or lo assist the Slate
of Illinois, the United States of America, or other municipal corporations, units of local
government or school districts in the State of Illinois, receiving proceeds of the Bonds as an
Authorized Officer shall deem necessary and appropriate) and perform such other acts prior to
or following the issuance of the Bonds as may be necessary or desirable in connecfion with the
issuance of the Bonds and any transactions contemplated herein related to the application of
the proceeds of the Bonds or collections or application of taxes levied for the payment of the
Bonds or the Outstanding Indebtedness or other purposes hereunder, bul subject to any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth, and any such actions
heretofore taken by the Mayor, an Aulhorized Officer, the City Treasurer or the City Clerk in
accordance with the provisions hereof are hereby ratified and approved. With respect to each
grant of Bond proceeds, each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to designate in writing,
with the written concurrence of the Budget Director of the City (the "Budget Director"'), (i) one or
more City departments or agencies to administer such grant, and (ii) the head of the City
department or agency who shall be authorized to execute a grant agreemeni and such other
documents, agreements or instruments as shall be deemed necessary or desirable by such City
department or agency head. Upon any such written designation by an Authorized Officer with
respect to a grant of Bond proceeds, such City department or agency shall be authorized to
administer such grant and the head of such City department or agency shall be aulhorized lo
execute a grant agreement and such other documents, agreements or instruments as such
official shall deem necessary or desirable.
Section 13.
follows:

The proceeds from the sale of any series of the Bonds shall be used as

(a)
The sum representing the accrued interest received, if any, shall be used
to pay the first interest becoming due on the Bonds sold, and to that end, shall be
deposited in the applicable Bond Fund or the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Account, if established.
(b)
From the sale proceeds derived from any such sale of a series of the
Bonds, (i) such sum as may be determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary to

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-3A-

 pay not more than three years of interest on the Bonds issued to pay costs of the Project
may be used to pay such interest, and to that end, may be deposited in the applicable
Bond Fund or the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Account, if established; (ii) the
sum determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary to pay the costs of the Project
shall be set aside, held and invested al the direction of an Authorized Officer, as
separate funds of the City pending such payment, provided lhal proceeds of the Bonds
issued lo finance the Pension Contributions shall be paid into the Pension Funds as and
when required by law; (iii) the sum determined by an Authorized Officer to capitalize or
fund interest on Outstanding Indebtedness shall be deposited into the respective debt
service funds established for the Outstanding Indebtedness; (iv) the sum determined by
an Aulhorized Officer to be sufficient to pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being
refunded at or prior to their respective maturities, al a price of par, the applicable
redemption premium and accrued interest thereon up to and including said redemption
or maturily dates shall be deposited into the respective debt service funds established
for the Outstanding Indebtedness or into one or more "Refunded Bonds Escrow
Accounts" to be held by one or more banks or trust companies to be designated by an
Authorized Officer (each a "Refunding Escrow Agent'), each pursuant to Ihe terms of an
escrow agreement (each a "Refunding Escrow Agreement'), and the Mayor, an
Authorized Officer and the City Clerk, or any of them, are hereby authorized to execute
and deliver each Refunding Escrow Agreement, and any amendment thereto, in such
form as the officer so executing shall deem appropriate to effect the refunding or
refundings described in this paragraph and (v) the sum determined by an Authorized
Officer lo be sufficient to provide for the payment of any settlement, breakage or
termination amount payable in connection with the termination, amendment or
modificafion of an Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreemeni shall be paid lo the City's
counterparty or counterparties thereunder.
Notwithstanding any provision of the
Municipal Code, investments acquired with proceeds of the Bonds or investment income
thereon may mature beyond ten years from the date of acquisifion, and may include but
are not limited to agreements entered into behA^een the City and providers of securifies
under which agreements such providers agree to purchase from or sell lo the City
specified securities on specific dates at predetermined prices, all as established at the
time of execution of any such agreemeni and as set forth in such agreement, and
guaranteed investment contracts, forward purchase agreements and other similar
investment vehicles.
Such guaranteed investment contracts, forward purchase
agreements and other similar investment vehicles may, to the extent permitted by
operative authorizing documents and by applicable law, be assigned or transferred from
one bond transaction to another or apply to the proceeds of more than one bond
transaction on a commingled or non-commingled basis, as determined by an Authorized
Officer. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby aulhorized to enter into any
amendments to or restatements of existing documents or to execute new documents, to
consent to adions being taken by others or to obtain the consent of other parties, as
may be necessary or desirable in this respect. Investment income derived from Bond
proceeds may be (w) expended for the same purposes for which Bond proceeds may be
expended, (x) used for the payment or prepayment of City debt obligations, (y) deposited
in the Corporate Fund of the City or (z) rebated to the United States of America as

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

 provided in Section 16 hereof all as determined by an Authorized Officer or the Budget
Director. Any commingled investment income from guaranteed investment contracts,
forward purchase agreements and other similar investment vehicles shall be apportioned
among bond transactions as determined by an Authorized Officer or as otherwise
required by operafive authorizing documents and applicable law.
(c)
From the sale proceeds of a series of the Bonds not applied as provided
in paragraphs (a) and (b), above, the amount deemed necessary by an Authorized
Officer shall be applied to the payment of the costs of issuance of such Bonds, including
the premium or fee for bond insurance or other credit or liquidity enhancement, if any,
and any unexpended portion of the sale proceeds shall be paid to the City.
The costs of the Project may be paid directly by the City or may be financed by the
making of grants for the implementation of the Project to (i) not-for-profit organizations,
educational or cultural institutions or for-profit organizations, (ii) the United States of America,
(iii) the State of Illinois or (iv) other units of local government, political subdivisions, municipal
corporations or school districts in the State of Illinois, including any operating division thereof all
as determined by an Authorized Officer.
An Authorized Officer shall report to the City Council with respect to the expenditure of
the proceeds of each series of the Bonds issued hereunder to pay the costs of the Project.
Such reports shall be made no later than August 1 of each year, commencing August 1, 2014,
with respect to expenditures made during the preceding calendar year. No report shall be
required hereunder following any calendar year in which no proceeds of any series of the Bonds
are expended to pay costs of the Project.
Section 14.
(a) The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized lo execute and
deliver, with respect to all or any portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness, the Bonds, and any
General Obligation Indebtedness (as defined below) that may be issued in the future
(collectively, "City Indebtedness"), from time to time one or more agreements, or options to
enter into such agreements, with counterparties selected by an Aulhorized Officer, the purpose
of which is to provide to the City (i) an interest rate basis, cash ftow basis, or other basis
different from that provided in the related City Indebtedness for the payment of interest or
(ii) with respect to a future delivery of general obligation bonds, notes or commercial paper
(collectively, "General Obligation Indebtedness"), one or more of a guaranteed interest rate,
interest rate basis, cash flow basis, or purchase price (such agreements or options lo enter into
such agreements being collectively referred lo as "Interest Rate Exchange Agreements').
Interest Rate Exchange Agreements include without limitation agreements or contracts
commonly known as interest rate exchange, swaps, including forward starting swaps, collar,
caps, or derivative agreements, forward payment conversion agreements, interest rate locks,
forward bond purchase agreements, bond warrant agreements, or bond purchase opfion
agreements and also include agreements granting lo the City or a counterparty an opfion to
enter into any of the foregoing and agreements or contracts providing for payments based on
levels of or changes in interest rates, including a change in an interest rate index, to exchange
cash flows or a series of payments, or to hedge payment, rate spread, or similar exposure. The

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-36-

 stated aggregate notional amount (net of offsetfing transactions) under all Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements related to certain City Indebtedness shall not exceed the principal
amount of such City Indebtedness lo which such Interest Rate Exchange Agreements relate.
For purposes of the immediately preceding sentence, "offsetting transactions" shall include any
transaction which is intended to hedge, modify or otherwise affect another outstanding
transaction or its economic results. The offsetting transaction need not be based on the same
index or rate opfion as the related City Indebtedness or the transaction being offset and need
not be wilh the same counterparty as the transaction being offset. Examples of offsetting
transactions include, without limitation, a floating-to-fixed rate interest rate swap being offset by
a fixed-to-fioafing rate interest rate swap, and a fixed-lo-floating rale interest rate swap being
offset by a floating-to-fixed rate interest rale swap or an interest rate cap or floor or a
floating-to-floafing interest rate swap.
Any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement to the extent practicable shall be in substanfially
the form of either the 2002 ISDA Master Agreemeni or the Local Currency — Single Jurisdiction
version or the Multicurrency— Cross Border version of the 1992 ISDA Master Agreement
(including a Schedule and/or a Credit Support Annex to such Schedule, if applicable) published
by ISDA or any successor form to either published by ISDA, and in the appropriate
confirmations of transactions governed by the applicable agreement, with such insertions,
completions and modifications thereof as shall be approved by the officer of the City executing
the same, his or her execution to constitute conclusive evidence of the City Council's approval
of such insertions, completions and modifications thereof Should any ISDA form not be the
appropriate form to accomplish the objectives of the City under this Section 14, then such other
agreement as may be appropriate is hereby approved, the execufion by the Mayor or an
Authorized Officer being conduslve evidence of the City Council's approval of such insertions,
completions and modifications thereof Amounts payable by the City under any Interest Rale
Exchange Agreement shall (i) constitute a general obligation of the City for which is pledged its
full faith and credit, (ii) be payable from a tax unlimited as lo rale or amounl that may have
heretofore or shall be hereafter levied by the City Council (including, with respect only to an
Interest Rale Exchange Agreemeni relating to the Bonds, the tax levy described in Section 7
hereof), (iii) constitute operating expenses of the City payable from any monies, revenues,
income, assets or funds of the City available for such purpose, or (iv) constitute any combination
of (i), (ii), and (iii), all as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer. Nothing contained in ttiis
Section 14 shall limit or restrict the authority of the Mayor or an Authorized Officer to enter into
similar agreements pursuant lo prior or subsequent authorizafion of the City Council.
The Mayor and an Authorized Officer are hereby aulhorized to take all actions necessary
to assign, terminate, amend or modify all or a portion of any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement
upon a determination that such assignment, terminafion, amendment or modificafion is in the
best financial interest of Ihe City. Any settlement, breakage or termination amount payable as a
result of such assignment, termination, amendment or modificafion may be paid from proceeds
of sale of the Bonds or General Obligation Indebtedness or from any lawfully available funds of
the City.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-37-

 Any amounts received by the City pursuant to any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement
(other than regularly scheduled payment amounts) are hereby authorized to be expended for
any purpose for which the proceeds of the related City Indebtedness are aulhorized to be
expended and for the payment or prepayment of any City Indebtedness, all as determined by an
Authorized Officer.
In addifion to the foregoing, the Mayor and an Authorized Officer are hereby authorized
lo take all actions necessary to assign, terminate, amend or modify all or a portion of any
agreement of the type described herein as an Interest Rate Exchange Agreemeni wilh respect
to any Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness upon a determination that such assignment,
termination, amendment or modificafion is in the best financial interest of the City. Any
settlement, breakage or terminafion amount payable as a result of such assignment,
termination, amendment or modification may be paid from the sources provided for the payment
of such agreements in the proceedings authorizing the Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness to
which such agreements relate or from any other lav^rfully available funds of the City.
(b)
It is necessary and in the best interests of the City to avail itself of the services of
Swap Providers under the statutory and regulatory regime contained in the Dodd-Frank Act and
the CFTC Regulations and in connection therewith, in addition to the amendments to the
Municipal Code contained in Section 26 hereof, the Mayor and each Aulhorized Officer are each
hereby authorized to execute and deliver (i) the ISDA Protocol Documentation in the form at the
fime prescribed by ISDA, which may include, among other documentation, the ISDA DF
Protocol Agreement, the ISDA DF Supplement, the ISDA DF Protocol Quesfionnaire and related
Addenda and (ii) one or more bilateral agreements with one or more providers of Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements (each, a "Bilateral Agreement'), which Bilateral Agreements shall be
responsive to the applicable provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act and the CFTC Regulations and
contain provisions similar to those in the ISDA Protocol Documentation. The ISDA Protocol
Documentation and the Bilateral Agreements shall be executed in the forms as described
above, in each case with such revisions, insertions, completions and modifications therein as
shall be approved by the Mayor or Authorized Officer executing the same that are not
inconsistent with the lerms and provisions of this Ordinance, such execution to consfilute
conclusive evidence of the approval of the Mayor or Authorized Officer executing the same and
this City Council of such revisions, insertions, completions and modifications thereof
Section 15.
The taxes levied for the years from and after 2012 for the payment of the
Outstanding Indebtedness or amounts due under any Exisfing Interest Rate Exchange
Agreement, to the extent the collection of such taxes is not necessary for the payment of all or a
portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof or for the payment of
amounts due under an Exisfing Interest Rate Exchange Agreemeni due to the termination of
such Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreemenf as authorized herein or pursuant to any other
authorization, may, al the direction of an Authorized Officer, be applied (A) as set forth in the
next paragraph or (B) to any other lawrful public purpose of the City designated by the City
Council including (i) the purposes set forth in clauses (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi) of the first
paragraph of Section 7 of this Ordinance, (ii) the payment of the costs of any capital projects for
which funds have been lawfully appropriated or (iii) the abatement of such taxes. There shall be

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-38-

 prepared by an Authorized Officer and filed with the County Clerks a certificate of reduction of
taxes heretofore levied for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding
by an Authorized Officer as provided in Secfions 12 and 13 hereof and directing the abatement
of the taxes heretofore levied to pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being refunded, including
the taxes levied for the years from and after 2012, if so determined by an Authorized Officer as
provided in the preceding sentence. In addition, any proceeds of the Outstanding Indebtedness
being held for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness, lo the extent such proceeds are
not necessary for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein or pursuant to any other authorization, may, al the direction of an Authorized
Officer, be applied lo any lawful public purpose of the City designated by the City Council,
including the payment of the Bonds (bul in the case of Bonds the interest on which is excluded
from gross income for federal income lax purposes, only upon receipt by the City of an opinion
of Bond Counsel to the effect that such will not adversely affect the tax-exempt status of the
Bonds).
Furthermore, notwithstanding any other provision hereof taxes levied for the years 2012
to 2014, inclusive, for the payment of Outstanding Indebtedness, lo the extent the colleclion of
such taxes is not necessary for the payment of all or a portion of the Outstanding indebtedness
due to the refunding thereof with the proceeds of the Bonds may, in addition to the other
purposes set forth above, be applied lo the payment of the principal of and interest due on
General Obligation Commercial Paper Notes due on or before January 31, 2017. al the direcfion
of an Authorized Officer. Any directions or determinations by an Authorized Officer pursuant to
this paragraph shall be filed wilh the City Clerk no later than the date a levy is applied to the
payment of commercial paper as provided herein.
Section 16.
The City covenants that il will take no action in the investment of the
proceeds of the Bonds (other than Bonds issued as bonds the interest on which is not
excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal income lax purposes) which
would result in making the interest payable on any of such Bonds subject to federal income
taxes by reason of such Bonds being classified as "arbitrage bonds" within the meaning of
Section 148 of the Code.
The City further covenants that it will act with respect to the proceeds of Bonds (other
than Bonds issued as bonds the interest on which is not excludable from the gross income of
the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes), the earnings on the proceeds of such Bonds
and any other moneys on deposit in any fund or account maintained in respect of such Bonds,
including, if necessary, a rebate of such earnings lo the United States of America, in a manner
which would cause the interest on such Bonds to continue lo be exempt from federal income
taxation under Section 103(a) of the Code.
Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute such certifications, tax returns,
covenants and agreements as shall be necessary, in the opinion of nationally recognized bond
counsel, or in the best interest of the City, as determined by an Authorized Officer, to evidence
the City's compliance with the covenants contained in this section. Each Authorized Officer is

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-39-

 hereby aulhorized to execute one or more declarations of intent to reimburse costs of the
Project in accordance wilh the Code and the Treasury Regulafions thereunder.
Section 17. This Ordinance is prepared in accordance with the powers of the City as a
home rule unit under Article Vll of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. The appropriate officers of the
City are hereby authorized to take such actions and do such things as shall be necessary lo
perform, carry out, give effect to and consummate the transactions contemplated by this
Ordinance and the Bonds, including, but not limited to, the exercise following the delivery date
of any of the Bonds of any power or authority delegated to such official of the City under this
Ordinance with respect lo the Bonds upon the initial issuance thereof, but subject lo any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth, and any actions
heretofore taken by such officers of the City in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby ratified and approved.
Section 18. The Mayor and each Aulhorized Officer may each designate another to act
as their respective proxy and, as applicable, to affix their respective signatures lo the Bonds
whether in temporary or definitive form, and any other instrument, certificate or document
required to be signed by the Mayor or an Authorized Officer pursuant to this Ordinance and any
instrument, certificate or document required thereby. In such case, each shall send to the City
Council written notice of the person so designated by each, such notice stating the name of the
person so selected and identifying the instruments, certificates and documents which such
person shall be authorized to sign as proxy for the Mayor and each Authorized Officer,
respectively. A written signature of the Mayor or of an Authorized Officer, respectively,
executed by the person so designated underneath, shall be attached to each notice. Each
notice, with the signatures attached, shall be recorded in the Journal of Proceedings of the City
Council for such date and filed in the office of the City Clerk. When the signature of the Mayor
is placed on an instrument, certificate or document at the direction of the Mayor in the specified
manner, the same, in all respects, shall be as binding on the City as if signed by the Mayor in
person. When the signature of an Authorized Officer is so affixed to an instrument, certificate or
document at the direction of such Authorized Officer, the same, in all respects, shall be as
binding on the City as if signed by such Authorized Officer in person.
Section 19. If requested by the Bond Registrar, the Mayor, each Aulhorized Officer and
Ihe City Clerk are each authorized to execute the standard form of agreemeni between the City
and the Bond Registrar wilh respect to the obligations and duties thereof.
Section 20.
If payment or provision for payment is made, to or for the registered
owners of all or a portion of the Bonds, of the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital
Appreciation Bond and the principal of and interest due and to become due on any Current
Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond al the times and in the manner sfipulaled therein, and there
is paid or caused to be paid to the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax
Escrow Agent as provided in Section 9 hereof or such bank or trust company as shall be
designated by an Authorized Officer (such bank or trust company hereinafter referred to as a
"Defeasance Escrow Agent"), all sums of money due and lo become due according lo the
provisions hereof, then these presents and the estate and rights hereby granted shall cease,

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-40-

 the proceeds of that sale in escrow securifies which, together with money to remain so held in
trust, shall be sufficient to provide for payment of principal, redemption premium, if any, and
interest on any of the defeased Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness, as appropriate. Amounts
held by the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, any
Defeasance Escrow Agent or any Refunding Escrow Agent in excess of the amounts needed so
to provide for payment of the defeased Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness, as appropriate,
may be subject lo withdrawal by the City. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver from time to time one or more agreements (and amendments
thereto) with counterparties selected by an Authorized Officer, with respect lo the investment
and use of such excess amounts held by the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad
Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, a Defeasance Escrow Agent or a Refunding Escrow Agent.
Section 21.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, the terms and
provisions of the trust indenture securing a series of Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in
Section 2 hereof wilh respect to (a) the authenficafion, registration, transfer and destruction or
loss of such Variable Rate Bonds, (b) subject to the limitation on redemption price set forth in
Section 3(d) hereof, the redempfion of such Variable Rate Bonds, or (c) the method of payment
or defeasance of such Variable Rate Bonds, shall apply to such Variable Rate Bonds issued
pursuant lo this Ordinance. With respect to the Direct Purchase Bonds, an Authorized Officer is
authorized lo negotiate the terms and provisions of such Direct Purchase Bonds in addition to or
as an alternative to the terms and provisions of the trust indenture securing a series of Variable
Rate Bonds.
Section 22. Any series of the Bonds, the Outstanding Indebtedness or the Outstanding
Revenue Indebtedness may be restructured in a manner authorized by the Mayor or an
Authorized Officer, including but not limited to (a) terminafing credii enhancement or liquidity
facilities for a series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness, (b) replacing credit enhancement or liquidity facilities for a series of Bonds,
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness with similar credii
enhancement or liquidity from a different provider, (c) replacing credii enhancement or liquidity
facilities for a series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness wilh different forms of credit enhancement or liquidity from the same or a different
provider, (d) adding additional credit enhancement or liquidity supplemental to that securing a
series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness,
(e) removing or amending provisions for a series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness, or in financing documents related thereto, lo or for the
benefit of credit enhancers or liquidity providers or adding provisions for the benefit of new or
replacement credit enhancers or liquidity providers, (f) replacing an existing remarketing agent
or remarkefing agents for Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness with a remarketing agent or remarketing agents selected by an Authorized Officer
or assigning an exisfing remarketing agreement lo a remarketing agent or remarketing agents
selected by an Authorized Officer, (g) converting to or adding a different interest rate mode or
modes under the documents pursuant to which such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness were issued, (h) adding a floafing rate note (FRN) mode to
any document pursuant to which such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-42-

 Revenue Indebtedness were issued or refunding such Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness using an FRN structure, or (i) selling or remarketing
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness pursuant to a direct purchase
arrangement to one or more purchasers selected by an Aulhorized Officer either al par or with a
discount or premium, subject to any limitafions or restrictions with respect to such actions being
taken contained in this Ordinance with respect lo the Bonds or an ordinance pursuant to which
such Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued, but
provided, that if determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary to achieve the financial
interests of the City, such limitations or restrictions contained in an ordinance pursuant to which
such Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued may be
exceeded, but not in excess of the comparable limitations set forth in this Ordinance. The
Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into any amendments to or
restatements of existing documents or lo execute new documents, to consent to actions being
taken by others or to obtain the consent of other parties, and to cause to be prepared such
remarketing documents, including disclosure documents, as may be necessary or desirable to
effect any such debt restructuring and facilitate the remarketing of the Bonds, Outstanding
Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness, and lo pay the fees, costs and expenses
relating thereto, as the Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer executing the same delermines is
necessary and desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or an Authorized Officer to
evidence the City Council's approval of all such amendments.
Section 23. Any funds heretofore or hereafter received by the City, pursuant to any
Interest Rate Exchange Agreemeni and in connection with Outstanding Indebtedness, are
hereby authorized to be expended for the payment or prepayment of any City Indebtedness;
provided however, notwithstanding the foregoing, such authorization shall not apply to any
funds the expenditure of which shall have been heretofore aulhorized by other applicable law.
Section 24. To provide increased financial flexibility and protection to the City in
connecfion with Financing Transacfions, the Mayor and each Authorized Officer are each
hereby authorized lo obtain one or more letters of credit, lines of credit, loan payment
undertaking agreements or other forms of financial security or credit enhancement to secure
payment of amounts due from the City in connection wilh each such Financing Transaction,
including payment of any purchase option price (each such document, instrument or form of
financial security or credii enhancement being hereinafter referred to as a "Financing Credit
Facility') wilh one or more financial institutions. The Mayor and each Authorized Officer are
each hereby authorized to enter into one or more reimbursement agreements (each, a
"Financing Reimbursement Agreement") and to execute and issue one or more promissory
notes (each a "Financing Note") in connection with such Financing Credit Facilifies. Any
Financing Credit Facility, Financing Reimbursement Agreement or Financing Note shall be in
substantially the form of the credii facilities, reimbursement agreements and promissory notes,
respectively, previously entered into by the City in connection with existing Financing
Transactions, exisfing lines of credii secured by the City or the sale of general obligation bonds
or notes by the City, but with such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer
executing the same shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by the
Mayor or an Authorized Officer to evidence the City Council's approval of all such revisions.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-43-

 The annual fee paid to any financial institution that provides a Financing Credit Facility shall not
exceed three percent of the principal amount of the Financing Credit Facility outstanding during
such annual period. The final form of any Financing Credit Facility, Financing Reimbursement
Agreement or Financing Note entered into by the City pursuant to this paragraph shall be filed in
the office of the City Clerk. The payment obligation of the City (each, a "Financing Payment
Obligation") in connection with any Financing Credii Facility, Financing Reimbursement
Agreement or Financing Note shall be a general obligation of the City for the payment of which,
both principal and interest, the City pledges its full faith, credii and resources. Each such
Financing Payment Obligation shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding 18 percent per annum
and shall mature not later than the fortieth anniversary of the final date of payment by the City
under the related Financing Transaction (including the payment of any purchase option price).
The Mayor and each Authorized Officer are each hereby authorized to execute and deliver any
such Financing Credit Facility, Financing Reimbursement Agreement or Financing Note, and
any amendment thereto or replacement thereof, under the seal of the City affixed and attested
by the City Clerk. In connection with any Financing Transacfion, the Mayor and each
Authorized Officer are each hereby aulhorized to retain one or more financial institutions to act
as paying agent on behalf of the City. The City shall appropriate or otherwise provide amounts
sufficient to pay when due all Financing Payment Obligations, and the City hereby covenanis to
take timely action as required by law lo carry out the provisions of this paragraph, but, if for any
such year it fails to do so, this Ordinance shall constitute a continuing appropriafion ordinance of
such amounts without any further action on the part of the City Council.
Section 25.
as follows:

Section 3 of the 2002 Ordinance is hereby amended in its entirety to read

Section 3. Maximum Amounl and Term. Without further authorization of this City
Council, the maximum aggregate principal amount of all Aulhorized Debt outstanding
under this ordinance at any fime shall not exceed One Billion Dollars ($1,000,000,000)
(exclusive of unpaid interest and fees). All Authorized Debt shall mature on or prior to
January 1, 2032.
Section 26.
Section 2-32-031 of the Municipal Code is hereby amended by deleting the
language stricken through and by inserting the language underscored, as follows:
2-32-031 Debt Management Policies; retention of rebate calculation agents,
financial advisors and qualified independent representatives.
(a) The chief financial officer and the comptroller shall each have
authority to retain, in connection wilh debt obligations issued by the City, such
rebate calculation agents as either such officer may deem necessary or desirable
in order for such debt obligations to comply with applicable requirements of the
Internal Revenue Code. As-^JGGd in this section, the-tefm-^ief finaneiaf-effieef^
stelf-mean the chief financial officer of the City appointed by the moyofr

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-44-

 (b) The chief financial officer shall have authoritv_Lo_retain. in connectioj]
with financial products and, debt obligations purchased, entered into and/or
issued by the Cjty^uch advisors lo provide structuring timing and related advice
Lor such financial products and debt obligations, as deemed necessary, in
compliance with the applicable reouirements of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Public Law 111-203. and the regulations
in connection therewith.
(C)L The chief financial officer shall have authority to retain, in conneciLop
with debt obligations issued bv the Citv. sui:Ji_gualified independent
representatives for selecting, retaining and monitoring_th_e_performance of the
City's interest_raje exchange agreements, as deemed necessary or desirable in
order for s_uch interest rate exchange agreements to comply with applicable
requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act and the regulations in connection therewith.
As used in this section, "interest rate exchange agreements" shall mean those
certain interest rate exchange agreements entered into pursuant to an ordinance
of the city council authorizing the issuance of a series of bonds.
(d) The chief financial officer shall have authority to adopt written policjgs
which shall address the management of the city's bond, note and other debt
issuances, including the entering into of interest rate exchange agreements and
hiring of advisors in connection therewith. The chief financial officer mav amend
such written policies from time to lime. Copies of each such written policy and
any amendments thereto shall be kept on file with the comptroller
Section 27.
To the extent that any ordinance, resolution, rule, order or provision of the
Municipal Code, or part thereof is in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions
of this Ordinance shall be controlling. If any secfion, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such secfion, paragraph, clause or provision
shall not affect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance. No provision of the Municipal
Code or violation of any provision of the Municipal Code shall be deemed to render voidable at
the option of the City any document, instrument or agreement authorized hereunder or to impair
the validity of this Ordinance or the instruments authorized by this Ordinance or to impair the
rights of the owners of the Bonds to receive payment of the principal "of or interest on the Bonds
or to impair the security for the Bonds; provided further that the foregoing shall not be deemed
to affect the availability of any other remedy or penally for any violation of any provision of the
Municipal Code.
Section 28.
This Ordinance shall be published by the City Clerk, by causing to be
printed in special pamphlet form at least five copies hereof, which copies are to be made
available in her office for public inspection and distnbufion to members of the public who may
wish to avail themselves of a copy of this Ordinance.
Section 29.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its adopfion,
approval by the Mayor and publication as provided herein.

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-45-

    



 

 

EXHIBITB

REVOLVING CREDIT AGREEMENT

REVOLVING CREDIT AGREEMENT

dated as of February 1,2014

between

CITY OF CHICAGO

and

MORGAN SPANLEY BANK , N .A.

.^.s:i228y.UI 12 doc

 TABLE OK CONTENTS
SECTION

HEADING
DEFINITIONS AND ACCOU.NTING TERMS

ARTICLE I

Section
Section
Section
Section
Section

1.01.
1.02.
1.03.
1.04.
1.05.

ARTICLE II

Section 2.01.
Section 2.02.
Section 2.03.
Section 2.04.
Section 2.05.
Section 2.06.
Section 2.07.
Section 2.08.
Section 2.09.
Section 2.10.
Section 2.11.
Section 2.12.
ARTICLE III
Section 3.01.
Section 3.02.
Section 3.03.
Section 3.04.
Section 3.05.
Section 3.06.
ARTICLE IV

Section 4.01.
Section 4.02.
Section 4.03.
ARTICLE V

Section 5.01.
Section 5.02.
Section 5.03.
Section 5.04.

Defined Terms
Other Interpretive Provisions
Accounting Terms
Rounding
Times of Day
THE COMMITMENTS AND CREDIT EXTENSIONS

Loans
Borrowings and Conversions of Loans
Prepayments
Termination or Reduction of Commitment
Repayment of Loans
Interest
Fees
Computation of Interest and Fees
Evidence of Debt
Payments
Extension of Commitment Termination Date
Maximum Rate
TAXES , YIELD PROTECTION AND ILLEGALITY

Taxes
Increased Costs
Illegality
Inability to Determine Rates
Compensation for Losses
Survival
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO BORROWINGS

Conditions of Initial Borrowing; Authority;
Enforceability
Conditions to All Borrowings
Conditions to Term Loan
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES

Due Authorization
Enforceability
Ordinance
Consents

PAGE
1

1
11
12
12
13
13

13
13
14
15
15
15
16
16
17
17
17
17
18

18
20
22
22
22
23
23

23
24
25
25

25
25
25
26

 Section 5.05.
Section 5.06.
Section 5.07.
Sedion 5.08.
Section 5.09.
Section 5.10.
Section 5.11.
Section 5.12.
Section 5.13.
Section 5.14.
Section 5.15.
Section 5.16.
Section 5.17.
Section 5.18.
Section 5.19.
ARTICLE VI

Section 6.01.
ARTICLE VII

Section 7.01.
Section 7.02.
ARTICLE

Vlll

Section 8.01.
Section 8.02.
Section 8.03.
Section 8.04.
Section 8.05.
Section 8.06.
Section 8.07.
Section 8.08.
Section 8.09.
Section 8.10.
Section 8.11.
Section 8.12.
Section 8.13.
Section 8.14.
Section 8.15.
Section 8.16.
Section 8.17.
Section 8.18.

No Violation
Litigation
Security
Organization
Financial Statements
Absence of Default
Environmental Laws
No Proposed Legal Changes
Reserved
Solvent
Disclosure
Use of Proceeds; Margin Stock
Investment Company
ERISA
OFAC Sanctions
COVENANTS

Affirmative Covenants of the City
DEFAULTS

Events of Default and Remedies
Remedies
MISCELLANEOUS

Amendments, Etc
Notices; Effectiveness; Electronic Communication
No Waiver; Cumulative Remedies; Enforcement
Costs and Expenses; Damage Waiver
Payments Set Aside
Successors and Assigns; Participations
Treatment of Certain Information; Confidentiality
Counterparts; Integration; Effectiveness
Survival of Representations and Warranties
Severability
Governing Law; Jurisdiction; Etc
Waiver of Jury Trial
No Advi.sory or Fiduciary Relationship ;
Electronic Execution of Certain Documents
USA Patriot Act
Time of the Essence
Entire Agreement
No Third-Party Rights

26
26
26
26
26
27
27
27
27
27
27
27
28
28
28
28

28
30

30
32
33

33
33
34
34
35
36
36
37
37
37
38
39
39
39
39
40
40
40

 SCHEDULES

8.02

—

Lender's Office, Certain Addresses for Notices

EXHIBITS

Form of
A
"
B
C
—

Loan Notice
Note
Compliance Certificate

111 -

 REVOLVING CREDIT AGREEMENT

This REVOLVING CREDIT AGREEMENT (as amended, modified or supplemented from time
to time, this "Agreement") is entered into as of February 1, 2014, between the CiTY OF CHICAGO,
a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local government duly organized and exi.sting
under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois (the "City"), and Morgan Stanley Bank,
N.A., a national banking association (the "Lender").
The City has requested that the Lender provide a revolving credit facility, and the Lender
is willing to do so on the terms and conditions set forth herein. In consideration of the mutual
covenants and agreements herein contained, the parties hereto covenant and agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS AND ACCOUNTING TERMS

Section 7.07. Defined Terms. As used in this Agreement, the following terms have the
meanings set forth below:
"Affiliate" means, with respect lo a Person, any Person (whether for-profit or not-forprofit), which "controls," is "controlled" by, or is under common "conlrol" wilh such Person.
For purposes of this definition, a Person "controls" another Person when the first Person
possesses or exercises directly, or indirectly through one or more other affiliates or related
entities, the power to direct the management and policies of the other Person, whether through
the ownership of voting rights, membership, the power to appoint members, trustees or directors,
by contract, or otherwise.
"Agreement" has the meaning set forth in the introductory paragraph hereto.
"Applicable Rate" means, the rates per annum associated with the Rating as specified
below:

In the event all three Rating Agencies provide a Rating and there is a split Rating (i.e., the Rating
of any of Moody's, S&P or Fitch is at a different Level in the pricing grid set forth above than
the rating of either of the other Rating Agencies), the Applicable Rate shall be based upon the
Level in which the lower of the two highest Ratings appears (unless two of the Ratings appear in

 the same Level in which case the Applicable Rate shall be based upon that Level). In the event
only two Rating Agencies provide a Rating and there is a split Rating, the Applicable Rate shall
be based upon the Level in which the lower Rating appears. Any change in the Applicable Rate
resulting from a change in a Rating will be and become effective as of and on the date of the
announcement of the change in such Rating. References to ratings above are references to rating
categories as presently determined by the Rating Agencies and in the event of adoption of any
new or changed rating system by any such Rating Agency including, without limitation, any
recalibration of the long-term debt rating of any debt of the City in connection with the adoption
of a "global" rating scale, each of the Ratings from the Rating Agency in question referred to
above will be deemed to refer to the rating category under the new rating system which most
closely approximates the applicable rating category as currently in effect. The City
acknowledges, and the Lender agrees, that as of the Closing Date the Applicable Rate is that
specified above for Level 4.
"Authorized Officer" means the Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer, the City Comptroller
or any other officer of the City authorized to act on its behalf.
"Availability Period" means the period from and including the Closing Date to the
Commitment Termination Date.
"Base Rate" means, for any day, a fluctuating rate of interest per annum equal to the
greatest of (i) the Prime Rate in effect at such time plus H l i ^ H ^ ^ H H B ^''^
Federal
Funds Rate in effect at such time /'^'^'^ H   ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ H H
^''') 
"Borrowing" means a borrowing of Loans from the Lender pursuant to Section 2.01
hereof.
"Business Day" means a day which is not (a) a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday on
which banking institutions in New York, New York or Chicago, Illinois are authorized by law to
close, (b) a day on which the New York Stock Exchange or the Federal Reserve Bank is closed
or (c) a day on which the principal office ofthe Lender is closed.
"Cliange in Law" means the occurrence, after the Closing Date, of any of the following:
(a) the adoption or taking effect of any law, rule, regulation or treaty, (b) any change in any law,
rule, regulation or treaty or in the administration, interpretation, implementation or application
thereof by any Governmental Authority or (c) the making or issuance of any request, rule,
guideline or directive (whether or not having the force of law) by any Governmental Authority;
provided that notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, (i) the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act and all requests, rules, guidelines or directives thereunder
or issued in connection therewith and (ii) all requests, rules, guidelines or directives promulgated
by the Bank for International Settlements, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (or any
successor or similar authority) or the United States or foreign regulatory authorities, in each case
pursuant to Basel III, will in each case be deemed to be a "Change in Law", regardless of the
date enacted, adopted or issued.

 "City" has the meaning set forth in the introductory paragraph hereto.
"Closing Date" means the first date all the conditions precedent in Section 4.01 are
satisfied or waived in accordance with Section 8.01 hereof.
"Code" means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and. where appropriate
any statutory predecessor or any successor thereto.
"Commitment" means the Lender's obligation to make Loans to the City pursuant to
Section 2.01, in an aggregate principal amount at any one time outstanding not to exceed the
Commitment Amount, as such Commitment Amount may be adjusted from time to time in
accordance with this Agreement.
"Commitment Amount" means $100,000,000.
"Commitment Fee" has the meaning set forth in Section 2.07(a) hereof.
"Commitment Fee Rate" means, for each day during a month, the sum of (i) the
Eurodollar Rate, plus (ii) the Commitment Fee Rate Margin.
"Commitment Fee Rate Margin" means the rate per annum associated with the Rating
(as defined below), as specified below:

In the event all three Rating Agencies provide a Rating and there is a split Rating (i.e., the Rating
of any of Moody's, S&P or Fitch is at a different Level in the pricing grid set forth above than
the rafing of either of the other Rating Agencies), the Commitment Fee Rate Margin shall be
based upon the Level in which the lower of the two highest Ratings appears (unless two of the
Ratings appear in the same Level in which case the Commitment Fee Margin Rate shall be based
upon that Level). In the event only two Rating Agencies provide a Rating and there is a split
Rating, the Commitment Fee Rate Margin shall be based upon the Level in which the lower
Rating appears. Any change in the Commitment Fee Rate Margin resulting from a change in a
Rating will be and become effective as of and on the date of the announcement of the change in
such Rating. References to ratings above are references to rating categories as presently
determined by the Rating Agencies and in the event of adoption of any new or changed rating

 system by any such Rating Agency including, without limitation, any recalibration of the longterm debt rating of any debt of the City in connection with the adoption of a "global" rating
scale, each of the Ratings from the Rating Agency in question referred to above refers to the
rating category under the new rating system which most closely approximates the applicable
rating category as currently in effect. The City acknowledges, and the Lender agrees, that as of
the Closing Date the Commitment Fee Rate Margin is that specified above for Level 4. Upon the
occurrence and during the continuance of an Event of Default or in the event that any Rating is
suspended, withdrawn or is otherwise unavailable for credit related reasons, the Commitment
Fee Rate Margin will increase to the rate set forth in Level 7.
"Commitment Termination Date" means the earliest of:
(a) February 20, 2016, or such later date as may be established pursuant to
Section 2.11 hereof; and
(b)
the date the Commitment is reduced to zero pursuant to Section 2.04 or
Section 7.02 hereof.
"Corporate Fund" means the City's general operating fund, which supports basic City
operations and services .such as public safety, public health, waste collection and recycling.
"Debt" of any Person means at any date, without duplication, (i) all obligations of such
Person for borrowed money, (ii) all obligations of such Person evidenced by bonds, debentures,
notes or other similar instruments, (iii) all obligations of such Person to pay the deferred
purchase price of property or services, except trade accounts payable in the ordinary course of
business, (iv) all obligations of such Person as lessee under capital leases, (v) all Debts of others
secured by a lien on any asset of such Person, whether or not such Debts are assumed by such
Person, (vi) all Guarantees by such Person of Debt of other Persons, (vii) all obligations of such
Person to reimburse or repay any bank or other Person in respect of amounts paid or advanced
under a letter of credit, credit agreement, liquidity facility or other instrument, and (viii) net
obligations of such Person under any Swap Contract.
"Debtor Relief Laws" means the Bankruptcy Code of the United States, and all other
liquidation, conservatorship, bankruptcy, assignment for the benefit of creditors, moratorium,
rearrangement, receivership, insolvency, reorganization, or similar debtor relief Laws of the
United States or other applicable jurisdictions from time to time in effect.
"Default" means any event or condition that, with the giving of any notice, the passage
of time, or both, would be an Event of Default.
"Default Rate" means, for any day, a rate of interest per annum equal to the greater of (i)
the sum of the Base Rate in effect on such day p l u t ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ B ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ H and (ii)

'Dollar" and "$" mean lawful money of the United States.

 "Draw Fees" has the meaning set forth in Section 2.07(c) hereof.
"ERISA" means the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
"Eurodollar Rate" means, for any Interest Period with respect to a Eurodollar Rate Loan
or the calculation of the Commitment Fee Rate, the rate per annum equal to (i) the LIBOR rate
quoted by the Lender from Reuters Screen LIBOR 1 Page or any successor thereto at
approximately 11:00 a.m., London time, two London Banking Days prior to the commencement
of such Interest Period, for Dollar deposits (for delivery on the first day of such Interest Period)
with a term equivalent to such Interest Period or, (ii) if such rate is not available at such time for
any reason, the rate per annum commercially reasonably selected by the Lender to be the rate at
which deposits in Dollars for delivery on the first day of such Interest Period in same day funds
in the approximate amount of the Eurodollar Rate Loan being made, continued or converted and
with a term equivalent to such Interest Period would be offered by Bank of America's London
Branch to major banks in the London interbank eurodollar market at their request at
approximately 11:00 a.m. (London time) two London Banking Days prior to the commencement
of such Interest Period.
"Eurodollar Rare Loan " means a Loan that bears interest at the Eurodollar Rate, plus the
Applicable Rate.
"Event of Default" has the meaning specified in Section 7.01 hereof.
"Excess Interest" has the meaning specified in Section 2.12 hereof.
"Excluded Taxes" means any of the following Taxes imposed on or with respect to the
Lender or required to be withheld or deducted from a payment to the Lender, (a) Taxes imposed
on or measured by net income (however denominated), franchise Taxes, and branch profits
Taxes, in each case, (i) imposed as a result of the Lender being organized under the laws of, or
having its principal office located in the jurisdiction imposing such Tax (or any political
subdivision thereoO or (ii) that are Other Connection Taxes, (b) in the case of the Lender, U.S.
federal withholding Taxes impcsed on amounts payable to or for the account of the Lender
pursuant to a law in effect on the date on which the Lender acquires such interest in the Loans or
the Commitment and (c) Taxes attributable to the Lender's failure to comply with
Section 3.01(e).
"Federal Funds Rate" means, for any day, the rate per annum equal to the weighted
average of the rates on overnight federal funds transactions with members of the Federal Reserve
System arranged by federal funds brokers on such day, as published by the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York on the Business Day next succeeding such day: provided that (a) if such day is not
a Business Day, the Federal Funds Rate for such day will be such rate on such transactions on
the next preceding Business Day as so published on the next succeeding Business Day, and (b) if
no such rate is so published on such next succeeding Business Day, the Federal Funds Rate for
such day will be the average rate (rounded upward, if necessary, to a whole multiple of 1/100
of 1%) charged to the Lender on such day on such transactions as determined by the Lender.

-5-

 "Fee Payment Date" has the meaning specified in Section 2.07(a) hereof.
"Fitch" means Fitch, Inc., and any successor rating agency.
"Floating Rate" means, for any day, the fluctuating rate of interest equal to the greater of
(i) the Prime Rate, or (ii) the Federal Funds Rate plus ^ H l ; provided, that subject to
Section 2.12 hereof, at no time will the Floating Rate exceed the Maximum Rate.
"Floating Rate Loan" means a Loan that bears interest based on the Floating Rate.
"FRB" means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System of the United
States, together with any successors thereof.
"General Obligarion Debt" means general obligation Debt payable from any moneys,
revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City legally available for such purposes.
"Generally Accepted Accounting Principles" or "GAAP" means generally accepted
accounting principles in effect from time to time in the United States and applicable to entities
such as the City.
"Governmental Authoriry" means the government of the United States or any other
nation, or of any political subdivision thereof, whether state or local, and any agency, authority,
instrumentality, regulatory body, court, central bank or other entity exercising executive,
legislative, judicial, taxing, regulatory or administrative powers or functions of or pertaining to
government (including any supra-national bodies such as the European Union or the European
Central Bank).
"Guarantee" means, as to any Person, (a) any obligation, contingent or otherwise, of
such Person guaranteeing or having the economic effect of guaranteeing any Debt or other
obligation payable or performable by another Person (the "primary obligor") in any manner,
whether directly or indirectly, and including any obligation of such Person, direct or indirect,
(i) to purchase or pay (or advance or supply funds for the purchase or payment of) such Debt or
other obligation, or (ii) entered into for the purpose of assuring in any other manner the obligee
in respect of such Debt or other obligation of the payment or performance thereof or to protect
such obligee against loss in respect thereof (in whole or in part), or (b) any Lien on any assets of
such Person securing any Debt or other obligation of any other Person, whether or not such Debt
or other obligation is assumed by such Person (or any right, contingent or otherwise, of any
holder of such Debt to obtain any such Lien). The amount of any Guarantee will be deemed to
be an amount equal to the stated or determinable amount of the related primary obligation, or
portion thereof, in respect of which such Guarantee is made or, if not stated or determinable, the
maximum reasonably anticipated liability in respect thereof as determined by the guaranteeing
Person in good faith. The term "Guarantee" as a verb has a corresponding meaning.
"Indemnified Taxes" means (a) Taxes, other than Excluded Taxes, imposed on or with
respect to any payment made by or on account of any obligation of the City under the Agreement
or the Note and (b) to the extent not otherwise described in (a), Other Taxes.
-6-

 "Indemnitees" has the meaning specified in Section 8.04(b) hereof.
"Information" has the meaning specified in Section 8.07 hereof.
"Initial Term Loan Payment Date" means the first January 1 or July 1 to occur at least
120 days following the Commitment Termination Date.
"Interest Payment Date" means, (a) as to any Eurodollar Rate Loan, the last day of each
Interest Period applicable to such Loan and the Commitment Termination Date; and (b) as to any
Floating Rate Loan and the Term Loan, the first Business Day of each month.
"Interest Period" means, (i) as to each Eurodollar Rate Loan, the period commencing on
the date such Eurodollar Rate Loan is disbursed or converted to or continued as a Eurodollar
Rate Loan and ending on the date one month thereafter, as selected by the City in its Loan Notice
and (ii) for the calculation of the Commitment Rate, the period from the Closing Date through
February 28,2014, and each calendar month thereafter; provided that with respect to each
Eurodollar Rate Loan:
(i)
any Interest Period that would otherwise end on a day that is not a
Business Day will be extended to the next succeeding Business Day unless such Business
Day falls in another calendar month, in which case such Interest Period will end on the
next preceding Business Day;
(ii)
any Interest Period that begins on the last Business Day of a calendar
month (or on which there is no numerically corresponding day in the calendar month at
the end of such Interest Period) will end on the last Business Day of the calendar month
at the end of such Interest Period; and
(iii)

no Interest Period will extend beyond the Commitment Termination Date.

"IRS" means the United States Internal Revenue Service.
"Laws" means, collectively, all international, foreign, Federal, state and local statutes,
treaties, rules, guidelines, regulations, ordinances, codes and administrative or judicial
precedents or authorities, including the interpretation or administration thereof by any
Governmental Authority charged with the enforcement, interpretation or administration thereof,
and all applicable administrative orders, directed duties, requests, licenses, authorizations and
permits of, and agreements with, any Governmental Authority, in each case whether or not
having the force of law.
"Lender" has the meaning specified in the introductory paragraph hereto.
"Lending Office'" means, the office or offices of the Lender described as such in
Schedule 8.02, or such other office or offices as the Lender may from time to time notify the
City.

 "Lien" means any mortgage, pledge, hypothecation, assignment, deposit arrangement,
encumbrance, lien (statutory or other), charge, or preference, priority or other security interest or
preferential arrangement in the nature of a security interest of any kind or nature whatsoever
(including any conditional sale or other title retention agreement, any easement, right of way or
other encumbrance on title to real property, and any financing lease having substantially the
same economic effect as any of the foregoing).
"Loan" has the meaning specified in Section 2.01 hereof.
"Loan Nonce" means a notice of a Borrowing pursuant to Section 2.02(a), which, if in
writing, shall be substantially in the form of Exhibit A.
"London Banking Days" means any Business Day on which commercial banks are open
for business in London, England.
"Material Adverse Effect" means: (a) a material adverse change in, or a material adverse
effect upon, the operations, business, properties, liabilities (actual or contingent) or condition
(financial or otherwise) of the City; (b) a material impairment of the ability of the City to
perform its obligations under this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance; or (c) a material
adverse effect upon the legality, validity, binding effect or enforceability against the City of this
Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance.
"Maximum Rate" means the lesser of (i) eighteen percent (18%) and (ii) the maximum
non-usurious lawful rate of interest permitted by applicable law.
"Moody's" means Moody's Investors Service, Inc. and any successor rating agency.
"Note" means a promissory note made by the City in favor of the Lender evidencing
Loans and the Term Loan made by the Lender, substantially in the form of Exhibit B.
"Obligations" means all advances to, and debts, liabilities, obligations, covenants and
duties of, the City arising under this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance or otherwise with
respect to any Loan or Term Loan, whether direct or indirect (including those acquired by
assumption), absolute or contingent, due or to become due, now existing or hereafter arising and
including interest and fees that accrue after the commencement by or against the City of any
proceeding under any Debtor Relief Laws naming such Person as the debtor in such proceeding,
regardless of whether such interest and fees are allowed claims in such proceeding.
"OFAC" means the United States Department of Treasury Office of Foreign Assets
Control.
"OFAC Sanctions Programs" means all laws, regulations, and executive orders
administered by OFAC, including without limitation, the Bank Secrecy Act. anti-money
laundering laws (including, without limitation, the Patriot Act), and all economic and trade
sancUon programs administered by OFAC, any and all similar United States federal laws.

 regulations or executive orders, and any similar laws, regulations or orders adopted by any State
vvithin the United States.
"OFAC SDN List" means the list of the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked
Persons maintained by OFAC.
"Ordinance" means that certain ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on
February 5,2014, and published in a Special Pamphlet on February 10,2014.
"Other Connection Taxes" means Taxes imposed as a result of a present or former
connection between the Lender and the jurisdiction imposing such Tax (other than connections
arising from the Lender having executed, delivered, become a party to, performed its obligations
under, received payments under, received or perfected a security interest under, engaged in any
other transaction pursuant to or enforced this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance, or sold or
assigned an interest in the Loans or the Term Loan or this Agreement, the Note or the
Ordinance).
"Other Taxes" means all present or future stamp, court or documentary, intangible,
recording, filing or similar Taxes that arise from any payment made under, from the execution,
delivery, performance, enforcement or registration of, from the receipt or perfection of a security
interest under, or otherwi.se with respect to, this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance, except
any such Taxes that are Other Connection Taxes imposed with respect to an assignment.
"Outstanding Amount" means on any date, the aggregate outstanding principal amount
thereof after giving effect to any borrowings and prepayments or repayments of Loans occurring
on such date.
"Patriot Act" means the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate
Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001, Title III of Pub. L. 107-56
(signed into law October 26.2001).
"Person" means any natural person, corporation, limited liability company, trust, joint
venture, association, company, partnership. Governmental Authority or other entity.
"Prime Rate" means on any day, a fluctuating rate of interest per annum equal to the
"Prime Rate" listed daily in the "Money Rate" section of The Wall Street Journal, or if The Wall
Street Journal is not published on a particular business day, than the "prime rate" published in
any other national financial journal or newspaper selected by the Lender. Any change in the
Prime Rate shall take effect on the date specified in the announcement of such change.
"Property" means any interest in any kind of property or asset, whether real, personal or
mixed, or tangible or intangible, whether now owned or hereafter acquired.
"Rating" means the long-term unenhanced debt ratings assigned by each of Fitch, S&P
and Moody's to General Obligation Debt (without giving effect to any credit enhancement
securing such Debt).

 "Rating Agencies" means Fitch, Moody's and S&P.
"Reduction Fee" means an amount equal to the product of (A) the Commitment Fee Rate
in effect on the date of the permanent reduction of the Commitment pursuant to Section 2.04
hereof, (B) the difference between (x) the Commitment Amount immediately prior to such
reduction and (y) the Commitment Amount immediately after such reduction, and (C) a fraction,
the numerator of which is equal to the number of days from and including the date of such
reduction to and including the one year anniversary of the Closing Date, and the denominator of
which is 365/366, as applicable.
"Related Parries" means, with respect to any Person, such Person's Affiliates and the
partners, directors, officers, employees, agents and advisors of such Person and of such Person's
Affiliates.
"Request for Borrowing " means with respect to a Borrowing, a Loan Notice.
"S&P" means Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, a Standard & Poor's Financial
Services LLC business, and any successor rating agency.
"SEC" means the Securities and Exchange Commission, or any Governmental Authority
succeeding to any of its principal functions.
"State" means the State of Illinois.
"Swap Contract" means (a) any and all rate swap transactions, basis swaps, credit
derivative transactions, forward rate transactions, commodity swaps, commodity options,
forward commodity contracts, equity or equity index swaps or options, bond or bond price or
bond index swaps or options or forward bond or forward bond price or forward bond index
transactions, interest rate options, forward foreign exchange transactions, cap transactions, floor
transactions, collar transactions, currency swap transactions, cross-currency rate swap
transactions, currency options, spot contracts, or any other similar transactions or any
combination of any of the foregoing (including any options to enter into any of the foregoing),
whether or not any such transaction is governed by or subject to any master agreement, and
(b) any and all transactions of any kind, and the related confirmations, which are subject to the
terms and conditions of, or governed by, any form of master agreement published by the
International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc., any International Foreign Exchange
Master Agreement, or any other master agreement (any such master agreement, together with
any related schedules, a "Masrer Agreement"), including any such obligations or liabilities under
any Master Agreement.
"Ta.xes" means all present or future taxes, levies, imposts, duties, deductions,
withholdings (including backup withholding), assessments, fees or other charges imposed by any
Governmental Authority, including any interest, additions to tax or penalties applicable thereto.
"Term Loan" means the term loan made by the Lender to the City pursuant to the terms
of Section 2.05(b) hereof.
-10-

 "Term Loan Maturity Date" means, with respect to the Term Loan, the earliest to occur
of (i) the third (3rd) anniversary of the Commitment Termination Date, (ii) the date on which this
Agreement is terminated by the City and the Lender prior to the Commitment Termination Date,
and (iii) the date on which the Term Loan becomes due in accordance with Section 7.02 hereof.
"Term Loan Payment Dare" means (a) the Initial Term Loan Payment Date and each
January 1 and July 1 occurring after the Initial Term Loan Payment Date which occurs prior to
the Term Loan Maturity Date and (b) the Term Loan Maturity Date.
"Term Loan Rate" means, for each day of determination, a fluctuating rate per annum,
with respect to any Term Loan, equal to (i) for the period from and including the Commitment
Termination Date to but not including the date which is two hundred and seventy (270) calendar
days immediately following the Commitment Termination Date, the Base Rate from time to time
in effect, and (ii) for the period from and after the date which is two hundred and seventy (270)
calendar days immediately following the Commitment Termination Date and thereafter, the Base
Rate from time to time in effect plus one percent (1.0%); provided that from and after the
occurrence of an Event of Default, "Term Loan Rate" shall mean the Default Rate.
"Termination Fee" means an amount equal to the product of (A) the Commitment Fee
Rate in effect on the date of termination of the Commitment pursuant to Section 2.04 hereof, (B)
the Commitment Amount immediately prior to such termination and (C) a fraction, the
numerator of which is equal to the number of days from and including the date of termination to
and including the date that is the one-year anniversary of the Closing Date, and the denominator
of which is 365/366, as applicable.
"Total Outstandings" means the aggregate Outstanding Amount of all Loans.
"Type" means with respect to a Loan, its character as a Floating Rate Loan or a
Eurodollar Rate Loan.
"United States" and "U.S." mean the United States of America.
"written" or "in writing" means any form of written communication or a communication
by means of telex, telecopier device or electronic mail.
Section J.02. Other Interpretive Provisions. With reference to this Agreement, the Note
and the Ordinance, unless otherwise specified herein or in the Note or the Ordinance:
(a) The definitions of terms heiein apply equally to the singular and plural rorins of the
terms defined. Whenever the context may require, any pronoun includes the corresponding
masculine, feminine and neuter forms. The words "include" "includes" and "including" are
deemed to be followed by the phrase "without limitation." The word "will" will be construed to
have the same meaning and effect as the word "shall." Unless the context requires otherwise, (i)
any definition of or reference to any agreement, instrument or other document will be con.strued
as referring to such agreement, instrument or other document as from time to time amended,
supplemented or otherwise modified (subject to any restrictions on such amendments.

•11-

 supplements or modifications set forth herein or in the Note or the Ordinance), (ii) any reference
herein to any Person will be construed to include such Person's successors and assigns, (iii) the
words "hereto," "herein," "hereof and "hereunder," and words of similar import when used in
this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance, will be construed to refer to such document in its
entirety and not to any particular provision thereof, (iv) all references in this Agreement, the
Note or the Ordinance to Articles, Sections, Exhibits and Schedules will be con.strued to refer to
Articles and Sections of, and Exhibits and Schedules to, this Agreement, the Note or the
Ordinance in which such references appear, (v) any reference to any law includes all statutory
and regulatory provisions consolidating, amending, replacing or interpreting such law and any
reference to any law or regulation shall, unless otherwise specified, refer to such law or
regulation as amended, modified or supplemented from time to time, and (vi) the words "asser"
and "properry" will be construed to have the same meaning and effect and to refer to any and all
tangible and intangible assets and properties, including cash, securities, accounts and contract
rights.
(b) In the computation of periods of time from a specified date to a later specified date,
the word "from" means "from and including;" the words "ro" and "unriT each mean "to but
e.xcluding;" and the word "through" means "to and including."
(c) Section headings herein and in the Note and the Ordinance are included for
convenience of reference only and do not affect the interpretation of this Agreement, the Note or
the Ordinance.
Secrion J .03.

Accounring lerms.

(a) Generally. All accounting terms not specifically or completely defined herein will
be construed in conformity with, and all financial data (including financial ratios and other
financial calculations) required to be submitted pursuant to this Agreement shall be prepared in
conformity with, GAAP applied on a consistent basis, as in effect from time to time, applied in a
manner consistent with that used in preparing the Audited Financial Statements, e.xcept as
otherwise specifically prescribed herein.
(b) Changes in GAAP. If at any time any change in GAAP would affect the
computation of any financial ratio or requirement set forth in any Loan Document, and either the
City or the Lender shall so request, the Lender and the City shall negotiate in good faith to
amend such ratio or requirement to preserve the original intent thereof in light of such change in
GAAP; provided thar, until so amended, (A) such ratio or requirement will continue to be
computed in accordance with GAAP prior to such change therein and (B) the City shall provide
to the Lender financial statements and other documents required under this Agreement or as
reasonably requested hereunder setting forth a reconciliation between calculations of such ratio
or requirement made before and after giving effect to such change in GAAP.
Section J.04. Rounding. Any financial ratios required to be maintained by the City
pursuant to this Agreement shall be calculated by dividing the appropriate component by the
other component, carrying the result to one place more than the number of places by which such

-12-

 ratio is expressed herein and rounding the result up or down to the nearest number (with a
rounding-up if there is no nearest number).
Section 1.05. Times of Day. Unless otherwise specified, all references herein to times of
day are references to Central time (daylight or standard, as applicable).
ARTICLE II
T H E COMMITMENTS AND CREDIT EXTENSIONS

Section 2.01.
Loans. Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, the Lender
agrees to make loans (each such loan, a "Loan") to the City from time to time, on any Business
Day during the Availability Period, in an aggregate amount not to exceed at any time outstanding
the Commitment Amount; provided, however, that after giving effect to any Borrowing, the
Total Outstandings will not exceed the Commitment Amount. Subject to the other terms and
conditions hereof, the City may borrow under this Section 2.01, prepay under Section 2.03, and
reborrow under this Section 2.01. Loans may be Eurodollar Rate Loans, or, if the Lender has
notified the City that the Eurodollar Rate is unavailable in accordance with Section 3.03 or 3.04
hereof, a Floating Rate, as further provided herein.
Section 2.02. Borrowings, Conversions and Continuations of Loans, (a) Each Borrowing,
each conversion and each continuation of Loans from one Type to the other, and each
continuation of Eurodollar Rate Loans will be made upon the City's irrevocable notice to the
Lender, which may be given by telephone. The Lender must receive each such notice not later
than 11:00 a.m., (i) three Business Days prior to the requested date of any Borrowing of,
conversion to or continuation of Eurodollar Rate Loans, or of any conversion of Eurodollar Rate
Loans to Floating Rate Loans (if the Lender has notified the City that the Eurodollar Rate is
unavailable for any reason), and (ii) on the requested date of any Borrowing of Floating Rate
Loans (if the Lender has notified the City that the Eurodollar Rate is unavailable for any reason).
Each telephonic notice by the City pursuant to this Section 2.02(a) mu.st be confirmed promptly
by delivery to the Lender of a written Loan Notice, appropriately completed and signed by an
Authorized Officer. Each Borrowing of, conversion to or continuation of Eurodollar Rate Loans
shall be in a principal amount of $500,000 or a whole multiple of $1,000 in excess thereof. Each
Borrowing of or conversion to Floating Rate Loans shall be in a principal amount of $500,000 or
a whole multiple of $1,000 in excess thereof. Each Loan Notice (whether telephonic or written)
shall specify (i) whether the City is requesting a Borrowing, a conversion of Loans from one
Type to the other, or a continuation of Eurodollar Rate Loans, (ii) the requested date of the
Borrowing, conversion or a continuation, as the case may be (which shall be a Business Day),
(iii) the principal amount of Loans to be borrowed, converted, or continued, (iv) the Type of
Loans to be borrowed or to which existing Loans are to be converted, and (v) if applicable, the
duration of the Interest Period with respect thereto. If the City fails to specify a Type of Loan in
a Loan Notice or if the City fails to give a timely notice requesting a conversion or continuation,
then the applicable Loans shall be made as, or converted to. Floating Rate Loans. Any such
automatic conversion to Floating Rate Loans will be effective as of the last day of the Interest
Period then in effect with respect to the applicable Eurodollar Rate Loans.

•13-

 (b) Upon satisfaction of the applicable conditions set forth in Section 4.02 (and, if such
Borrowing is the initial Borrowing, Section 4.01), the Lender shall make all funds available to
the City by 3:00 p.m. on the Business Day specified in the applicable Loan Notice by wire
transfer of such funds for deposit to an account specified by the City in the applicable Loan
Notice, in each case in accordance with instructions provided to (and reasonably acceptable to)
the Lender by the City.
(c) Except as otherwise provided herein, a Eurodollar Rate Loan may be continued or
converted only on the last day of an Interest Period for such Eurodollar Rate Loan. During the
existence of a Default, no Loans may be requested as, converted to or continued as Eurodollar
Rate Loans without the consent of the Lender, and the Lender may demand that any or all of the
then outstanding Eurodollar Rate Loans be converted immediately to Floating Rate Loans and
the City agrees to pay all amounts due under Section 3.05 in accordance with the terms thereof
due to any such conversion upon receipt of invoice of such charges.
(d) The Lender shall promptly notify the City of the interest rate applicable to any
Interest Period for Eurodollar Rate Loans upon determination of such interest rate and the date
on which such Interest Period ends.
(e) After giving effect to all Borrowings, all conversions of Loans from one Type to the
other, and all continuations of Loans as the same Type, there shall not be more than six Interest
Periods in effect with respect to Loans.
Section 2.03. Prepayments, (a) The City may, upon notice to the Lender, at any time or
from time to time voluntarily prepay Loans and the Term Loan in whole or in part without
premium or penalty; provided that (i) such notice must be received by the Lender not later than
2:00 p.m. (A) one Business Days prior to any date of prepayment of Eurodollar Rate Loans and
(B) on the date of prepayment of Floating Rate Loans or the Term Loan; and (ii) any prepayment
of Eurodollar Rate Loans shall be in a principal amount of $500,000 or a whole multiple of
$1,000 in excess thereof; and (iii) any prepayment of Floating Rate Loans or the Term Loan shall
be in a principal amount of $500,000 or a whole multiple of at least $1,000 in excess thereof or,
in each case, if less, the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding. Each such notice shall
specify the date and amount of such prepayment and the Type(s) of Loans to be prepaid and, if
Eurodollar Rate Loans are to be prepaid, the Interest Period(s) of such Loans. If the City gives
such notice, the City shall make such prepayment and the payment amount specified in such
notice shall be due and payable on the date specified therein. Any prepayment of principal shall
be accompanied by all accrued interest on the amount prepaid, together with any additional
amounts required pursuant to Section 3.05. No amount of the Term Loan paid or prepaid may be
reborrowed, and any such prepayment of the outstanding Term Loan pursuant to this
Section 2.03(a) will be applied to the principal repayment installments thereof in inverse order of
maturity.
(b) If for any reason the Total Outstandings at any time exceed the Commitment then in
effect, the City shall immediately prepay Loans in an aggregate amount equal to such excess.

•14-

 Section 2.04. Termination or Reducrion of Commirmenr. The City may, upon notice to
the Lender, terminate the Commitment, or from time to time permanently reduce the
Commitment; provided that (i) any such notice shall be received by the Lender not later than
2:00 p.m. three (3) Business Days prior to the date of termination or reduction, (ii) any such
partial reduction shall be in an aggregate amount of $500,000 or any whole multiple of $1,000 in
excess thereof, (iii) the City shall not terminate or reduce the Commitment if, after giving effect
thereto and to any concurrent prepayments hereunder, the Total Outstandings would exceed the
Commitment, and (iv) the City shall pay to the Bank a Termination Fee or Reduction Fee, if any,
as set forth in Section 2.07(d) hereto. All Commitment Fees accrued until the effective date of
any termination of the Commitment shall be paid on the effective date of such termination.
Section 2.05. Repayment of Loans, (a) The City shall repay to the Lender on the
Commitment Termination Date the aggregate principal amount of Loans outstanding on such
date.
(b) Subject to the satisfaction of the terms and conditions of Section 4.03 hereof, if the
City elects not to repay the Loans, on the Commitment Termination Date, the Outstanding
Amount ofthe Loans will convert into a Term Loan and the proceeds of such Term Loan shall be
used to pay in full the Loans. Any Loan not converted to the Term Loan shall be due and
payable on the Commitment Termination Date and will bear interest at the Default Rate
thereafter, payable on demand.
(c) The principal of the Term Loan shall be due and payable in substantially equal
installments due on each Term Loan Payment Date; provided, however, that any remaining
portion of the Term Loan shall be due and payable no later than the Term Loan Maturity Date.
Secrion 2.06. Inreresr. (a) Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) below, (i) each
Eurodollar Rate Loan will bear interest on the outstanding principal amount thereof for each
Interest Period at a rate per annum equal to the Eurodollar Rate for such Interest Period, plus the
Applicable Rate; (ii) each Floating Rate Loan will bear interest on the outstanding principal
amount thereof from the applicable borrowing date at a rate per annum equal to the Floating Rate
plus the Applicable Rate and (iii) the Term Loan will bear interest on the outstanding principal
amount thereof at a rate per annum equal to the Term Loan Rate; provided, that subject to
Section 2.12 hereof, at no time shall the interest rate on a Loan or Term Loan, as applicable, be
payable in excess of the Maximum Rate. Each invoice for interest sent by the Lender to the City
shall include a detailed breakdown of the Eurodollar Rate or Floating Rate, as applicable, for
such period being invoiced.
(b) (i) While any Event of Default exists, the City shall pay interest on all outstanding
Obligations hereunder (including, without limitation, all Loans and the Term Loan) at a
fluctuating interest rate per annum at all times equal to the Default Rate to the fullest extent
permitted by applicable Laws.
(ii) Accrued and unpaid interest on past due amounts (including interest on past due
interest) shall be due and payable upon demand.

-15-

 (c) Interest on each Loan and the Term Loan shall be due and payable in arrears on
each Interest Payment Date applicable thereto and at such other times as may be specified herein.
Interest hereunder shall be due and payable in accordance with the terms hereof before and after
judgment, and before and after the commencement of any proceeding under any Debtor Relief
Law.
Secrion 2.07. Fees, (a) Commirmenr Fee. The City shall pay to the Lender, a daily
commitment fee (the "Commitment Fee") equal to the product of (i) the Commitment Fee Rate
for such day and (ii) the actual daily amount by which the Commitment Amount exceeds the
Outstanding Amount of Loans on such day. The Commitment Fee will accrue at all times during
the Availability Period, including at any time during which one or more of the conditions in
Article IV is not met, and shall be due and payable quarterly in arrears on the first Business Day
of each January, April, July and October (each a "Fee Payment Date"), commencing with the
first such date to occur after the Closing Date, and on the last day of the Availability Period. The
Commitment Fee will be calculated quarterly in arrears, and if there is any change in the
Commitment Fee Rate during any quarter, the actual daily amount will be computed and
multiplied by the Commitment Fee Rate separately for each period during such quarter that such
Commitment Fee Rate was in effect.
(b) Amendment and Waiver Fees. The City hereby agrees to pay to the Lender, on the
date of each amendment to this Agreement or any other Loan Document, or execution of any
standard waiver or consent relating thereto, a non-refundable fee equal t o       ^ ^ , plus, in each
case, the reasonable fees and expenses of counsel to the Lender in an amount to be agreed upon
by the parties prior to the commencement of such action. Such fees will be fully earned when
paid and will not be refundable for any reason whatsoever.
(c) Draw Fees. The City hereby agrees to pay a non-refundable drawing fee (each, a
"Draw Fee") of
to the Lender for each advance of a Loan under this Agreement to be paid
quarterly in arrears on each Fee Payment Date; provided that the aggregate amount of such Draw
Fees shall not exceed
in any calendar year.
(d) Termination or Reducrion Fee. The City shall pay to the Lender a Reduction Fee or
Termination Fee, as applicable, in connection with each permanent reduction or termination of
the Commitment Amount, the Available Commitment or Commitment pursuant to Section 2.04
hereof prior to the one year anniversary of the Closing Date, in an amount equal to the Reduction
Fee or Termination Fee, as applicable, payable on the date of such termination or each such
reduction.
Section 2.08. Computation of Interest and Fees. All computations of fees and interest
will be made on the basis of a year of three hundred sixty-five (365) or three hundred sixiy-six
(366) days, as the case may be, and actual days elapsed. Interest will accrue on each Loan and
the Term Loan for the day on which the Loan or the Term Loan is made, and shall not accrue on
a Loan or the Term Loan, or any portion thereof, for the day on which the Loan or such portion
is paid, provided that any Loan or the Term Loan that is repaid on the same day on which it is
made shall, subject to Section 2.10(a), bear interest for one day. Each determination by the

•16-

 Lender of an interest rate or fee hereunder will be conclusive and binding for all purposes, absent
manifest error.
Section 2.09. Evidence of Debt. The Borrowings made by the Lender shall be evidenced
by one or more accounts or records maintained by the Lender in the ordinary course of business.
The accounts or records maintained by the Lender shall be conclusive absent manifest error of
the amount of the Borrowings made by the Lender to the City and the interest and payments
thereon. Any failure to so record or any error in doing so will not, however, limit or otherwise
affect the obligation of the City hereunder to pay any amount owing with respect to the
Obligations. The City shall execute and deliver to the Lender a Note, which evidences the
Lender's Loans and the Term Loan in addition to such accounts or records. The Lender may
attach schedules to its Note and endorse thereon the date, amount and maturity of its Loans and
the Term Loan and payments with respect thereto.
Secrion 2.10. Paymenrs. General. All payments to be made by the City shall be made in
Dollars and immediately available funds by wire transfer as directed by the Bank by 12:00 noon
in accordance with wire transfer instructions provided by the Bank, on the date specified and
without condition or deduction for any counterclaim, defense, recoupment or setoff. Unless the
Bank provides written notice to the contrary, payments shall be made to I

^ ^ K ^ t ^ t t ^ ^ ^ B l l ^ m / / / l / § l / ^ ^ - If any payment to be made by the City is come due
on a day other than a Business Day, payment shall be made on the next following Business Day.
and such extension of time will be reflected in computing interest or fees, as the case may be.
All payments received by the Lender after 12:00 noon will be deemed received on the next
succeeding Business Day and any applicable interest or fee will continue to accrue.
Secrion 2.77. Extension of Commitment Terminarion Date. At least sixty (60) days and
no more than two hundred and ten (210) days prior to the Commitment Termination Date, the
City may make a request to the Lender, upon written notice, to extend the Commitment
Termination Date. Not more than thirty (30) days from the date on which the Lender receives
any such notice from the City pursuant to the preceding .sentence, the Lender shall notify the City
of the initial consent or nonconsent of the Lender to such extension request, which consent shall
be given at the sole and absolute discretion of the Lender. If the Lender consents to such
extension request, the Lender shall deliver to the City written notice of the Lender's election to
extend Commitment Termination Date. Failure of the Lender to respond to a request for
extension of the Commitment Termination Date constitutes denial of such extension.
Section 2.12. Maximum Rate. If the rate of interest payable hereunder exceeds the
Maximum Rate for any period for which interest is payable, then (a) interest at the Maximum
Rate shall be due and payable with respect to such interest period, and (b) interest at the rate
equal to the difference between (i) the rate of interest calculated in accordance with the terms
hereof and (ii) the Maximum Rate (the "Excess Inreresr"), will be deferred until such date as the
rate of interest calculated in accordance with the terms hereof ceases to exceed the Maximum
Rate, at which time the City shall pay to the Lender, with respect to amounts then payable to the
Lender that are required to accrue interest hereunder, such portion of the deferred Excess Interest

•17-

 as will cause the rate of interest then paid to the Lender to equal the Maximum Rate, which
payments of deferred Excess Interest shall continue to apply to such unpaid amounts hereunder
until the earlier of (i) the date of payment in full of all Obligations (other than Excess Interest
which has not been recaptured) and on which this Agreement is no longer in effect, and (ii) the
date on which all deferred Excess Interest is fully paid to the Lender.
ARTICLE I I I
TAXES, YIELD PROTECTION AND ILLEGALITY

Section 3.01.

Taxes.

(a) Paymenrs Free of Taxes; Obligation to Withhold; Payments on Account of Taxes.
(i) Any and all payments by or on account of any obligation of the City hereunder or under any
other Loan Document shall to the extent permitted by applicable Laws be made free and clear of
and without reduction or withholding for any Taxes. If any applicable Laws require the
withholding or deducting of any Tax, such Tax shall be withheld or deducted in accordance with
such Laws as determined by the City or the Lender, as the case may be, upon the basis of the
information and documentation to be delivered pursuant to subsection (e) below.
(ii) If the City is required by any applicable Laws to withhold or deduct any Taxes,
including both United States Federal backup withholding and withholding taxes, from any
payment, then (A) the City, as required by such Laws, shall withhold or make such deductions as
are determined by it to be required based upon the information and documentation it has received
pursuant to subsection (e) below, (B) the City, to the extent required by such Laws, shall timely
pay the full amount withheld or deducted to the relevant Governmental Authority in accordance
with such Laws, and (C) to the extent that the withholding or deduction is made on account of
Indemnified Taxes, the sum payable by the City will be increased as necessary so that after any
required withholding or the making of all required deductions (including deductions applicable
to additional sums payable under this Section 3.01) the Lender, receives an amount equal to the
sum it would have received had no such withholding or deduction been made.
(b) Payment of Other Taxes by the City. Without limiting the provisions of subsection
(a) above, the City shall timely pay to the relevant Governmental Authority in accordance with
applicable Law, or at the option of the Lender at its option to timely reimburse it for the payment
of, any Other Taxes.
(c) Tax Indemnifications, (i) Without limiting the provisions of subsection (a) or (b)
above, the City shall, and does hereby, indemnify the Lender, and shall make payment in respect
thereof within ten (10) days after demand therefor, for the full amount of any Indemnified Taxes
(including Indemnified Taxes imposed or asserted on or attributable to amounts payable under
this Section 3.01) payable or paid by the Lender or required to be withheld or deducted from a
payment to the Lender, and any penalties, interest and reasonable expenses arising therefrom or
with respect thereto, whether or not such Indemnified Taxes were correctly or legally imposed or

 asserted by the relevant Governmental Authority. A certificate as to the amount of such payment
or liability delivered to the City by the Lender is conclusive absent manifest error.
(ii) Without limiting the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) above, the Lender shall, and
does hereby, indemnify the City and shall make payinent in respect thereof within ten (10) days
after demand therefor, against any and all Taxes and any and all related losses, claims, liabilities,
penalties, interest and expenses (including the reasonable fees, charges and disbursements of any
counsel for the City) incurred by or asserted against the City by any Governmental Authority as a
result of the failure by the Lender to deliver, or as a result of the inaccuracy, inadequacy or
deficiency of, any documentation required to be delivered by the Lender to the City pursuant to
subsection (e). The agreements in this clause (ii) survive any assignment of rights by, or the
replacement of, the Lender, the termination of the Commitment and the repayment, satisfaction
or discharge of all other Obligations.
(d) Evidence of Payments. Upon request by the City or the Lender, as the case may be,
after any payment of Taxes by the City or by the Lender to a Governmental Authority as
provided in this Section 3.01, the City shall deliver to the Lender or the Lender shall deliver to
the City, as the case may be, the original or a certified copy of a receipt issued by such
Governmental Authority evidencing such payment, a copy of any return required by Laws to
report such payment or other evidence of such payment reasonably satisfactory to the City or the
Lender, as the case may be.
(e) Status of the Lender; Tax Documenration. (i) If the Lender is entitled to an
exemption from or reduction of withholding Tax with respect to payments made under this
Agreement or the Note, the Lender shall deliver to the City, at the time or times reasonably
requested by the City, such properly completed and executed documentation reasonably
requested by the City as will permit such payments to be made without withholding or at a
reduced rate of withholding. In addition, the Lender, if reasonably requested by the City, shall
deliver such other documentation prescribed by applicable Law or reasonably requested by the
City as will enable the City to determine whether or not the Lender is subject to backup
withholding or information reporting requirements. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
the preceding two sentences, the completion, execution and submission of such documentation
(other than such documentation set forth in Section 3.01(e)(ii) below) shall not be required if in
the Lender's reasonable judgment such completion, execution or submission would subject the
Lender to any material unreimbursed cost or expense or woiild materially prejudice the legal or
commercial position of the Lender.
(ii) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Lender shall deliver to the City
(and from time to time thereafter upon the reasonable request of the City), executed originals of
IRS Form W-9 certifying that the Lender is exempt from U.S. federal backup withholding tax.
(f) Treatment of Certain Refitnds. If the Lender determines that it has received a
refund of any Taxes as to which it has been indemnified by the City or with respect to which the
City has paid additional amounts pursuant to this Section 3.01, it shall pay to the City an amount
equal to such refund (but only to the extent of indemnity payments made, or additional amounts
paid, by the City under this Section 3.01 with respect to the Taxes giving rise to such refund), net
-19-

 of all out-of-pocket expenses (including Taxes) incurred by the Lender, and without interest
(other than any interest paid by the relevant Governmental Authority with respect to such
refund); provided that the City, upon the request of the Lender, agrees to repay the amount paid
over to the City (plus any penalties, interest or other charges imposed by the relevant
Governmental Authority, provided, that the City shall not be obligated to pay the Lender for any
penalties, interest or expenses relating to Taxes or Other Taxes arising from the Lender's gross
negligence or willful misconduct) to the Lender in the event the Lender is required to repay such
refund to such Governmental Authority. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
subsection, in no event will the Lender be required to pay any amount to the City pursuant to this
subsection the payment of which would place the Lender in a less favorable net after-Tax
position than the Lender would have been in if the indemnification payments or additional
amounts giving rise to such refund had never been paid. This subsection shall not be construed
to require the Lender to make available its tax returns (or any other information relating to its
taxes that it deems confidential) to the City or any other Person.
(g) Survival. Each party's obligations under this Section survive the repayment,
satisfaction or discharge of all other Obligations.
Secrion 3.02.
(a)

Increased Costs.

Increased Costs Generally. If any Change in Law shall:

(i)
impose, modify or deem applicable any reserve, special deposit,
compulsory loan, insurance charge or similar requirement against assets of, deposits with
or for the account of, or credit extended or participated in by, the Lender (except any
reserve requirement contemplated by Section 3.02(e));
(ii)
subject the Lender to any Taxes (other than (A) Indemnified Taxes,
(B) Taxes described in clauses (b) through (d) of the definition of Excluded Taxes and
(C) Connection Income Taxes) on its loans, loan principal, letters of credit, commitments,
or other obligations, or its deposits, reserves, other liabilities or capital attributable
thereto; or
(iii)
impose on the Lender or the London interbank market any other condition,
cost or expense affecting this Agreement, the Loans or the Term Loan made by the
Lender or participation therein;
and the result of any of the foregoing increa.ses the cost to the Lender of making or maintaining
any Loan or the Term Loan (or of maintaining its obligation to make any such Loan or the Term
Loan), or to reduce the amount of any sum received or receivable by the Lender hereunder
(whether of principal, interest or any other amount) then, upon request of the Lender, the City
will pay to the Lender, such additional amount or amounts as will compensate the Lender, for
such additional costs incurred or reduction suffered.
(b) Capiral Requirements. If the Lender determines that any Change in Law affecting
the Lender or any Lending Office of the Lender or the Lender's holding company, if any,
-20-

 regarding capital requirements has or would have the effect of reducing the rate of return on the
Lender's capital or on the capital of the Lender's holding company, if any, as a consequence of
this Agreement, the Commitment of the Lender or the Loans or the Term Loan made by, to a
level below that which the Lender or the Lender's holding company could have achieved but for
such Change in Law (taking into consideration the Lender's policies and the policies of the
Lender's holding company with respect to capital adequacy), then from time to time the City will
pay to the Lender, as the case may be, such additional amount or amounts as will compensate
Lender or the Lender's holding company for any such reduction suffered.
(c) All payments of amounts referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Section shall
be due and payable, in full, on the date which is thirty-one (31) days following the City's receipt
of notice. Interest on the sums due as described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Section, and in
the preceding sentence, will begin to accrue at a rate per annum equal to (i) the Base Rate from
the date which is thirty-one (31) days following the City's receipt of notice thereof to and
including the date which is sixty (60) days following the City's receipt of notice thereof and
(ii) the Default Rate from and including the date which is sixty-one (61) days following the
City's receipt of notice thereof and at all times thereafter and shall otherwise be payable in
accordance with Section 2.06 hereof. A certificate as to such increased cost, increased capital or
reduction in return incurred by the Lender as a result of any event mentioned in paragraphs (a) or
(b) of this Section setting forth, in reasonable detail, the basis for such calculation and the
amount of such calculation shall be submitted by the Lender to the City and shall be deemed
conclusive if reasonably determined. In making the determinations contemplated by the above
referenced certificate, the Lender may make such reasonable estimates, assumptions, allocations
and the like that the Lender in good faith determines to be appropriate; provided that the Lender
shall provide to the City such additional information in connection with such certificate as the
City may reasonably request in writing.
(d) Delay in Requests. Failure or delay on the part of the Lender to demand
compensation pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this Section shall not constitute a waiver of
the Lender's right to demand such compensation; provided that the City shall not be required to
compensate the Lender pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this Section for any increased
costs incurred or reductions suffered more than nine months prior to the date that the Lender
notifies the City ofthe Change in Law giving rise to such increased costs or reductions and ofthe
Lender's intention to claim compensation therefor (except that, if the Change in Law giving rise
to such increased costs or reductions is retroactive, then the nine-month period referred to above
will be extended to include the period of retroactive effect thereoO(e) Reserves on Eurodollar Rate Loans. The City shall pay to the Lender, as long as
the Lender shall be required to maintain reserves with respect to liabilities or assets consisting of
or including Eurocurrency funds or deposits (currently known as "Eurocurrency liabilities"),
additional interest on the unpaid principal amount of each Eurodollar Rate Loan equal to the
actual costs of such reserves allocated to such Loan by the Lender (as determined by the Lender
in good faith, which determination shall be conclusive), which shall be due and payable on each
date on which interest is payable on such Loan, provided the City shall have received at least
10 days' prior notice of such additional interest from the Lender. If a Lender fails to give notice

-21-

 10 days prior to the relevant Interest Payment Date, such additional interest shall be due and
payable 10 days from receipt of such notice.
Section 3.03. Illegality. If the Lender determines that any Law has made it unlawful, or
that any Governmental Authority has asserted that it is unlawful, for the Lender or its applicable
Lending Office to make, maintain or fund Loans whose interest is determined by reference to the
Eurodollar Rate, or to determine or charge interest rates based upon the Eurodollar Rate, or any
Governmental Authority has imposed material restrictions on the authority of the Lender to
purchase or sell, or to take deposits of. Dollars in the London interbank market, then, on notice
thereof by the Lender to the City, any obligation of the Lender to make or continue Eurodollar
Rate Loans or to convert Floating Rate Loans to Eurodollar Rate Loans shall be suspended, until
the Lender notifies the City that the circumstances giving rise to such determination no longer
exist. Upon receipt of such notice, the City shall, upon demand from the Lender, prepay or, if
applicable, convert all Eurodollar Rate Loans of the Lender to Floating Rate Loans, either on the
last day of the Interest Period therefor, if the Lender may lawfully continue to maintain such
Eurodollar Rate Loans to such day, or immediately, if the Lender may not lawfully continue to
maintain such Eurodollar Rate Loans. Upon any such prepayment or conversion, the City shall
also pay accrued interest on the amount so prepaid or converted.
Secrion 3.04. Inability ro Derermine Pares. If the Lender determines that for any reason
in connection with any request for a Eurodollar Rate Loan or a conversion to or continuation
thereof that (a) Dollar deposits are not being offered to banks in the London interbank eurodollar
market for the applicable amount and Interest Period of such Eurodollar Rate Loan, (b) adequate
and reasonable means do not exist for determining the Eurodollar Rate for any requested Interest
Period with respect to a proposed Eurodollar Rale Loan or in connection with an existing or
proposed Floating Rate Loan, or (c) the Eurodollar Rate for any requested Interest Period with
respect to a proposed Eurodollar Rate Loan does not adequately and fairly reflect the cost to the
Lender of funding the Loan, the Lender will promptly so notify the City. Thereafter, the
obligation of the Lender to make or maintain Eurodollar Rate Loans shall be suspended, until the
Lender revokes such notice. Upon receipt of such notice, the City may revoke any pending
request for a Borrowing of, conversion to or continuation of Eurodollar Rate Loans or, failing
that, will be deemed to have converted such request into a request for a Borrowing of Floating
Rate Loans in the amount specified therein.
Secrion 3.05. Compensation for Losses. Upon demand of the Lender from time to time,
the City shall promptly compensate the Lender for and hold the Lender harmless from any loss,
cost or expense incurred by it as a result of:
(a) any continuation, conversion, payment or prepayment of any Eurodollar
Rate Loan on a day other than the last day of the Interest Period for such Loan (whether
voluntary, mandatory, automatic, by reason of acceleration, or otherwise); or
(b)
any failure by the City (for a reason other than the failure of the Lender to
make a Loan) to prepay, borrow, continue or convert any Eurodollar Rate Loan on the
date or in the amount notified by the City;

-22-

 including any loss of anticipated profits and any loss or expense arising from the liquidation or
reemployment of funds obtained by it to maintain such Loan or from fees payable to terminate
the deposits from which such funds were obtained.
For purposes of calculating amounts payable by the City to the Lender under this Section 3.05,
the Lender shall be deemed to have funded each Eurodollar Rate Loan made by it at the
Eurodollar Rate for such Loan by a matching deposit or other borrowing in the London interbank
eurodollar market for a comparable ainount and for a comparable period, whether or not such
Eurodollar Rate Loan was in fact so funded.
Section 3.06. Survival. All of the City's and Lender's obligations under this Article III
survive termination of the Commitment and repayment of all other Obligations hereunder.
ARTICLE IV
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO BORROWINGS

Section 4.01. Conditions of Initial Borrowing; Authoriry; Enforceability. This Agreement
shall become binding on the parties hereto upon the satisfaction of the following conditions
precedent (all Loan Documents and other documents to be delivered to the Lender pursuant to
this Section 4.01 are subject to prior approval as to form and substance by the Lender, with
delivery by the Lender of its signature page to this Agreement evidencing such Person's
acknowledgement that the conditions set forth in this Section 4.01 have been satisfied, unless
otherwise waived in writing):
(a) The Lender's receipt of the following, each of which shall be originals or
telecopies (followed promptly by originals) unless otherwise specified, each properly
executed by an Authorized Officer of the City, each dated the Closing Date (or, in the
case of certificates of governmental officials, a recent date before the Closing Date) and
each in form and substance satisfactory to the Lender:
(i)

executed counterparts of this Agreement;

(ii)

a Note executed by the City in favor of the Lender;

(iii)
a certified copy of the Ordinance and any other ordinances of the
City's City Council (or similar governing body) authorizing the execution,
delivery and performance of this Agreement, the Note and the Ordinance and the
consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby and thereby, together with
specimen signatures of the persons authorized to execute such documents on the
City's behalf, all certified in each instance by the City Clerk;
(iv)
a favorable opinion of counsel to the City acceptable to the Lender
addressed to the Lender, as to the matters set forth concerning the City and this

-23-

 Agreement, the Note and the Ordinance in form and substance satisfactory to the
Lender;
(v)
a certificate signed by an Authorized Officer of the City certifying
(A) that the conditions specified in Sections 4.02(a) and (b) have been satisfied,
and (B) that there has been no event or circumstance since December 31, 2012
that has had or could be reasonably expected to have, either individually or in the
aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect;
(vi)
recent evidence that the unenhanced long-term General Obligation
Debt ofthe City has been assigned long-term ratings of at least "A3" by Moody's,
"A+" by S&P and "A-" by Fitch, respectfully; and
(vii)
such other assurances, certificates, documents, consents or
opinions as the Lender reasonably may require.
For purposes of determining compliance with the conditions specified in this
Section 4.01, the Lender that has signed this Agreement shall be deemed to have consented to,
approved or accepted or to be satisfied with, each document or other matter required thereunder
to be consented to or approved by or acceptable or satisfactory to the Lender.
Secrion 4.02. Conditions ro All Borrowings. The obligation of the Lender to honor any
Request for Borrowing is subject to the following conditions precedent:
(a) The representations and warranties of the City contained in Article V
hereof or in the Ordinance, or which are contained in any document furnished at any time
under or in connection herewith or therewith, are true and correct on and as of the date of
such Borrowing, except to the extent that such representations and warranties specifically
refer to an earlier date, in which case they shall be true and correct as of such earlier date,
and except that for purposes of this Section 4.02, the representations and warranties
contained in Section 5.09 will be deemed to refer to the most recent statements furnished
pursuant to clause (b)(i) of Section 6.01.
(b) No Default or Event of Default exists, or would result from such proposed
Borrowing or from the application of the proceeds thereof.
(c) The Lender has received a Request for Borrowing in accordance with the
requirements hereof.
(d) After giving effect to any Loan, the aggregate principal amount of all
Loans outstanding hereunder does not exceed the Commitment.
(e) Such Borrowing does not violate any order, judgment or decree of any
court or authority of competent jurisdiction or any provision of law as then in effect.

-24-

 (0
The Lender shall have received, in form and substance satisfactory to it,
such other assurances, certificates, documents or consents related to the foregoing as the
Lender reasonably may require.
Each Request for Borrowing submitted by the City will be deemed to be a representation and
warranty that the conditions specified in Sections 4.02(a) and (b) have been satisfied on and as of
the date of the applicable Borrowing.
Secrion 4.03. Condirions to Term Loan. The obligation of the Lender to make any Term
Loan is subject to (i) the representations and warranties contained in Article V hereof and in each
certificate or other writing delivered to the Lender pursuant hereto on or prior to the
Commitment Termination Date being true and correct on and as of the Commitment Termination
Date as though made on and as of such date, except to the extent a representation or warranty
relates specifically to an earlier date (in which case such representation or warranty shall be true
and correct as of such date); (ii) no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing on
the Commitment Termination Date; and (iii) the Lender shall have received a certificate, signed
by an Authorized Officer and dated the Commitment Termination Date, confirming that all of
the foregoing conditions have been satisfied.
ARTICLE V
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES

The City represents and warrants to the Lender as follows:
Secrion 5.01. Due Aurlwrizarion. The City has or had, at the applicable time, full legal
right, power and authority to (i) adopt the Ordinance and (ii) enter into, to execute and deliver
this Agreement and the Note as provided herein and in the Ordinance. The City has duly
authorized and approved the execution and delivery of this Agreement, the Note and the delivery
of the Ordinance.
Secrion 5.02. Enforceabilin>. No further authorization or approval is required for the
City's execution and delivery of this Agreement or the Note, and this Agreement, the Ordinance
and the Note constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of the City, enforceable in
accordance with their respective terms, except as such enforcement may be limited by
bankruptcy, reorganization, insolvency, moratorium or other laws relating to or affecting the
enforcement of creditors' rights generally or by general principles of equity; and no further
authorization or approval is required with respect to the enforceability of the City's obligations
hereunder or thereunder.
Secrion 5.03. Ordinance. The City Council has duly adopted the Ordinance, which is in
full force and effect. In connection with the issuance of the Note, the City has complied in all
material respects with the Ordinance, the Constitution of the State and the laws of the State.

-25-

 Secrion 5.04. Consenrs. All approvals, consents registrations, declarations and filings
(except, if any, under applicable state blue sky or securities laws) with, any federal, state or other
governmental body or instrumentality, having jurisdiction which would constitute a condition
precedent to the performance by the City of its obligations hereunder, under the Ordinance or
under the Note have been obtained or made.
Section 5.05. No Violation. The adoption of the Ordinance and compliance with the
provisions thereof do not, and the execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement and the
Note do not and will not violate any existing law or administrative regulation of the State or of
any department, division, agency or instrumentality thereof or of the United States, or any court
or administrative regulation, judgment, decree or order to which the City is subject, or conflict
with in a material manner or constitute on the part of the City a material breach of, or a material
default under, any material provision of any agreement, indenture, mortgage, lease, note,
ordinance, resolution, agreement or other instrument to which the City is subject or by which it is
bound.
Section 5.06. Litigation. Except as disclosed prior to the execution of this Agreement in
writing to the Lender, no action, suit or proceeding, at law or in equity, or before any court,
public board or body is pending (or to the knowledge of the City threatened) against the City or
any officers of the City in their respective capacities as such (i) questioning the authority of the
City to adopt the Ordinance or to issue, or the issuance or validity of this Agreement, the Note or
any other General Obligation Debt of the City, or (ii) questioning the constitutionality of any
statute or the validity of any proceedings authorizing the Ordinance or issuance of this
Agreement or the Note, or (iii) questioning the validity or enforceability of the Ordinance, or
(iv) questioning in any manner the City's pledge of its full faith, credit and resources, or
(iv) which could materially adversely affect the business, financial condition or results of
operations of the City.
Section 5.07. Security. Pursuant to the Ordinance, the Obligations are direct and general
obligafions of the City, payable from funds legally available for such purposes. The Ordinance
consfitutes an ongoing appropriation from legally available funds for payment of the Obligations
payable pursuant to this Agreement and the Note.
Section 5.08. Organization. The City is a municipal corporation and "home rule unit" as
that term is defined in Section 6 of Article Vll of the 1970 Constitution ofthe State.
Section 5.09. Financial Statements. The most recent audited financial statements of the
City posted on the City's website and made available to the Lender fairly present the financial
position and results of operation of the City as of December 31, 2012, and such financial
statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as
consistently applied to governmental units, except as otherwise noted therein. Except as
otherwise disclosed in writing by the City to the Lender prior to the Closing Date, to the
knowledge of the City's Chief Financial Officer, no material adverse change in the financial
position of the City as shown on such financial statements has occurred since December 31,
2012.

-26-

 Secrion 5.10. Absence of Default. No Default or Event of Default has occurred and is
continuing, and the City is not in default under any material provision of the Ordinance. The
City is not in default under any material agreement or instrument to the extent such default
would have a material adverse effect on the City's ability to perform its obligations under this
Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance the City's ability to pay the Obligations, or the rights,
interests, security or remedies of the Lender.
Section 5.77. Environmental Laws. The City has not received notice to the effect that the
any of the operations of the City are not in compliance with any of the requirements of
applicable federal, state or local environmental, health and safety statutes and regulations or are
the subject of any governmental investigation evaluating whether any remedial action is needed
to respond to a release of any toxic or hazardous waste or substance into the environment, which
non-compliance or remedial action would have a material adverse effect on the City's ability to
perform its obligations under this Agreement or the Note, or the rights, interests, security or
remedies of the Lender.
Section 5.12. No Proposed Legal Changes. There is no amendment, or to the knowledge
of the City, proposed amendment certified for placement on a statewide ballot, to the
Constitution of the State or any published administrative interpretation of the Constitution of the
State or any State law, or any legislation that has passed either house of the State legislature, or
any published judicial decision interpreting any of the foregoing, the effect of which is to
materially adversely affect the City or the ability of the City to perform its obligations under this
Agreement, the Ordinance or the Note, or any right, interest, security or remedy of the Lender.
Secfion 5.13.

Reserved.

Section 5.14.

Solvent. The City is solvent.

Secrion 5.15. Disclosure. All information heretofore furnished by the City to the Lender
for purposes of or in connection with this Agreement or any transaction contemplated hereby
(and the ability of the City to perform its obligations under this Agreement or the Note) is, and
all such information hereafter furnished by the City to the Lender will be. true, accurate and
complete in all material respects or based on reasonable estimates on the date as of which such
information is stated or certified and such information does not omit to state a material fact
necessary to make such statements and information, in light of the circumstances under which
they were made, not misleading in any material respect. The City has disclosed to the Lender in
writing any and all facts which materially and adversely affect or may affect (to the extent the
City can now reasonably foresee), the business, operations, prospects or condition, financial or
otherwise, of the City, or the ability of the City to perform its obligations under this Agreement
or the Note.
Secrion 5.16. Use of Proceeds; Margin Stock. The City shall use the proceeds of the
Loans to provide funds for the payment of necessary expenses incurred for the general corporate
purposes of the City. The City is not engaged, and will not engage, principally or as one of its
important activities, in the business of purchasing or carrying Margin Stock (vvithin the meaning

-27-

 of Regulation U issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System), or extending
credit for the purpose of purchasing or carrying Margin Stock.
Section 5.17. Investmenr Company. The City is not an "investment company" or a
company "controlled" by an "investment company" within the meaning of the Investment
Company Act of 1940, as amended.
Section 5.18. ERISA. The City does not maintain or contribute to, and has not maintained
or contributed to, any employee pension benefit plan that is subject to Title IV of ERISA or that
is subject to the minimum funding standards under Section 412 of the Code.
Secrion 5.19. OFAC Sancrions. To the actual knowledge of the Chief Financial Officer,
the City (i) is in compliance with the requirements of all OFAC Sanctions Programs to the extent
applicable to the City, and (ii) is not, as of the date hereof, named on the current OFAC SDN
List.
ARTICLE VI
COVENANTS

Secrion 6.01.
Affirmative Covenants of the City. The City will do the following so long as
any Obligations remain outstanding under this Agreement or the Note, unless the Lender
otherwise consents in writing:
(a)
Further Assurances.
The City shall execute, acknowledge where
appropriate, and deliver, and cause to be executed, acknowledged where appropriate, and
delivered, from time to time promptly at the request of the Lender, all such instruments
and documents as in the reasonable judgment of the Lender are necessary to comply with
this Agreement, the Ordinance and the Note.
(b)
Information. The City will furnish, or cause to be furnished, to the
Lender, as soon as available, the following documents:
(i)
vvithin tvvo hundred forty (240) days after the close of each of its
fiscal years, the audited financial statements of the City certified by independent
certified public accountants covering the operations of the City for such fiscal
year and containing balance sheets, statements of revenues, expenses and changes
in retained earnings and statements of cash flows of the City for such fiscal year,
all prepared in accordance with GAAP, which the City shall deliver to the Lender
or ensure that they have been posted electronically on a website that the Lender
has access to;
(ii)
vvithin forty-five (45) days after the approval thereof, the annual
appropriation ordinance of the City which shall include the annual budget of the

-28-

 City, which the City shall deliver to the Lender or ensure that such information
has been posted electronically on a website that the Lender has access to;
(iii)
within ten (10) Business Days of the Lender's written request, a
certificate stating that no Default or Event of Default has occurred which was
continuing at the end of such fiscal year and on the date of such certificate or, if a
Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, a certificate indicating
the nature of such event and the action which the City proposes lo take with
respect thereto, provided thar such certificate shall not be required to be delivered
earlier than 45 days after the end of each fiscal year of the City; and
(iv)
from time to time, with reasonable promptness, such additional
information regarding the financial condition of the City as the Lender may
reasonably request in writing.
(c)
Book and Records; Inspection of Records. The City shall keep adequate
records and books of account in which complete entries will be made reflecting all
material financial transactions of the City. Upon the reasonable request of the Lender
and during normal business hours, the City will give the Lender, or any attorney-in-fact
or counsel therefor, access to and permission to examine, copy or make excerpts from
any and all books, records and documents under control of the City Comptroller relating
to thefinancialcondition of the City and, to the extent pennitted by applicable law, visit
the properties of the City and to discuss the affairs,financesand accounts of the City with
any of the City's officers, trustees and independent auditors (and by this provision the
City authorizes said auditors to discuss with the Lender and its agents and representatives
the affairs, finances and accounts of the City).
(d)
Compliance Wirh Laws. The City shall comply in all material respects
with all laws, ordinances, investment policies, orders, rules and regulations that may be
applicable to it if the failure to comply would have a material adverse effect on the City's
ability to perform its obligations under this Agreement and the Note.
(e) Notices. The City shall promptly furnish, or cause to be furnished, to the
Lender (i) notice of the occurrence of any Event of Default or Default as defined herein,
(ii) notice of any litigation or administrative proceeding which, if adversely determined,
would materially adversely affect the ability of the City to pay its obligations under this
Agreement or under any of the Loan Documents to which it is a party, (iii) a copy of any
reportable event notice (as described in paragraph b(5)(i)(C) of Rule 15c2-l2
promulgated pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (17 C.F.R.
Sec. 240-15c2-12)), disseminated, distributed or provided in satisfaction of or as may be
required pursuant to such requirements (delivery of notice of any such event shall be
deemed satisfied if notice has been filed with EMMA and is publicly available), (iv)
notice of any change in the City's Ratings vvithin five (5) days of such change taking
effect, and (v) such furtherfinancialand other information with respect to the City and its
affairs as the Lender may reasonably request from time to time.

-29-

 (f)
Maintenance of Approvals; Filings, Etc. The City shall at all times
maintain in effect, renew and comply with all the terms and conditions of all consents,
licenses, approvals and authorizations that may be necessary under any applicable law or
regulation (i) for its execution and delivery of this Agreement and the Note and (ii) with
respect to the Ordinance to the extent that failure to do so would have a material adverse
effect on the City's ability to perform its obligations under this agreement, the Note or the
Ordinance, the City's ability to pay when due its Obligations under this Agreement or the
Note.
(g)
Use of Proceeds. The City agrees to use the proceeds of the Loans for the
necessary expenses incurred for the general purposes ofthe City.
(h)
Ratings. The City shall, at all times, cause to be maintained a long-term
unenhanced rating on its General Obligation Debt by at least one Rating Agency.
(i)
Compliance with Ordinance. From and after the date hereof and so long
as this Agreement is in effect, except to the extent compliance in any case or cases is
waived in writing by the Lender, the City agrees that it will, for the benefit of the Lender,
comply with in all material respects abide by all material obligations and undertakings
contained in the Ordinance. No amendment or waiver of the Ordinance with respect to
the foregoing provisions shall be effective as to this Agreement unless and until
specifically agreed to in writing by the Lender with reference to this Agreement.
ARTICLE VII
DEFAULTS

Section 7.01.
Evenrs of Defaulr and Remedies. If any of the following events occur, each
such event shall be an "Evenr of Defaulr":
(a) the City fails to pay, or cause to be paid, vvhen due, (i) any amount of
principal or interest of any Loan or the Term Loan or (ii) any other Obligation owing to
the Lender hereunder and such failure continues for a period of seven (7) Business Days;
(b)
any representation, warranty or statement made by or on behalf of the City
herein or in any certificate delivered pursuant hereto or thereto proves to be untrue in any
material respect on the date as of which made or deemed made; or the documents,
certificates or statements of the City (including unaudited financial reports, budgets,
projections and cash flows of the City) furnished to the Lender by or on behalf of the City
in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby, vvhen taken as a whole, are
materially inaccurate in light of the circumstances under which they were made and as of
the date on which they were made;
(c)
(i) the City fails to perform or observe any term, covenant or agreement
contained in Section 6.01(e)(i), or 6.0I(i) hereof; (ii) the City fails to perforin or observe

-30-

 any term, covenant or agreement contained in Section 6.01(c) hereof and any such failure
cannot be cured or, if curable, remains uncured for five (5) days after written notice
thereof to the City; or (iii) the City fails to perform or observe any other term, covenant
or agreement contained in this Agreement (other than those referred to in
Sections 7.01(a), (c)(i) and (c)(ii)) and any such failure cannot be cured or, if curable,
remains uncured after the earlier to occur of thirty (30) days after (A) written notice
thereof to the City or (B) knowledge by responsible officers of the City of the occurrence
thereof; provided, however, that such default will not constitute an Event of Default after
such thirty (30) day period of time as, if in the sole judgment of the Bank, the City is
diligently pursuing a cure or correction of such default; provided, fitrrher, that such cure
period shall not exceed sixty (60) days from the date of such default without receipt of
the Bank's written consent to such extension.
(d)
the City defaults in any payment of principal of or premium, if any, or
interest on any of its General Obligation Debt and such default continues beyond the
expiration of the applicable grace period, if any. or the City fails to perform any other
agreement, term or condition contained in any agreement under which any such
obligalion is created or secured, which permits or results in the declaring due and payable
of such obligation prior to the date on which it would otherwise have become due and
payable;
(e)
any material provision of this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance at
any time for any reason ceases to be valid and binding on the City or any other party
thereto or is declared to be null and void, or the validity or enforceability thereof is
contested in writing by an Authorized Officer of the City or such other party thereto or by
any Governmental Authority having jurisdiction, or the City or such other party denies in
writing that it has any or further liability or obligation under any such document and the
occurrence of any such event would have a material adverse effect on the City's ability to
pay its obligations under this Agreement;
(0
any provision of this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance relating to the
City's ability to pay the Obligations or perform its obligations hereunder or therightsand
remedies of the Lender, or any material provision thereof ceases to be in full force or
effect, or an Authorized Officer of the City denies or disaffirms the City's obligations
under the Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance;
(g)
one or more final, unappealable judgments against the City not covered by
insurance, or attachments against the property of the City, the operation or result of
which, individually or in the aggregate, equals or exceeds $25,000,000 remains unpaid,
undischarged, unbonded or undismissed for a period of sixty (60) days;
(h)
(i) a debt moratorium, debt restructuring, debt adjustment or comparable
restriction is impo.sed on the repayment when due and payable of the principal of or
interest relating to any General Obligation Debt of the City; (ii) under any existing or
future law of any jurisdiction relating to bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization or relief
of debtors, the City seeks to have an order for relief entered with respect to it or seeking

-31-

 to adjudicate it insolvent or bankrupt or .seeking reorganization, arrangement, adjustment,
winding-up, liquidation, dissolution, composition or other relief with respect to it or its
debts; (iii) the City seeks appointment of a receiver, trustee, custodian or other similar
official for itself or for any substantial part of the City's property, or the City makes a
general assignment for the benefit of its creditors; (iv) there is commenced against the
City any case, proceeding or other action of a nature referred to in clause (ii) above which
(A) results in an order for such relief or in the appointment of a receiver or similar
official or (B) remains undismissed, undischarged or unbonded for a period of sixty (60)
days; (v) there is commenced against the City any case, proceeding or other action
seeking issuance of a warrant of attachment, execution, distraint or similar process
against all or any substantial part of its property which results in the entry of an order for
any such relief which shall not have been vacated, discharged, or stayed or bonded
pending appeal vvithin sixty (60) days after the entry thereof; (vi) the City takes action in
furtherance of, or indicating its consent to, approval of, or acquiescence in, any of the
acts set forth in clause (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) or (v) above; or (vii) the City generally does not,
or is unable to, or admits in writing its inability to, pay its debts as they become due; or
(i)
any of Fitch, Moody's or S&P downgrades its long-term unenhanced
rating of any General Obligation Debt of the City to below "BBB" (or its equivalent),
"Baa2" (or its equivalent), or "BBB" (or its equivalent), respectively, or suspends or
withdraws for credit related reasons its rating of the same.
Secrion 7.02. Remedies. If any Event of Default occurs and is continuing, the Lender
may take any or all of the following actions:
(a)
declare the Commitment of the Lender to make Loans or the Term Loan to
be terminated, whereupon such Commitment and obligation will be terminated;
(b)
declare the unpaid principal amount of all outstanding Loans and the Term
Loan, all interest accrued and unpaid thereon, and all other amounts owing or payable
hereunder or under the Note to be immediately due and payable, without presentment,
demand, protest or other notice of any kind, all of which arc hereby expressly waived by
the City; and
(c)
exercise all rights and remedies available to the Lender under this
Agreement or the Note.
provided, however, that upon the occurrence of an actual or deemed entry of an order for
relief with respect to the City under the Bankruptcy Code of the United States, the
obligation of the Lender to make Loans and the Term Loan automatically terminates, and
the unpaid principal amount of all outstanding Loans and the Term Loan and all interest
and other amounts as aforesaid shall automatically become due and payable, in each case
without further act of the Lender.

-32-

 ARTICLE

VIII

MISCELLANEOUS

Secrion 8.01.
Amendments, Ere. No amendment or waiver of any provision of this
Agreement or the Note, and no con.sent to any departure by the City therefrom, will be effective
unless in writing signed by the Lender and the City, and each such waiver or consent will be
effecfive only in the specific instance and for the specific purpose for which given. In the case of
any such waiver or consent relating to any provision hereof, any Default or Event of Default so
waived or consented to will be deemed to be cured and not continuing, but no such waiver or
consent will extend to any other or subsequent Default or Event of Default or impair any right
consequent thereto.
Secrion 8.02. Notices; Effectiveness; Electronic Communicarion. (a) Except in the case
of notices and other communications expressly permitted to be given by telephone (and except as
provided in subsection (b) below), all notices and other communicafions provided for herein
shall be in writing and shall be delivered by hand or overnight courier service, mailed by
certified or registered mail or sent by facsimile as follows, and all notices and other
communications expressly permitted hereunder to be given by telephone shall be made to the
applicable telephone number, if to the City or the Lender, to the address, facsimile number,
electronic mail address or telephone number specified for such Person on Schedule 8.02.
Notices and other communications sent by hand or overnight courier service, or mailed by
certified or registered mail, will be deemed to have been given when received; notices and other
communications sent by facsimile will be deemed to have been given vvhen sent (except that, if
not given during normal business hours for the recipient, will be deemed to have been given at
the opening of business on the next Business Day for the recipient). Notices and other
communications delivered through electronic communications to the extent provided in
subsection (b) below, will be effective as provided in such subsection (c).
(b) Electronic Communicarions. Notices and other communications to the Lender
hereunder may be delivered or furnished by electronic communication (including e-mail and
Internet or intranet websites) pursuant to procedures approved by the Lender.
(c) Unless the Lender otherwise prescribes, (i) notices and other communications sent
to an e-mail address shall be deemed received upon the sender's receipt of an acknowledgement
from the intended recipient (such as by the "return receipt requested" function, as available,
return e-mail or other written acknowledgement), and (ii) notices or communications posted to
an Internet or intranet website will be deemed received upon the deemed receipt by the intended
recipient at its e-mail address as described in the foregoing clause (i) of notification that such
notice or communication is available and identifying the website address therefor; provided that,
for both clauses (i) and (ii), if such notice, email or other communication is not sent during the
normal business hours of the recipient, such notice, email or communication will be deeined to
have been sent at the opening of business on the next business day for the recipient.
(d) In no event shall the Lender or any of its Related Parties have any liability to the
City or any other Person for losses, claims, damages, liabilities or expenses of any kind (whether
-33-

 in tort, contract or otherwise) arising out of the City's or the Lender's transmission of materials
through the Internet.
(e) Change of Address, Etc. Each of the City and the Lender may change its addiess,
facsimile or telephone number for notices and other communications hereunder by written notice
(including email) to the other parties hereto.
(f) Reliance by the Lender. The Lender is entitled to rely and act upon any notices
(including telephonic or electronic notices) purportedly given by or on behalf of the City even if
(i) such notices were not made in a manner specified herein, were incomplete or were not
preceded or followed by any other form of notice specified herein, or (ii) the terms thereof, as
understood by the recipient, varied from any confirmation thereof. The City shall indemnify the
Lender and the Related Parties of the Lender from all losses, costs, expen.ses and liabilities
resulting from the reliance by such Person on each notice purportedly given by or on behalf of
the City. All telephonic notices to and other telephonic communications with the Lender may be
recorded by the Lender, and each ofthe parties hereto hereby consents to such recording.
Section 8.03. No Waiver; Cumulative Remedies; Enforcemenr. No failure by the Lender
to exercise, and no delay by the Lender in exercising, any right, remedy, power or privilege
hereunder or under, the Note or the Ordinance will operate as a waiver thereof; nor will any
single or partial exercise of any right, remedy, power or privilege hereunder preclude any other
or further exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right, remedy, power or privilege. The
rights, remedies, powers and privileges herein provided, and provided under the Note and the
Ordinance, are cumulative and not exclusive of any rights, remedies, powers and privileges
provided by law.
Section 8.04. Costs and Expenses; Damage Waiver, (a) The City shall pay (i) promptly
after closing and upon receipt of an invoice, all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred by
the Lender (including the reasonable fees, charges and disbursements of counsel for the Lender),
in connection with the preparation, negotiation, execution, delivery and administration of this
Agreement and the Note or any amendments, modifications or waivers of the provisions hereof
or thereof, and (ii) all out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Lender (including the fees, charges
and disbursements of any counsel for the Lender), and shall pay all fees and time charges for
attorneys who may be employees of the Lender, in connecfion with the enforcement or
protection of its rights (A) in connection with this Agreement, the Note and the Ordinance,
including its rights under this Section, or (B) in connection with the Loans and the Term Loan
made hereunder, including all such out-of-pocket expenses incurred during any workout,
restructuring or negotiations in respect of such Loans or the Term Loan.
(b) Indemnificarion by rhe dry. To the extent pemiitted by Law, the City shall
indemnify the Lender (and any sub-agent thereof) (each such Person being called an
"Indemniree") against, and hold each Indemnitee harmless from, any and all losses, claims,
damages, liabilities and related expenses (including the reasonable fees, charges and
disbursements of any counsel for any Indemnitee), and shall indemnify and hold harmless each
Indemnitee from all fees and time chiu-ges and disbursements for attorneys who may be
employees of any Indemnitee, incurred by any Indemnitee or asserted against any Indemnitee by
-34-

 any Person (including the City) other than such Indemnitee and its Related Parties arising out of,
in connection with, or as a result of (i) the execufion or delivery of this Agreement, the Note, the
Ordinance or any agreement or instrument contemplated hereby or thereby, the performance by
the parties hereto of their respective obligations hereunder or thereunder, the consummation of
the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby, or, in the case of the Lender (and any sub-agent
thereoO and its Related Parties only, the administration of this Agreement, the Note and the
Ordinance (including in respect of any matters addressed in Section 3.01), (ii) any Loan, the
Term Loan or the use or proposed use of the proceeds therefrom, or (iii) any actual or
prospective claim, lifigation, investigation or proceeding relating to any of the foregoing,
whether based on contract, tort or any other theory, whether brought by a third party or by the
City, and regardless of whether any Indemnitee is a party thereto; provided that such indemnity
shall not, as to any Indemnitee, be available to the extent that such losses, claims, damages,
liabilities or related expenses (x) are determined by a court of competent jurisdiction by final and
nonappealable judgment to have resulted from the gross negligence or willful misconduct of
such Indemnitee or (y) result from a claim brought by the City or any other party against an
Indemnitee for breach in bad faith of such Indemnitee's obligations hereunder, under the Note or
the Ordinance, if the City or other party has obtained a final and nonappealable judgment in its
favor on such claim as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. Without limifing the
provisions of Section 3.01(c), this Section 8.04(b) will not apply with respect to Taxes other than
any Taxes that represent losses, claims, damages, etc. arising from any non-Tax claim.
(c)
Waiver of Consequenrial Damages, Ere. To the fullest extent permitted by
applicable law, the City shall not assert, and hereby waives, and acknowledges that no other
Person will have, any claim against any Indemnitee, on any theory of liability, for special,
indirect, consequential or punitive damages (as opposed to direct or actual damages) arising out
of, in connection with, or as a result of, this Agreement, the Note, the Ordinance or any
agreement or instrument contemplated hereby, the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby,
any Loans or the Term Loan or the use of the proceeds thereof. No Indemnitee referred to in
subsection (b) above shall be liable for any damages arising from the use by unintended
recipients of any information or other materials distributed to such unintended recipients by such
Indemnitee through telecommunications, electronic or other information transmission systems in
connection with this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance or the transactions contemplated
hereby or thereby other than for direct or actual damages resulting from the gross negligence or
willful misconduct of such Indemnitee as determined by a final and nonappealable judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(d) Payments. All amounts due under this Section shall be payable not later than sixty
(60) days after demand therefor.
(e) Survival. The agreements in this Section survive the termination of this Agreement
and the repayment, satisfaction or discharge of all the other Obligations.
Secrion 8.05. Payments Set Aside. To the extent that any payment by or on behalf of the
City is made to the Lender and such payment or any part thereof is subsequently invalidated,
declared to be fraudulent or preferential, set aside or required (including pursuant to any
settlement entered into by the Lender in its discretion) to be repaid to a trustee, receiver or any
-35-

 other party, in connection with any proceeding under any Debtor Relief Law or otherwise, then
to the extent of such recovery, the obligation or part thereof originally intended to be safisfied
shall be revived and continued in full force and effect as if such payment had not been made.
Secrion 8.06.

Successors and Assigns; Participations.

(a) Successors and Assigns Generally. The provisions of this Agreement are binding
upon and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto and their respective succes.sors and assigns
permitted hereby, except that the City may not assign or otherwise transfer any of its rights or
obligations hereunder without the prior written consent of the Lender. Nothing in this
Agreement, expressed or implied, will be construed to confer upon any Person (other than the
parties hereto, their respective successors and assigns permitted hereby, participants to the extent
provided in subsection (b) of this Section and, to the extent expressly contemplated hereby, the
Related Parties of the Lender) any legal or equitable right, remedy or claim under or by reason of
this Agreement.
(b) Participations. The Lender shall have the right to grant participations in all or a
portion of the Lender's rights and/or obligations under this Agreement (including all or a portion
of its Commitment and/or the Loans and the Term Loan owing to it) to one or more other
banking institufions (each such person a "Parricipant"), and such Participants shall be entitled to
the benefits of this Agreement, including, without limitafion, Sections 3.01 and 3.02 hereof, to
the same extent as if they were a direct party hereto; provided that (i) the Lender's obligations
under this Agreement shall remain unchanged, (ii) the Lender shall remain solely responsible to
the other parties hereto for the performance of such obligations and (iii) the City, shall continue
to deal solely and directly with the Lender in connection with the Lender's rights and obligations
under this Agreement, and provided firrrher that no such Participant shall be entitled to receive
payment hereunder of any amount greater than the amount which would have been payable had
the Lender not granted a participation to such Participant. Upon the grant of a participation of
the Lender's rights and/or obligations under this Agreement, the Lender will promptly notify the
City of the Participant and the proporfionate amount granted under such participation.
(c) Cerrain Pledges. The Lender may at any time pledge or assign a security interest in
all or any portion of its rights under this Agreement (including under its Note, if any) to secure
obligations of the Lender, including any pledge or assignment to secure obligations to a Federal
Reserve Bank; provided that no such pledge or assignment shall release the Lender from any of
its obligations hereunder or substitute any such pledgee or assignee for the Lender as a party
hereto.
Section 8.07. Treatment of Certain Information; Confidentiality Each ofthe City and the
Lender agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the Information (as defined below), except that
Information may be disclosed (a) to its Affiliates and to its Related Parties (it being understood
that the Persons to whom such disclosure is made will be informed of the confidential nature of
such Information and instructed to keep such Information confidential), (b) to the extent required
or requested by any regulatory authority purporting to have jurisdiction over such Person or its
Related Parties (including any self-regulatory authority, such as the National As.sociation of
Insurance Commissioners), (c) to the extent required by applicable laws or regulations or by any
-36-

 subpoena or similar legal process, (d) to any other party hereto, (e) in connection with the
exercise of any remedies hereunder or under the Note or any action or proceeding relating to this
Agreement or the Note or the enforcement of rights hereunder or thereunder, (0 subject to an
agreement containing provisions substantially the same as those of this Section, to (i) any
assignee of or Participant in, or any prospective assignee of or Participant in, any of its rights and
obligations under this Agreement or (ii) any actual or prospective party (or its Related Parties) to
any swap, derivative or other transaction under which payments are to be made by reference to
the City and its obligations, this Agreement or payments hereunder, (g) on a confidential basis to
(i) any rating agency in connection with rating the City or the credit facilities provided
hereunder or (ii) the CUSIP Service Bureau or any similar agency in connection with the
issuance and monitoring of CUSIP numbers or other market identifiers with respect to the credit
facilities provided hereunder, (h) with the consent of the City or (i) to the extent such
Information (x) becomes publicly available other than as a result of a breach of this Secfion or
(y) becomes available to the Lender or any of its Affiliates on a nonconfidenfial basis from a
source other than the City. For purposes of this Section, "Information" means all information
received from the City relafing to the City or any of their respective businesses, other than any
such information that is available to the Lender on a nonconfidential basis prior to disclosure by
the Chy, provided that, in the case of information received from the City after the date hereof,
such information is clearly identified at the time of delivery as confidenfial. The Lender
acknowledges that (a) the Information may include material non-public information concerning
the City, as the case may be, (b) it has developed compliance procedures regarding the use of
material non-public information and (c) it will handle such material non-public information.
Section 8.08. Counterparts; huegrarion; Effecriveness. This Agreement may be executed
in counterparts (and by different parties hereto in different counterparts), each of which
constitutes an original, but all of which when taken together constitutes a single contract. This
Agreement, the Ordinance and the Note constitute the entire contract among the parties relating
to the subject matter hereof and supersede any and all previous agreements and understandings,
oral or written, relating to the subject matter hereof. Except as provided in Section 4.01, this
Agreement is effective vvhen executed by the Lender and when the Lender receives counterparts
hereof that, when taken together, bear the signatures of each of the other parties hereto. Delivery
of an executed counterpart of a signature page of this Agreement by facsimile or other electronic
imaging means (e.g., "pdf or " t i f ) will be effective as delivery of a manually executed
counterpart of this Agreement.
Section 8.09. Survival of Representations and Warranties. All representations and
warranties made hereunder and in the Ordinance or any other document delivered pursuant
hereto or thereto or in connection herewith or therewith survive the execution and delivery
hereof and thereof. Such representations and warranties have been or will be relied upon by the
Lender, regardless of any investigation made by the Lender or on its behalf and notwithstanding
that the Lender may have had notice or knowledge of any Default at the lime of any Borrowing,
and shall continue in full force and effect as long as any Loan, the Term Loan or any other
Obligafion hereunder remain unpaid or unsatisfied.
Section 8.10. Severability. If any provision of this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance
is held to be illegal, invalid or unenforceable, (a) the legality, validity and enforceability of the
-37-

 remaining provisions of this Agreement, the Note and the Ordinance shall not be affected or
impaired thereby and (b) the parties shall endeavor in good faith negotiations to replace the
illegal, invalid or unenforceable provisions with valid provisions the economic effect of which
comes as close as possible to that of the illegal, invalid or unenforceable provisions. The
invalidity of a provision in a particular jurisdiction will not invalidate or render unenforceable
such provision in any other jurisdiction.
Secrion 8.11.

Governing Law; Jurisdicrion Ere. (a) GOVERNING LAW. THIS AGREEMENT

SHALL BE GOVERNED BY, AND CONSTRUED IN ACCORDANCE WITH, THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF
ILLINOIS WITHOUT GIVING EFFECT TO CONFLICTS OF LAWS PRINCIPLES; PROVIDED THAT THE
OBLIGATIONS OF CITY HEREUNDER SHALL BE GOVERNED BY, AND CONSTRUED IN ACCORDANCE

WITH, THE LAW OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS. EACH PARTY HEREBY WAIVES ANY OBJECTION THAT
THE LENDER MAY NOW OR HEREAFTER HAVE TO THE LAYING OF THE VENUE OF ANY SUCH SUIT,

ACTION OR PROCEEDING AND ANY CLAIM THAT SUCH SUIT, ACTION OR PROCEEDING BROUGHT IN
SUCH A COURT HAS BEEN BROUGHT IN AN INCONVENIENT FORUM.
(b)
SUBMISSION TO JURISDICTION. EACH PARTY IRREVOCABLY AND UNCONDITIONALLY
SUBMITS, FOR ITSELF AND ITS PROPERTY, TO THE NONEXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS OF
THE STATE OF ILLINOIS SITTING IN COOK COUNTY AND OF THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF ILLINOIS, AND ANY APPELLATE COURT FROM ANY THEREOF, IN
ANY ACTION OR PROCEEDING ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO THIS AGREEMENT OR THE NOTE, OR
FOR RECOGNITION OR ENFORCEMENT OF ANY JUDGMENT, AND EACH OF THE PARTIES HERETO
IRREVOCABLY AND UNCONDITIONALLY AGREES THAT ALL CLAIMS IN RESPECT OF ANY SUCH
ACTION OR PROCEEDING MAY BE HEARD AND DETERMINED IN SUCH STATE COURTS OR, TO THE
FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAWS, IN SUCH FEDERAL COURTS. EACH OF THE
PARTIES HERETO AGREES THAT A FINAL JUDGMENT IN ANY SUCH ACTION OR PROCEEDING SHALL BE
CONCLUSIVE AND MAY BE ENFORCED IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS BY SUIT ON THE JUDGMENT OR IN

ANY OTHER MANNER PROVIDED BY LAW. NOTHING IN THIS AGREEMENT, THE NOTE OR THE
ORDINANCE SHALL AFFECT ANY RIGHT THAT THE LENDER MAY OTHERWISE HAVE TO BRING ANY
ACTION OR PROCEEDING RELATING TO THIS AGREEMENT, THE NOTE OR THE ORDINANCE AGAINST
CITY OR ANY OF ITS PROPERTIES IN THE COURTS OF ANY OTHER JURISDICTION.
(c)
SERVICE OF PROCESS. EACH PARTY HERETO IRREVOCABLY CONSENTS TO SERVICE OF
PROCESS IN THE MANNER PROVIDED FOR NOTICES IN SECTION 8.02. NOTHING IN THIS AGREEMENT
WILL AFFECT THE RIGHT OF ANY PARTY HERETO TO SERVE PROCESS IN ANY OTHER MANNER
PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW.

(d) To the fullest extent permitted by law, the City represents that it is subject to suit
with respect to its Obligations under this Agreement and the Note and that no sovereign
immunity exists under Illinois law, as ofthe date that this Agreement is executed and delivered
by the City, with respect to the City's contractual obligations under this Agreement and the Note.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, (i) in accordance with the laws of the
State of Illinois, the City shall not waive any sovereign immunities from time to time available
under the laws of the State of Illinois as to jurisdiction, procedures and remedies, (ii) subject to
clause (i) above, this Agreement and the Note will otherwise be fully enforceable as a valid and
binding contract as and to the extent provided by applicable law and, the City may not claim

-38-

 sovereign immunity with respect to any Obligations under this Agreement or the Note; and
(iii) nothing in this Agreement or the Note is deemed to create any rights of action for persons or
entities not a party to this Agreement or the Note or to circumvent any of the iminunifies
contained in the Local Government and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, 745 ILCS
10/1-101 er ie^., as amended.
Secrion 8.12.
Waiver of Jury Trial. EACH PARTY HERETO HEREBY IRREVOCABLY WAIVES,
TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE L A W , ANY RIGHT IT MAY HAVE TO A TRIAL BY
JURY IN ANY LEGAL PROCEEDING DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO THIS
AGREEMENT, THE NOTE OR THE ORDINANCE OR THE TRANSACnONS CONTEMPLATED HEREBY OR
THEREBY (WHETHER BASED ON CONTRACT, TORT OR ANY OTHER THEORY). EACH PARTY HERETO
(A) CERTIFIES THAT NO REPRESENTATIVE, AGENT OR ATTORNEY OF ANY OTHER PERSON HAS
REPRESENTED, EXPRESSLY OR OTHERWISE, THAT SUCH OTHER PERSON WOULD NOT, IN THE EVENT
OF LITIGATION, SEEK TO ENFORCE THE FOREGOING WAIVER AND (B) ACKNOWLEDGES THAT IT AND
THE OTHER PARTIES HERETO HAVE BEEN INDUCED TO ENTER INTO THIS AGREEMENT AND THE NOTE
BY, AMONG OTHER THINGS, THE MUTUAL WAIVERS AND CERTIFICATIONS IN THIS SECTION.
Section 8.13. No Advisory or Fiduciary Relationship. The City acknowledges and agrees
that its dealing with the Lender are solely in the nature of a debtor/creditor relationship and that
in no event will the Lender be considered to be a partner or joint venturer of the City. Also, the
City represents and warrants that it has independently evaluated the business transaction and has
not relied upon, nor will it rely upon, the experfise, advise or other comments or statements of
the Lender (including agents of the Lender), if any, in deciding to pursue such undertaking. As
the City is experienced in business, in no event shall the Lender owe any fiduciary or similar
obligations to it in connection with the subject transaction.
Section 8.14. Electronic Execution of Cerrain Documenrs.
The words "execute,"
"execution," "signed," "signature," and words of like import in any in any amendment or other
modification hereof (including waivers and consents) shall be deemed to include electronic
signatures, the electronic matching of assignment terms and contract formations on electronic
platforms approved by the Lender, or the keeping of records in electronic form, each of which
shall be of the same legal effect, validity or enforceability as a manually executed signature or
the use of a paper-based recordkeeping system, as the case may be, to the extent and as provided
for in any applicable law, including the Federal Electronic Signatures in Global and National
Commerce Act, the New York State Electronic Signatures and Records Act, or any other similar
state laws based on the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act.
Section 8.15.
USA Patriot Act. The Lender is subject to the Patriot Act and hereby
notifies the City that pursuant to the requirements of the Patriot Act, it is required to obtain,
verify and record information that identifies the City, which information includes the name and
address of the City and other information that will allow the Lender to identify the City in
accordance with the Act. The City shall, promptiy following a request by the Lender, provide all
documentaUon and other information that the Lender requests in order to comply with its
ongoing obligafions under applicable "know your customer" and anti-money laundering rules
and regulations, including the Patriot Act.

-39-

 Section 8.16.
Time ofthe Essence. Time is of the essence of this Agreement, the Note
and the Ordinance.
Section 8.17.
Entire Agreement. THIS AGREEMENT, THE NOTE AND THE ORDINANCE
REPRESENT THE FINAL AGREEMENT AMONG THE PARTIES AND MAY NOT BE CONTRADICTED BY
EVIDENCE OF PRIOR, CONTEMPORANEOUS, OR SUBSEQUENT ORAL AGREEMENTS OF THE
PARTIES. T H E R E ARE NO UNWRITTEN ORAL AGREEMENTS A M O N G T H E PARTIES.
Section 8.18.
No Third-Party Righrs. Nothing in this Agreement, whether express or
implied, shall be construed to give to any Person other than the parties hereto any legal or
equitable right, remedy or claim under or in respect of this Agreement, which is intended for the
sole and exclusive benefit of the parties hereto.
[SIGNATURE PAGES TO FOLLOW]

-40-

 the parties hereto have caused this Agreemeni to be.duly executed
as of,the date first above.written.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF,

CITY OF CHICAGO

MORGAN STANLEY BANK. N.A.

By:
Name;
Title:

[Signature Page to Revolving Credit AgreemeniJ

 IN '^ITNESS WHEREOF, the parties h'ercio'hay'e-'Caused this Agreement io be duly executed;
as;ofthe>'date -first; aboye; written.
CITYOF CHICAGO

By:
Name:_
Title: '

MORGAN STANLEY BANK. N . A .

[Signature Page lo Revolving Credit Agreement]

 SCHEDULE 8.02
LENDER'S LENDING O F F I C E ,
CERTAIN ADDRESSES FOR NOTICES
CITY:

City of Chicago

City^s Account
(for loan proceeds):

MORGAN STANLEY BANK, N.A., AS LENDER:

with respect to notices other loan administration matters:
Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A.

with respect to loan administration (borrowing, paydown, interest, fees, rate setting):
Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A.

 EXHIBIT A
FORM OF LOAN NOTICE;

Date;

,201

To: Morgan Staiiley Bank, N.A.

Ladiies and Gentlemen:
Reference is made lo that certain Revolving Credit Agreement, dated as of Febniaiy I,
2014 (as ainended, restated, extended, supplemented or odierwise modified in writing from nine
to time, tlie "Agreement;" the terms defined therein being used herein as therein defined),
between City of CHcagO\(die/Ti"/y ''), and.Mprgan Stanley Bank, N.A. (tlie "Lender").
TheUi'ndersigned hereby^reqiiests (select'pne):
• ' A Borrowing of LotUis

•

A: conyersiori or continuation of Loans

(a Business Day).

1.

On

•.2-

In tlie amoimt of $_

3.

Comprised of.
[Type of Loan Requested][Floating Rate only, availableiif the Lender ha.s
notifie'd' the. City thai' the Eurodollar Rate is unavailable]
For Eurodollar Rate Loans: with an Interest Period of one month.
[Eurodollar Rate Loan]

5.

T6,the following account:

[City's Account]

 The Borrowing, if any, requested herein complies with the proviso to the first sentence of
Section 2.01 of the Agreement.

CITY OF CHICAGO

By:.
Name:
Title:

A-2

 EXHIBIT B
FORM OF NOTE

$100,000,000
FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the

February 21,2014

undersigned CITY OF CHICAGO (the "City"), hereby promises

to pay to MORGAN STANLEY BANK, N.A. or registered assigns (the "Lender"), in accordance
with the provisions of the Agreement (as hereinafter defined), the principal amount of each Loan
and the Term Loan from time to time made by the Lender to the City under that certain
Revolving Credit Agreement, dated as of February 1, 2014 (as amended, restated, extended,
supplemented or otherwise modified in writing from time to time, the "Agreement;"" the terms
defined therein being used herein as therein defined), between the City and the Lender.
The City promises to pay interest on the unpaid principal amount of each Loan and the
Term Loan from the date of such Loan and the Term Loan until such principal amount is paid in
full, at such interest rates and at such times as provided in the Agreemeni. All payments of
principal and interest shall be made to the Lender in Dollars in immediately available funds as
set forth in the Agreement. If any amount is not paid in full when due hereunder, such unpaid
amount will bear interest, to be paid upon demand, from the due date thereof until the date of
actual payment (and before as well as after judgment) computed at the per annum rate set forth in
the Agreement.
This Note is the Note referred to in the Agreement, is entitled to the benefits thereof and
may be prepaid in whole or in part subject to the terms and conditions provided therein. Upon
the occurrence and continuation of one or more of the Events of Default specified in the
Agreement, all amounts then remaining unpaid on this Note shall become, or may be declared to
be, immediately due and payable all as provided in the Agreement. The Loans and the Term
Loan made by the Lender will be evidenced by one or more loan accounts or records maintained
by the Lender in the ordinary course of business. The Lender may also attach schedules to this
Note and endorse thereon the date, amount and maturity of its Loans and the Term Loan and
payments with respect thereto.
The City, for itself, its successors and assigns, hereby waives diligence, presentment,
protest and demand and notice of protest, demand, dishonor and non-payment of this Note.

 THIS NOTE SHALL BE GOVERNED BY, AND CONSTRUED IN ACCORDANCE WITH, THE LAWS OF
THE STATE OF ILLINOIS.
CITY OF CHICAGO

By:.
Name:
Title:

B-2

 LOANS AND PAYMENTS WITH RESPECT THERETO

DATE

AMOUNTOF
LOAN MADE

AMOUNT OF
PRINCIPAL OR
INTEREST PAID THIS
DATE

B-3

OUTSTANDING
PRINCIPAL BALANCE
THIS DATE

NOTATION
MADE BY

 EXHIBIT C
FORM OF COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE

Financial Statement Date:
To:

,

Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A., as Lender

Ladies and Gentlemen:
Reference is made to that certain Revolving Credit Agreement, dated as of February 1,
2014 (as amended, restated, extended, supplemented or otherwise modified in writing from time
to time, the "Agreement;" the terms defined therein being used herein as therein defined),
between City of Chicago (the "City"), and Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A., (the "Lender").
The undersigned Authorized Officer hereby certifies as of the date hereof that he/she is
the
of the City, and that, as such, he/she is authorized to
execute and deliver this Certificate to the Lender on the behalf of the City, and that:
1. Attached hereto as Schedule 1 are the year-end audited financial statements required
by Section 6.01(b)(i) of the Agreement for the fiscal year of the City ended as of the above date,
together with the report and opinion of an independent certified public accountant required by
such section.
2. The undersigned has reviewed and is familiar with the terms of the Agreement and
has made, or has caused to be made under hi.s/her supervision, a detailed review of the
transactions and condition (financial or otherwise) of the City during the accounting period
covered by the attached financial statements.
3. A review of the activities of the City during such fiscal period has been made under
the supervision of the undersigned with a view to determining whether during such fiscal period
the City performed and observed all its Obligations under the Agreement and the Note, and
[select one:]
(to the best knowledge of the undersigned during such fiscal period, the City
performed and observed each covenant and condition of the Agreement, the Note and the
Ordinance applicable to it, and no Default has occurred and is continuing.]
—or—

[the following covenants ur conditions have not been performed or observed and the
following is a list of each such Default and its nature and status:]

 4. The representations and warranties of the City contained in Article V of the
Agreement, and/or any representations and warranties of the City that are contained in any
document furnished at any fime under or in connection with the Agreement, the Note and the
Ordinance, are true and correct on and as of the date hereof, except to the extent that such
representations and warranties specifically refer to an earlier date, in which case they are true and
correct as of such earlier date, and except that for purposes of this Compliance Certificate, the
representafions and warranties contained in Section 5.09 of the Agreement shall be deemed to
refer to the most recent statements furnished pursuant to clau.ses (b)(i) and (b)(ii), respectively, of
Section 6.01(b) of the Agreement, including the .statements in connection with which this
Compliance Certificate is delivered.
IN

WITNESS WHEREOF,

the undersigned has executed this Certificate as of

CITY OF CHICAGO

By:.
Name:
Title:

C-2

 