City of Chicago
Office of the City Clerk

F2014-40

Document Tracking Sheet

Meeting Date:

5/28/2014

Sponsor(s):

City Clerk (transmitted by)

Type:

Connmunication

Title:

General Obligation Revolving Line of Credit Closing
Certificate

Committee(s) Assignment:

 RECEIVED
$100,000,000
CITY OF CHICACJO
GENERAL OBLIGATION REVOLVING LINE OF CRED5g  , HAY 16 PM 3: 20
CLOSING CERTIFICATE
^ ,

OFFICE .OF THE/»^
This Closing Certificate is being delivered pursuant to the authority ci£Htlifi(SL£iR{^e
ordinance adopted by the City Council (the "City Council") of the City of Chicago (the "City") on
May, 1, 2002 (the "Initial Ordinance"), as amended by an ordinance adopted by the City Council on
March 14, 2012, authorizing the City to execute and deliver one or more line of credit agreements
with one or more commercial banks and other financial institutions to provide a revolving line of
credit to meet the City's need for working capital or interim financing for capital projects (the "2012
Ordinance"), and as fiirther amended by an ordinance adopted by the City Council on February 5,
2014 (the "2014 Ordinance" and collectively with the Original Ordinance and the 2012 Ordinance,
the "Ordinance"). Copies of the Ordinance are attached hereto as Exhibit A, and the Ordinance, as
modified by its terms, collectively, remains in full force and effect. Pursuant to Section 18 of the
Initial Ordinance, as amended by the 2012 Ordinance, Barclays Bank PLC has been selected to serve
as the bank providing a revolving line of credit to the City in the amount of $100,000,000.
The City has executed that certain Revolving Credit Agreement dated as of May /
2014
between the City and Barclays Bank PLC (the "Credit Agreement"; capitalized terms used without
definition in this Certificate having the means given them in the Credit Agreement) and that certain
Note dated May /
2014 (the "Note") to evidence the $100,000,000 line of credit.
Attached hereto as Exhibits B and C are executed copies of the Credit Agreement and the
Note.
I , the undersigned, RAHM EMANUEL, Mayor of the City, hereby certify that, pursuant to
law and authorization vested in me, I have approved the Ordinance in the manner and capacity
indicated by my signature and title appended hereto.
I , the undersigned, LOIS A. SCOTT, Chief Financial Officer of the City, hereby certify that I
have executed the Credit Agreement and the Note, in the manner and capacity indicated by my
signature and title appended hereto.
I , the undersigned, LOIS A. SCOTT, Chief Financial Officer of the City, hereby certify that:
(i)
(ii)

(iii)
(iv)

no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing as ofthe date hereof
or will result from the execution and delivery by the City of the Credit Agreement;
the representations and warranties and covenants made by the City in Article IV of
the Credit Agreement or incorporated into the Credit Agreement by reference are
true and correct in all material respects on and as of the Closing Date, as if made on
and as of such date;
all conditions precedent to the effectiveness of the Credit Agreement set forth in
Section 3.01 of the Credit Agreement have been satisfied;
neither the making of any Loans nor the consummation of any ofthe transactions
contemplated by the Credit Agreement will violate any law, rule or regulation

 applicable to the City or the Credit Agreement;
no material adverse change in the financial condition, operations or prospects ofthe
City or laws, rules or regulations (or iheir interpretation or administration) that, in
any case, may adversely affect the transactions contemplated by the Credit
Agreement and the repayment by the City of the Loans has occurred since
December 31, 2012 which would be reasonably likely to result in a Material
Adverse Effect, except as disclosed in writing to the Baiik prior to the Closing
Date; and
attached hereto as Exhibit D are copies of the most recent rating reports from
Standard & Poor's ("S&P"), Moody's Investor Service ("Moody's") and Fitch
Ratings ("Fitch"), concerning the City's general obligation credit, respectively.
The City has not received notice from S&P, Moody's or Fitch that the current
ratings have been reduced, withdrawn or suspended.

(v)

(vi)

I , the undersigned, SUSANA A MENDOZA, City Clerk of the City, do further certify that
RAHM EMANUEL and LOIS A. SCOTT are, respectively, the duly authorized Mayor and Chief
Financial Officer ofthe City, and that the signatures of said RAHM EMANUEL and LOIS A. SCOTT
as they appear below are in all respects the true and genuine signatures of the officers ofthe City
authorized to approve the Ordinance, and to execute the Credit Agreement and the Note, respectively.
I , the undersigned SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk ofthe City, direct a copy of this
filing to the City Council.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto affixed our signatures and have caused to
be affixed hereto the Corporate Seal of the City this / ( p ^ a y of May, 2014.

SIGNATURES

_

OFFICIAL T I T L E
Mayor, City of Chicago
Chief Financial Officer, City of Chicago
ity Clerk, City of Chicago

[SEAL]

  



 

Respectfully submitted this / ^ day of May, 2014.

CITY OF CHICAGO

Chief Financial Officer

Closing Certificaie
Barclays Bank PLC
Revolving Credit Agreement

  

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF FILING
The Closing Certificate of the City for its $100,000,000 Revolving Line of Credit
Program including all exhibits thereto was filed in the Office of the City Clerk ofthe City of
Chicago, this /fe'^ay of May, 2014.

Susana A. Mendoza
City Clerk
[SEAL]

 EXHIBIT A

THE ORDINANCE

83072

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL--CHICAGO

5/1/2002

AUTHORIZATION FOR ISSUANCE OF COMMERCIAL
PAPER NOTES, SERIES A AND B .
The Committee on Finance submitted the following report:
CHICAGO, May 1, 2002.
To the President and Members of the City Council:
Your Committee on Finance, having had under consideration a substitute
ordineuice authorizing the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes Series A and
Series B, amount of notes not to exceed $200,000,000, having had the same under
advisement, begs leave to report and recommend that Your Honorable Body Pass
the proposed substitute ordinance transmitted herewith.
This recommendation was concurred in by a viva voce vote of the members of the
Committee.
Respectfully submitted,
(Signed) EDWARD M. BURKE.
Chairman.

Alderman Burke presented the following amendment to the proposed substitute
ordinance trzuismitted with the foregoing committee report:
I hereby move to amend the commercial paper ordinance by adding a new
Section 29, following Section 28 ofthe ordinance:
Section 29. Reporting Requirement. The Chief Financieil OfOcer shaUl report
to the City Council with respect to the expenditure of the proceeds of any
Authorized Debt issued hereunder. Such reports shall be made no later
than April, 1 and October 1 of each year, commencing October 1, 2002, with
respect to expenditures made during the six (6) month period ending on
September 1. April 1 reports shall cover expenditures made during the six (6)
month period ending on March 1.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F C O M M I T T E E S

83073

On motion of Alderman Burke, the foregoing eunendment was Adopted by yeas and
nays as follows:
Yeas — Aldermen Granato, Haithcock, Tillman, Preckwinkle, Hairston, Lyle,
Beavers, Stroger, Beale, Pope, Balcer, Frias, OLivo, Burke, T. Thomas, L. Thomas,
Murphy, Rugai, Troutman, DcVille, Munoz, Zaiewski, Chandler, Solis, Ocasio,
Burnett, E. Smith, Carothers, Wojcik, Suarez, Matlak, Mell, A u s t i n , Colom, Banks,
Mitts, Allen, Laurino, Doherty, Daley, Hansen, Levar, Shiller, Schulter, M . Smith,
Moore, Stone — 47.
Nays ~ None.
Thereupon, on motion of Alderman Burke, the said proposed substitute ordinance,
as amended, was Passed by yeas and nays as follows:
Yeas — Aldermen Granato, Haithcock, Tillman, Preckwinkle, Hairston, Lyle,
Beavers, Stroger, Beale, Pope, Balcer, Frias, Olivo, Burke, T. Thomas, L. Thomas,
Murphy, Rugcu, Troutman, DeViUe, Munoz, Zaiewski, Chandler, Solis, Ocasio,
Burnett, E. Smith, Carothers, Wojcik, Suarez, Matlak, Mell, A u s t i n , Colom, Banks,
Mitts, Allen, Laurino, Doherty, Daley, Hansen, Levar, Shiller, Schulter, M . Smith,
Moore, Stone ~ 47.
Nays — None.
Alderman Beavers moved to reconsider the foregoing vote. The motion was lost.
The following is said ordinance as passed:

WHEREAS, The City of Chicago (the "City") is a duly constituted and existing
municipality w i t h i n the meaning of Section 1 of Article VII o f t h e 1970 Constitution
o f t h e State of Illinois (the "Constitution") having a population i n excess of twentyfive thousand (25,000) and is a home rule u n i t of local government u n d e r
Section 6(a) of /Article VII of the Constitution; and
WHEFiEAS, The City proposes to establish a Commercial Paper Program (the "CP.
Program") an Auction Rate Securities Program (the "Auction Rate Program") a
Variable Rate Securities Program (the "Variable Rate Program") and a Line of Credit
Program (the "Line of Credit Program") for the City to provide i n t e r i m financing for
capital projects of the City and for the short-term financing of the working capital
needs of the City (the "Borrowing Plan"); and
WHEREAS, There have been prepared and presented to this meeting forms of the
following documents:

 JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(1) Commercial Paper Trust Indenture (the "CP. Indenture") between the City
and a bank or trust company to be designated as provided herein (the "CP.
Trustee") (Exhibit A); and
(2) Connmercial Paper Dealer Agreement (the "CP. Dealer Agreement") between
the City and a commercicd paper dealer designated as provided herein (the
"Dealer^) (Exhibit B); and
(3) Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement (the "CP. Paying Agent Agreement")
between the City and an issuing and pajring agent designated as provided herein
(Exhibit C); and
(4) Auction Rate Securities Trust Indenture (the "Auction Rate Indenture")
between the City and a bank or trust company to be designated as provided herein
(the "Auction Rate Trustee") (Exhibit D); and
(5) Auction Agreement (the "Auction Agreement") between the City and an
auction agent designated as provided herein (the "Auction Agent") (Exhibit E); and
(6) Variable Rate Securities Trust Indenture (the "Variable Rate Indenture")
between the City and a bank or trust company to be designated as provided herein
(the "Variable Rate Trustee") (Exhibit F); and
WHEREAS, It is necessary and advisable to implement the Borrowing Plan; now,
therefore.
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Chicago:
SECTION 1. Findings And Determinations. The City hereby finds and
determines as follows:
(a) that from time to time interim financing of capital projects is needed prior to
the issuance of long-term bonds;
(b) that from time to time working capital needs of the City require the shortterm borrowing of funds;
(c) that the City's ability to borrow pursuant to the Borrowing Plan as herein
provided without further action by this City Council for such purposes will
enhance the City's opportunities to obtain financing upon the most favorable
terms available; and
(d) that the delegations of authority that are contained herein arc necessary and
desirable because this City Council cannot itself as advantageously, expeditiously
or conveniently exercise such authority.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83075

Thus, authority is granted to the Chief Financial Officer ofthe City appointed by
the Mayor or, if there is no such officer then holding such office, the City
Comptroller (the "Chief Financial Officer") to implement the Borrowing Plan for the
purposes set forth herein, and from time to time to cause to be issued Commercial
Paper Notes (the "CP. Notes") pursuant to the CP. Progreun, Auction Rate Bonds
or Notes (the "Auction Rate Securities") pursuant to the Auction Rate Progrsun, Line
of Credit Notes (the "Line of Credit Notes") pursuant to the Line of Credit Program
and Variable Rate Demand Bonds or Notes (the "Variable Rate Securities") pursuant
to the Variable Rate Program, as and to the extent determined to be desirable and
in the best fmancial interest of the City.
The CP. Notes, the Line of Credit Notes, the Auction Rate Securities and the
Variable Rate Securities are herein sometimes collectively called the "Authorized
Debt" and the CP. Indenture, the Auction Rate Indenture and the Variable Rate
Indenture (each an "Indenture") are herein sometimes collectively called the
"Indentures".
SECTION 2. Purposes. The Borrowing Plan authorizes the issuance of one (1)
or more series of Authorized Debt for any ofthe following purposes (or combination
thereof): (a) the payment, or the reimbursement of the City for the pa3mient, of the
cost of all or any portion of any capital project heretofore or hereafter approved by
this City Council; (b) cash Qow needs ofthe City; (c) the deposit of monies into funds
and accounts as are provided for in an Indenture; and (d) the payment of costs of
issuance incurred in cotmection with each series of Authorized Debt. The proceeds
ofthe issuance of each series of Authorized Debt shall be applied for the purposes
set forth above in the manner and i n the amounts specified in a certificate of the
Chief Financial Officer delivered in connection with such issuance pursuant to the
applicable Indenture securing such series or, in the case of the Line of Credit
f^ogram, each request for funds under each line of credit agreement (as defined in
Section 18 of this ordinance) entered into by the City pursuant to this ordineuice.
In order to facilitate the sale of the Authorized Debt, the Chief Financial OfGcer is
authorized to purchase or obtain from commercial banks or other financial
institutions one (1) or more letters of credit, lines of credit, bond insurance policies,
standby bond purchase agreements or similar credit enhancement and liquidity
facilities (each a "Credit Facility").
Ln cormection with the Borrowing Plan and the use of the proceeds of the
Authorized Debt, the Chief Financial Officer is authorized to establish one (1) or
more funds, accounts, sub-funds and sub-accounts ofthe City, one (1) or more of
which may be held in trust with a trustee pursuant to an Indenture.
SECTION 3. Maximum Amount And Term. Without further authorization of
this City Council, the maximum aggregate principal amount of all Authorized Debt
outstanding under this ordinance at any time shall not exceed Two Hundred Million
Dollars ($200,000,000) (exclusive of unpaid interest and fees). All Authorized Debt

 83076

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

shall mature on or prior to January 1, 2017.
SECTION 4. Limited Tax General Obligations. The obHgation of the City to
make payments on the Authorized Debt (principal, interest and redemption
p r e m i u m , i f any, as appropriate) is a direct and general obligation of the City
payable f r o m any f u n d s legally available for such purpose. The City covenants and
agrees to take all necessary action to cmnually appropriate f i i n d s i n a timely manner
so as to provide for the making of all payments o f t h e Authorized Debt as described
i n the Indentures and each Line of Credit Agreement; provided, however, that i n no
event shall the City be obligated to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax i n
addition to other City taxes or any special ad valorem or other tax u n l i m i t e d as to
rate or amount to pay such principEd, interest or redemption p r e m i u m .
SECTION 5. The C P . Program, (a) The C P . Notes are hereby authorized to be
issued f r o m time to time. The C P . Notes shall be designated "Commercial Paper
Notes" and may be issued i n one (1) or more series. Each C P . Note shall m a t u r e
not later t h a n two h u n d r e d seventy (270) days after its date of issuance, and shall
bear interest f r o m its date at a rate or rates not i n excess of the lesser of (i) eighteen
percent (18%) per annum, computed i n the manner set f o r t h i n the C P . Indenture,
or (ii) during such period as such C P . Note is secured by a Credit Facility (a "CP.
Credit Facility"), the m a x i m u m interest rate provided for u n d e r such C P . Credit
Facility. The C P . Notes may be issued as notes the interest on w h i c h is n o t
includable i n gross income for federal income tax purposes or, i f so determined by
the Chief Financial Officer at the time of the sale thereof, as notes the interest on
w h i c h is includable i n gross income for federal income tax purposes.
(b) The C P . Notes shall be executed on behalf of the City w i t h the m a n u a l or
facsimile signature of the Mayor of the City, and shall be attested w i t h the m a n u a l
or facsimile signature of the City Clerk of the City, and shall have impressed or
imprinted thereon the ofiicial seal of the City (or a facsimile thereof). I n case any
officer of the City whose signature or whose facsimile signature shall appear on the
C P . Notes shall cease to be such officer before the deUvery of such C P . Notes, such
signature or the facsimile signature thereof shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient
for all purposes the same as i f such officer had remained i n office u n t i l defivery.
(c) Subject to the limitations contained i n this ordinance, a u t h o r i t y is hereby
delegated to the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer to determine the aggregate
principal amount of C P . Notes to be issued, the date or dates thereof, the maturities
thereof, the rate or rates of interest payable thereon or the method for determining
such rate or rates, and to sell the C P . Notes to or w i t h the assistance of one (1) or
more Dealers to be designated by the Chief Financial Officer, p u r s u a n t to one (1) or
more C P . Dealer Agreements.
(d) To evidence the exercise of the authority delegated to the Mayor or the Chief
Financial Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, as the
case may be, is hereby directed to execute and file w i t h the City Clerk i n connection

 5 / 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83077

with the initial sale of CP. Notes a certificate setting forth the determinations made
pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate shall constitute
conclusive evidence of the proper exercise by them of such authority. Upon the
filing of such certificate, the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shall also file with
the City Clerk one (1) copy ofthe CP. Indenture. The City Clerk shall direct a copy
of such filing to this City Council.
SECTION 6. Form Of CP. Indenture. The form of CP. Indenture presented to
this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit A is hereby approved in all respects.
The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver
one (1) or more CP. Indentures in substantially the form of the CP. Indenture
presented to this meeting, with appropriate revisions in text as the Mayor or the
Chief Financial Oflicer shall determine are necessary or desirable, and the City
Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the corporate seal ofthe City
or a facsimile thereof, the execution and delivery thereof to constitute conclusive
evidence of this City Councirs approval of any and all such changes or revisions.
The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate a bank or trust
company to serve as Trustee under the CP. Indenture.
SECTION 7. Form Of CP. Dealer Agreement. The form of CP. Dealer
Agreement presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit B is hereby
approved in all respects. The Mayor or the Chief FinanciEd Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver one (1) or more CP. Dealer Agreements in
substantially the form ofthe CP. Dealer Agreement presented to this meeting, with
appropriate revisions in text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shall
determine are necessary or desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the
same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the
execution and defivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City
Council's approval of any and all such changes or revisions. The Chief FinEmcial
Officer is hereby authorized to designate one (1) or more banks or investment
banking firms to serve as "Dealer" under a CP. Dealer Agreement.
SECTION 8. Form Of CP. Paying Agent Agreement. The form of CP. Paying
Agent Agreement presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit C is
hereby approved in all respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and deUver one (1) or more CP. Pajdng Agent Agreements in
substantially the form of the CP. Paying Agent Agreement presented to this
meeting, with appropriate revisions i n text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer shall determine are necessary or desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized
to attest the same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile
thereof, the execution and defivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this
City Council's approved of any and all such changes or revisions. The Chief
Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate the CP. Paying Agent with
respect to each series of CP. Notes.
SECTION

9.

CP.

Reimbursement

Agreements.

The Mayor or the Chief

 83078

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Financial Officer is hereby authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more
reimbursement agreements (each, a "CP. Reimbursement Agreement") in
substantially the form of reimbursement agreements executed and defivered by the
City in connection with previous variable rate financings, with appropriate revisions
in text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shall determine are necessary or
desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the same £md affix thereto the
corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and deUvery thereof
to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval of any and all such
changes or revisions. Such revisions in text may include (a) provisions permitting
the stated amount of a CP. Credit Fadfity to be increased and decreased from time
to time to support the CP. Notes then outstanding; and (b) such other provisions
as may be necessary or desirable to implement the CP. Program as herein
contemplated. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby further authorized
to execute and deliver a promissory note pursuant to each CP. Reimbursement
Agreement (a "CP. Reimbursement Note") to the extent required thereby, in
substantially the form used to support reimbursement agreements i n previous
variable rate financings for the City, with appropriate revisions to reflect the terms
and provisions ofthe related CP. Reimbursement Agreement, and the City Clerk is
hereby authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the corporate seal ofthe City
or a facsimile thereof, the execution and defivery thereof to constitute conclusive
evidence of this City Council's approval of any changes or revisions therein. The
interest rate payable on any such CP. Reimbursement Note shall not exceed
eighteen percent (18%) per annum (including the recovery by the financial
institution providing the related CP. Credit Facifity of any amounts otherwise not
payable to such financial institution solely as a result ofthe interest rate limit set
forth in the related CP. Reimbursement Note, any interest to be so recovered to be
determined at an interest rate not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) per annum),
and the maturity of any obUgation thereunder shall not be greater than ten (10)
years fi^om the date of the related advance (subject to extension and renewal as
therein provided). The maximum annual fee payable to any financial institution
under a CP. Reimbursement Agreement shall not exceed two percent (2%) of the
stated amount of the related CP. Credit Facility (and any unused capacity
thereunder).
The obfigations of the City under each CP. Reimbursement Agreement and under
each CP. Reimbursement Note shall constitute direct and general obfigations ofthe
City and may be payable from any funds legaUy available for such purpose. The
City hereby covenants and agrees to take afi necessary action to annually
appropriate funds in a timely manner so as to provide for the making of all
pajmients due under any CP. Reimbursement Agreement and under each CP.
Reimbursement Note; provided however, that in no event shall the City be obfigated
to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax in addition to other City taxes or any
special ad valorem tax or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to pay any
amount due under any CP Reimbursement Agreement or the principal of,
redemption premium on, or interest on any CP. Reimbursement Note.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF C O M M I T T E E S

83079

The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate one (1) or more
financial institutions to provide a C P . Credit Facifity w i t h respect to each series of
C P . Notes. Nothing contained herein shall fimit or restrict the Chief Financial
Officer's abifity (i) to appoint separate financial institutions to issue separate C P .
Credit Facifities; (u) to appoint more than one (1) financial i n s t i t u t i o n to issue a
single C P . Credit Facifity; or (ifi) to replace or extend any C P . Credit Facifity.
SECTION 10. The Auction Rate Program, (a) The Auction Rate Securities are
hereby authorized to be issued firom time to time. The Auction Rate Securities shall
be designated "Auction Rate Bonds" or "Auction Rate Notes", may be issued i n one
(1) or more series and may bear an additional designation to identify each series.
Each Auction Rate Security shall bear interest f r o m its date at a rate or rates not
i n excess of the lesser of (i) eighteen percent (18%) per a n n u m , computed i n the
manner set f o r t h i n the Auction Rate Indenture, or (u) d u r i n g s u c h period as such
Auction Rate Security is secured by a Credit Facifity (an "Auction Rate Credit
Facifity"), the m a x i m u m interest rate provided for under such Auction Rate Credit
Facifity. The Auction Rate Securities may be issued as bonds or notes the interest
on w h i c h is not includable i n gross income for federal income tax purposes or, if so
determined by the Chief Financial Officer at the time of the sale thereof, as bonds
or notes the interest on which is includable i n gross income for federal income tax
purposes.
(b) The Auction Rate Securities shaU be executed on behalf of the City w i t h the
manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor of the City, and shall be attested w i t h
the manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk of the City, and shaU have
impressed or imprinted thereon the official seal o f t h e City (or a facsimile thereof).
In case any officer of the City whose signature or whose facsimile signature shaU
appear on the Auction Rate Securities shall cease to be such officer before the
delivery of such Auction Rate Securities, such signature or the facsimile signature
thereof shaU nevertheless be vafid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if such
officer had remained i n office u n t i l defivery.
(c) Subject to the limitations contained i n this ordineuice, authority is hereby
delegated to the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer to sell the Auction Rate
Securities to one (1) or more underwriters to be designated by the Chief Financial
Officer, pursuant to one (1) or more contracts of purchase w i t h respect to the
Auction Rate Securities between the City and such underwriters; provided that the
aggregate purchase price of any series of Auction Rate Securities shafi not be less
than ninety-eight percent (98%) of the principal amount thereof to be issued (less
any original issue discount which may be used i n the marketing thereof) plus any
accrued interest thereon from theii: date to the date of defivery thereof and payment
therefor.
(d) The Mayor or the Chief Fincmcial Officer, w i t h the concurrence of the
Chairman o f t h e Conunittee on Finance o f t h e City CouncD, is hereby authorized
and directed to execute and defiver one (1) or more contracts of purchase for

 83080

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Auction Rate Securities i n substantially the f o r m o f t h e contracts of purchase used
i n connection w i t h the previous sales of variable rate debt by the City, together w i t h
such changes and revisions consistent w i t h the purposes and intent of this
ordinance as shall be approved by the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, as the
case may be, subject to the limitations contained i n this ordinance, the execution
and deUvery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of t h i s City Council's approval
of such changes and modifications.
(e) To evidence the exercise o f t h e a u t h o r i t y delegated to the Mayor or the Chief
Financial Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, as the
case may be, is hereby directed to execute and file w i t h the City Clerk i n connection
w i t h the initial auction of Auction Rate Securities a certificate setting f o r t h the
determinations made pursuant to the a u t h o r i t y granted herein, w h i c h certificate
shall constitute conclusive evidence of the proper exercise by them of such
authority. Upon the fifing of such certificate, the Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer shcdl also file w i t h the City Clerk one (1) copy o f t h e Auction Rate Indenture.
The City Clerk shaU direct a copy of such f i l i n g to this City Council.
SECTION 11. Form Of Auction Rate Indenture. The f o r m of Auction Rate
Indenture presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit D is hereby
approved i n aU respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more A u c t i o n Rate Indentures i n
substantiaUy the f o r m o f t h e Auction Rate Indenture presented to this meeting, w i t h
appropriate revisions i n text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shall
determine £u-e necessary or desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the
same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the
execution and defivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City
Council's approval of any and all such changes or revisions. The Chief Financial
Officer is hereby authorized to designate a bank or t r u s t company to serve as
Trustee under the Auction Rate Indenture.
SECTION 12. Form Of Auction Agreement. The f o r m of Auction Agreement
presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit E is hereby approved i n
aU respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to
execute and defiver one (1) or more Auction Agreements i n substantiaUy the f o r m
of the Auction Agreement presented to this meeting, w i t h appropriate revisions i n
text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shaU determine are necessary or
desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the
corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and defivery thereof
to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval of any and all such
changes or revisions. The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate
one (1) or more banks or investment banking firms to serve as "Auction Agent"
under an Auction Agreement.
SECTION 13. Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreements. The Mayor or the
Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83081

reimbursement agreements (each, an "Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement")
in substantiaUy the form of reimbursement agreements executed and defivered by
the City in connection with previous variable rate financings, with appropriate
revisions in text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shall determine are
necessary or desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the SEune and affix
thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and
delivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Council's approved of
any and all such changes or revisions. Such revisions in text may include (a)
provisions permitting the stated amount of an Auction Rate Credit Facifity to be
increased and decreased from time to time to support the Auction Rate Securities
then outstanding; and (b) such other provisions as may be necessary or desirable
to implement the Auction Rate Program as herein contemplated. The Mayor or the
Chief Financial Officer is hereby further authorized to execute and deUver a
promissory note pursuant to each Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement (an
"Auction Rate Reimbursement Note"), to the extent required thereby, in
substantially the form used to support reimbursement agreements in previous
variable rate financings for the City, with appropriate revisions to reflect the terms
and provisions ofthe related Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement, and the City
Clerk is hereby authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the corporate seal of
the City or a facsimUe thereof, the execution and deUvery thereof to constitute
conclusive evidence of this City CouncU's approval of any changes or revisions
therein. The interest rate payable on any such Auction Rate Reimbursement Note
shall not exceed eighteen percent (18%) per auinum (including the recovery by the
financial institution providing the related Auction Rate Credit Facifity of any
amounts otherwise not payable to such financial institution solely as a result ofthe
interest rate limit set forth in the related Auction Rate Reimbursement Note, any
interest to be so recovered to be determined at an interest rate not to exceed twentyfive percent (25%) per sumum), and the maturity of any obfigation thereunder shaU
not be greater than ten (10) years from the date ofthe related advance (subject to
extension and renewal as therein provided). The maximum emnual fee payable to
any financial institution under an Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement shaU
not exceed two percent (2%) ofthe stated amount ofthe related Auction Rate Credit
Facifity (and any unused capacity thereunder).
The obfigations of the City under each Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement
and under each Auction Rate Reimbursement Note shall constitute direct and
general obligations of the City and may be payable from any funds legaUy available
for such purpose. The City hereby covenEuits and agrees to take aU necessary
action to annually appropriate funds in a timely manner so as to provide for the
making of all payments due under any Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement and
under each Auction Rate Reimbursement Note; provided however, that in no event

 83082

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

shaU the City be obligated to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax in addition
to other City taxes or any special ad valorem tax or other tax unlimited as to rate
or amount to pay any amount due under any Auction Rate Reimbursement
Agreement or the principal of, redemption premium on, or interest on any Auction
Rate Reimbursement Note.
The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate one (1) or more
financial institutions to provide an Auction Rate Credit Facifity with respect to each
series of Auction Rate Securities. Nothing contained herein shaU fimit or restrict
the Chief Financial Officer's abifity (i) to appoint separate financial institutions to
issue separate Auction Rate Credit Facifities; (u) to appoint more than one (1)
financial institution to issue a single Auction Rate Credit Facility; or (iii) to replace
or extend any Auction Rate Credit Facifity.
SECTION 14. The Variable Rate Program, (a) The Variable Rate Securities are
hereby authorized to be issued from time to time. The Variable Rate Securities shaU
be designated "Vzuiable Rate Bonds" or "Variable Rate Notes" may be issued in one
(1) or more series and may bear an additional designation to identify each series.
E^ch Variable Rate Security shaU bear interest from its date at a rate or rates not
in excess of the lesser of (i) eighteen percent (18%) per annum, computed in the
manner set forth in the Variable Rate Indenture, or (u) during any period as such
Variable Rate Security is secured by a Credit Facility (a "Vzuriable Rate Credit
Facifity"), the maximum interest rate provided for under such Variable Rate Credit
Facifity. At any time, the Chief Financial Officer may determine that a Variable Rate
Security shaU bear interest at a fixed rate to its maturity. The Variable Rate
Securities may be issued as bonds or notes the interest on which is not includable
in gross income for federal income tax purposes or, if so determined by the Chief
Financial Officer at the time of the sale thereof, as bonds or notes the interest on
which is includable in gross income for federal income tax purposes.
(b) The Variable Rate Securities shaU be executed on behalf of the City with the
manual or facsinule signature of the Mayor of the City, £md shall be attested with
the manucd or facsinule signature of the City Clerk of the City, and shall have
impressed or imprinted thereon the official seal ofthe City (or a facsimile thereof).
In case any officer of the City whose signature or whose facsimile signature shaU
appear on the Variable Rate Securities shaU cease to be such officer before the
defivery of such Variable Rate Securities, such signature or the facsimUe signature
thereof shafi nevertheless be vafid and sufficient for aU purposes the same as if such
officer had remained in office untU defivery.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83083

(c) Subject to the fimitations contained in this ordinance, authority is hereby
delegated to the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer to sell the Variable Rate
Securities to one (1) or more underwriters to be designated by the Chief Financial
Officer, pursuant to one (1) or more contracts of purchase with respect to the
Variable Rate Securities between the City and such underwriters; provided that the
aggregate purchase price of any series of Variable Rate Securities shaU not be less
than ninety-eight percent (98%) of the principal amount thereof to be issued (less
any original issue discount which may be used in the marketing thereof) plus any
accrued interest thereon from their date to the date of defivery thereof and payment
therefor.
(d) The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, with the concurrence of the
Chairman of the Committee on Finance of this City CouncU, is hereby authorized
and directed to execute and deliver one (1) or more contracts of purchase for
Variable Rate Securities in substantiaUy the form of the contracts of purchase used
in connection with the previous sales of Variable Rate Securities by the City,
together with such changes and revisions consistent with the purposes and intent
of this ordinance as shafi be approved by the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer,
as the case may be, subject to the limitations contained in this ordinance, the
execution and delivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City
CouncU's approval of such changes and modifications.
(e) To evidence the exercise of the authority delegated to the Mayor or the Chief
Financial Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, as the
case may be, is hereby directed to execute and fUe with the City Clerk in connection
with each sale of Variable Rate Securities a certificate setting forth the
determinations made pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate
shaU constitute conclusive evidence of the proper exercise by them of such
authority. Upon the filing of such certificate, the Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer shaU also file with the City Clerk one (1) copy ofthe Variable Rate Indenture.
The City Clerk shaU direct a copy of such fifing to this City CouncU.
SECTION 15. Form Of Variable Rate Indenture. The form of Variable Rate
Indenture presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit F is hereby
approved in aU respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver one (1) or more Variable Rate Indentures in
substantiaUy the form of the Variable Rate Indenture presented to this meeting,
with appropriate revisions in text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shafi
determine are necessary or desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the
same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimUe thereof, the

 83084

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

execution and delivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City
CouncU's approval of any and all such changes or revisions. The Chief Financial
Officer is hereby authorized to designate a bank or trust company to serve as
TVustee under the Variable Rate Indenture.
SECTION 16. Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreements. The Mayor or the
Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more
reimbursement agreements (each, a "Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement") in
substantiaUy the form of reimbursement agreements executed euid delivered by the
City in connection with previous variable rate financings, with appropriate revisions
in text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shaU determine are necessary or
desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the
corporate seal of the City or a facsimUe thereof, the execution and delivery thereof
to constitute conclusive evidence of this City CouncU's approval of any and aU such
changes or revisions. Such revisions in text may include (a) provisions permitting
the stated amount of a Variable Rate Credit Facifity to be increased and decreased
from time to time to support the Variable Rate Securities then outstanding; and (b)
such other provisions as may be necessary or desirable to implement the Variable
Rate Program as herein contemplated. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is
hereby further authorized to execute and deliver a promissory note pursuant to
each Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement (a "Variable Rate Reimbursement
Note"), to the extent required thereby, in substantiaUy the form used to support
reimbursement agreements in previous variable rate financings for the City, with
appropriate revisions to reflect the terms and provisions ofthe related Variable Rate
Reimbursement Agreement, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized to attest the
same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimUe thereof, the
execution and defivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City
CouncU's approval of Euiy changes or revisions therein. The interest rate payable on
any such Variable Rate Reimbursement Note shaU not exceed eighteen percent
(18%) per annum (including the recovery by the financial institution providing the
related Variable Rate Credit FacUity of any amounts otherwise not payable to such
financial institution solely as a result ofthe interest ratefimitset forth in the related
Variable Rate Reimbursement Note, any interest to be so recovered to be determined
at an interest rate not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) per annum, and the
maturity of any obfigation thereunder shaU not be greater than ten (10) years from
the date of the related advance (subject to extension and renewal as therein
provided). The maximum annual fee payable to any financial institution under a
Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement shaU not exceed two percent (2%) of the
stated amount ofthe related Variable Rate Credit FacUity (and any unused capacity
thereunder).

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83085

The obfigations of the City under each Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement
and under each Vsuiable Rate Reimbursement Note shaU constitute direct and
general obfigations of the City and may be payable from any funds legaUy avculable
and annuaUy appropriated for such purpose. The City hereby covenants and agrees
to take aU necessary action to annuaUy appropriate funds in a timely manner so as
to provide for the making of aU payments due under any Variable Rate
Reimbursement Agreement and under each Variable Rate Reimbursement Note;
provided however, that in no event shaU the City be obfigated to levy any separate
ad valorem or other tax in addition to other City taxes or any special ad valorem tax
or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to pay any amount due under any
Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement or the principEd of, redemption premium
on, or interest on any Variable Rate Reimbursement Note.
The Chief Financied Officer is hereby authorized to designate one (1) or more
financial institutions to provide a Variable Rate Credit Facifity with respect to each
series of VEiriablc Rate Securities. Nothing contained herein shaU fimit or restrict
the Chief FinEmcial Officer's abifity (i) to appoint separate Cnemcial institutions to
issue separate Variable Rate Credit Faculties; (u) to appoint more than one (1)
financial institution to issue a single Vsuiable Rate Credit FacUity; or (ifi) to replace
or extend any Variable Rate Credit Facifity.
SECTION 17. Remarketing Agreements. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer
is hereby authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more remarketing agreements
(each a "Remarketing Agreement") relating to Auction Rate Securities and Vsuriable
Rate Securities in substEuitiaUy the form previously used for variable rate finEmcings
of the City with such appropriate revisions in text as the Chief FinEmcial Officer
shaU determine as necessary and desirable, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized
to attest the same and to affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimUe
thereof. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby delegated the authority
to appoint a Remarketing Agent with respect to each series of Auction Rate
Securities and each series of Variable Rate Securities in the manner provided in the
related Indenture.
SECTION 18. The Line Of Credit Program, (a) The Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer is hereby authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more line of credit
agreements (each, a "Line of Credit Agreement") with commercial banks and other
financial institutions £uid in the form customarily used to provide borrowers with
a revolving fine of credit to meet their need for working capital and with such terms
and provisions as the Chief Financial Officer shaU determine to be in the best
interest ofthe City. The City Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto
the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and defivery
thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City CouncU's approval of each
such Line of Credit Agreement.

 83086

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(b) To evidence borrowings under each Line of Credit Agreement, the City is
authorized to issue from time to time one (1) or more Line of Credit Notes, each to
be designated "Line of Credit Note". Each Line of Credit Note shaU hear interest
from its date at a rate or rates not in excess of eighteen percent (18%) per annum.
The Line of Credit Notes may be issued as notes the interest on which is not
includable in gross income for federal income tax purposes or, if so determined by
the Chief Financial Officer at the time of issuance of the Line of Credit Notes, as
notes the interest on which is includable in gross income for federal income tax
purposes.
(c) The Line of Credit Notes shall be executed on behalf of the City with the
manual or facsimUe signature of the Mayor of the City, and shcdl be attested with
the manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk, and shaU have impressed or
imprinted thereon the official seal of the City (or a facsimUe thereof). In case any
officer of the City whose signature or facsimile signature shaU appear on the Line
of Credit Notes shaU cease to be such officer before the defivery of such Line of
Credit Notes, such signature or facsimUe signature thereof shaU nevertheless be
vafid and sufficient for aU purposes the sEmie as if such officer had remained in
office untU defivery.
(d) To evidence the exercise of the authority delegated to the Mayor or the Chief
Financial Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or the Chief Finsmcial Officer, as the
case may be, is hereby directed to execute and lUe with the City Clerk in connection
with the initiEd borrowing under any Line of Credit Agreement, a copy of such Line
of Credit Agreement and a certificate setting forth the determinations made
pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate shaU constitute
conclusive evidence of the proper exercise by them of such authority. Upon the
filing of such Line of Credit Agreement and such certificate, the City Clerk shaU
direct a copy of such fifing to the City CouncU.
SECTION 19.
Continuing Appropriation. This ordinance constitutes a
continuing appropriation from legaUy avaUable funds of the City of the monies that
may be required from time to time to provide for the punctual payment of (i) the
principal of, interest on and any redemption premium on, the Authorized Debt, (u)
the principEd of, interest on and redemption premium on, any C P . Reimbursement
Note, any Auction Rate Reimbursement Note and any Variable Rate Reimbursement
Note, and (ifi) the program expenses of the Borrowing Plan. Such continuing
appropriation shaU be and remain in fuU force and effect without any further action
by the City CouncU. Nothing contained in this ordinance shaU obligate the City to
levy any separate ad valorem or other tax in addition to other City taxes or any
special ad valorem or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to fund the
continuing appropriation provided for in this section.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83087

SECTION 20. Offering Documents. The Chief Financial Officer is hereby
authorized to cause to be prepared one  1) or more offering documents (each an
"Offering Document") describing each issue of CP. Notes, Auction Rate Securities
or Variable Rate Securities. Each Offering Document shall be i n customary form for
the appficable Program. The distribution of each such Offering Document to
prospective purchasers and the use thereof by the Dezder in connection with the
offering of the CP. Notes and by the underwriters in connection with the offering of
the Auction Rate Securities and the Variable Rate Securities is hereby authorized
and approved.
SECTION 21. Tax Compfiance Agreement. The Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer is hereby authorized to execute and defiver from time to time one (1) or more
Teix CompfiEmce Agreements in such form as is customary for simUar transactions
as determined by bond counsel, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the same
Emd affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimUe thereof.
SECTION 22. Forward Supply Contracts. I f the Chief Financial Officer
determines it to be in the best financiEd interest of the City, the Chief Financial
Officer is authorized to execute and defiver from time to time i n the name and on
behEilf of the City one (1) or more forward supply contracts wjth one (1) or more
counterparties selected by the Chief FinandEd Officer under which contracts such
counterpcUiies agree to seU to the City, and the City agrees to purchase from such
counterparties, specified securities on specified dates at purchase prices estabfished
at the time ofthe execution Euid defivery ofthe appficable contract. The sources of
funds to purchase such securities shaU be amounts on hand and avEulable i n the
funds and accounts created and estabfished under EUI Indenture or a Line of Credit
Agreement. Under no circumstances shaU any amounts payable by the City under,
or with respect to, £my such contract constitute Em indebtedness of the City for
which its fuU faith and credit is pledged, but such Emaounts shaU be payable solely
from legaUy avaUable funds of the City.
SECTION 23. Interest Rate Swap And Cap Agreements. If determined by the
Chief FinEuicial Officer to be in the best finandEd interest of the City, the Chief
Financial Officer is authorized to execute and defiver from time to time in the name
and on behsdf of the City one (1) or more agreements or options to enter into
agreements with counterparties selected bythe Chief Finandal Officer, the purpose
of which is to memage the City's interest rate exposure with respect to any
Authorized Debt or a particular series of Authorized Debt; provided, however, that
(a) the stated aggregate notional amount under aU such agreements (net of
offsetting transactions) at any one (1) time shaU not exceed the aggregate prindpal
amount of such Authorized Debt at the time outstanding, (b) any such agreement
to the extent practicable shall be in substantially the form of either the Local
Currency — Single Jurisdiction version or the Multicurrency — Cross Border version
of the 1992 l.S.D.A. Master Agreement accompsuued by the United States
Municipal Counterparty Schedule pubfished by the International Swaps and

 83088

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

Derivatives Association, Inc. ("l.S.D.A.") or any successor form to either pubfished
by the l.S.D.A., and in appropriate confirmations of transactions governed by that
agreement, with such insertions, completions and modifications thereof as shall be
approved by the Chief Financicd Officer, his or her execution thereof to constitute
conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval of such insertions, completions
and modifications, and (c) under no circumstEuices shall any amounts payable by
the City under, or with respect to, Emy such agreement constitute an indebtedness
ofthe City for which its fuU faith and credit is pledged, but such amounts shaU be
payable solely from legaUy available funds ofthe City.
SECTION 24. Performance Provisions. The Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer
and the City Clerk for and on behEiff of the City shEdl be, and each of them hereby
is, authorized Emd dfrected to do any Euid aU things necessary to effect the
performance of aU obfigations ofthe City, or to exercise Emy rights ofthe City, under
and pursuEuit to this ordinance, any Indenture, Emy Line of Credit Agreement, any
CP. Dealer Agreement, any C P . Paying Agent Agreement, any C P . Reimbursement
Agreement, any Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement, any Variable Rate
Reimbursement Agreement and any Remarketing Agreement, and the performEUice
of cdl other acts of whatever nature necessEuy to effect and carry out the authority
conferred by this ordinance and any Indenture, including, but not fimited to, the
exercise foUowing the defivery date of any Authorized Debt of Emy power or authority
delegated to such official of the City under this ordinEUice with respect to the
Authorized Debt upon the initial defivery or issuEuice thereof, but subject to any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth. The
Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer, the City Clerk and other officers, agents Emd
employees of the City are hereby further authorized, empowered and directed, for
and on behalf ofthe City, to execute and deliver aU papers, documents, certificates
and other instruments that may be required to CEury out the authority conferred by
this ordinance and any Indenture, or to evidence said authority.
SECTION 25. Proxies. The Mayor and the Chief Financial Officer may each
designate smother to act as their respective proxy and to affix their respective
signatures to, in the case ofthe Mayor, each Authorized Debt, whether in temporary
or definitive form, and to any other instrument, certificate or document required to
be signed by the Mayor or the Chief FinEmcial Officer pursuant to this ordinance,
any Line of Credit Agreement and any Indenture. In each case, each shaU send to
the City CouncU written notice of the person so designated by each, such notice
stating the name of the person so selected and identifying the instruments,
certificates and documents which such person shall be authorized to sign as proxy
for the Mayor and the Chief Financial Officer, respectively. A written signature of

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83089

the Mayor or the Chief FinEmcial Officer, respectively, executed by the person so
designated underneath, shaU be attached to each notice. Each notice, with
signatures attached, shaU be recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings ofthe City
Council and filed with the City Clerk. When the signature ofthe Mayor is placed on
an instrument, certfficate or document at the direction ofthe Mayor in the specffied
manner, the same, in all respects, shaU be as binding on the City as if signed by the
Mayor in person. When the signature of the Chief Financial Officer is so affixed to
an instrument, certificate or document at the direction of the Chief FinEmdal
Officer, the same, in aU respects, shaU be as binding on the City as if signed by the
Chief FinanciEd Officer in person.
SECTION 26. SeverabUity. It is the intention of this City CouncU that, if any
section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be ruled by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invEifid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph,
dause or provision shall not affect any of the remEuning provisions hereof.
SECTION 27. Inconsistent Provisions. AU ordinances, resolutions, motions or
orders in conffict with this ordinEmce Eire hereby repealed to the extent of such
conffict. No provision of the Municipal Code of Chicago (the "Municipal Code") or
violation of any provision of the Municipal Code shall be deemed to impair the
vEdidity of this ordinance or the instruments authorized by this ordinance, or to
impair the security for or payment ofthe instruments authorized by this ordinance;
provided further, however, that the foregoing shaU not be deemed to affect the
avaUabifity of any other remedy or penalty for any violation of any provision of the
Municipal Code.
SECTION 28. Effective Date. This ordinance shaU take effect immediately upon
its passage and approvEj.
SECTION 29. Reporting Requirement. The Chief Financial Officer shaU report
to the City Council with respect to the expenditure of the proceeds of Emy
Authorized Debt issued hereunder. Such reports shaU be made no later than
AprU 1 and October 1 of each year, commencing October 1, 2002, with respect to
expenditures made during the six (6) month period ending on September 1.
AprU 1 reports shaU cover expenditures made during the six (6) month period
ending on March 1.
Exhibits "A", "B", " C , "D", "E" and "F" referred to in this ordinance read as foUows:

 83090

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Exhibit "A'.
(To Ordinance)
Trust

Indenture

Between
City Of Chicago
And
As
Dated As Of

Trustee
J, 2002

Relating To
City Of Chicago
Commercial Paper Notes
2002 Program
Series A (Tax Exempt) And Series B (Taxable).

THIS TRUST INDENTURE, dated as of
1, 2002 (this
"Indenture"), is by and between Uie City of Chicago (the "City"), a municipality and a home rule
unit of local government duly organized and validly existing under Uie Constitution and laws of
the State of Illinois, and
(the "Trustee"), a
duly organized, validly existing and auUiorized to accept the duties and
obligations set out by virtue of the laws of the
and having a corporate trust
office located in the City of Chicago, Illinois, as trustee.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83091

WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, the City is a home rule unit of local government, duly organized and
existing under the laws of the State of Illinois, and in accordance with the provisions of Section
6(a) of Article VII of the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois; and
WHEREAS, the City has previously authorized the issuance of an amount
outstanding at any one time of not to exceed $200,000,000 (the "Authorized Amount") of City
of Chicago Commercial Paper Notes pursuant to the "CP Note Ordinance" (as hereinafter
defined); and
WHEREAS, the City wishes to provide m this Indenture for the issuancefromtime
to time, in an aggregate amount outstanding at any one time not exceeding the Authorized
Amount, of its Commercial Paper Notes, as authorized by the CP Note Ordinance, designated as
"City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program Series A (Tax Exempt)", and "City
of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program Series B (Taxable)"; and
WHEREAS, the City wishes to provide in this Indenture that such Commercial
Papei* Notes (as hereinafter defined) be issued as direct and general obligations ofthe City payable
from any fimds of the City legally available and annually appropriated for such purpose and the
Trustee is wiUing to accept the trusts provided in this Indenture;
NOW, THEREFORE, Uie City and the Trustee agree as foUows each for die
benefit of the other and/or the benefit of holders of the Commercial Paper Notes secured by this
Indenture:

AR-nCLEI.
Definitions; General Authorization; Ratification.
Section 1.01- Definitions. The foUowing definitions shaU, for aU purposes of Uiis
Indenture and supplemental hereto, have the meanings herein specified unless the context clearly
requires otherwise:
"Advances" means payments made by the Bank as a result of draws made on the
Lener of Credit to pay principal of and/or interest on Commercial Paper Notes.

 83092

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Authenticating Agent" means, with respect to any Series, each person or entity,
if any, designated by the City herein or in any Supplemental Indenture to manually sign the
certificate of authentication on the Commercial Paper Notes, and its successors and assigns, and
any other person or entity which may at any time be substituted for it pursuant hereto. Initially,
the Authenticating Agent shall be the Issuing and Paying Agent. .
"Authorized Amount" means $200,000,000; provided that such amount may be
issued in one or more Series; and provided, fiirther, that the aggregate amoimt outstanding under
this Indenture at any one time among all Series may not exceed such amount reduced by the
outstanding principal amoimt of "Auction Rale Securities" and "Variable Rate Securities" issued
pursuant to the CP Note Ordinance.
"Authorized Citv Representative" means the Chief Financial Officer of the City
or such other officer or employee of the City or other person, which other officer, employee or
person has been designated by the City as an Authorized City Representative by written notice
defivered by the Chief Financial Officer to the Trustee and the Issuing and Paying Agent.
"Available Moneys" means moneys which are continuously on deposit with the
Trustee or tbe Issuing and Paying Agent in trust for tbe benefit ofthe holders of tbe Commercial
Paper Notes in a separate and segregated account in which only AvaUable Moneys are held, which
moneys constimte proceeds of (i) the Commercial Paper Notes received contemporaneously with
the initial issuance and sale of the Commercial Paper Notes, (ii) a drawing under tbe Letter of
Credit or payments otherwise made under a substitute Letter of Credit, (iu) refiinding obfigations
or other funds for which the Trustee has received a written opinion of nationaUy recognized
counsel experienced in bankruptcy matters and acceptable to an Authorized City Representative
and tbe Rating Agencies to the effect that payment of such moneys to the holders of the
Commercial Paper Notes would not constitute an avoidable preference under Section 547 of the
United States Bankruptcy Code if the City were to become a debtor under the United States
Bankruptcy Code, or (iv) the investment of funds qualifying as Available Moneys under the
foregoing clauses.
"Bank" means the issuer of the Letter of Credit then outstanding and effective
hereimder. InitiaUy, the Bank shall be
.
"Bank Note" means a note or notes issued by the City pursuant to Section 5.01
hereof and evidencing all or any portion of any unreimbursed Advances made by the Bank and
designated as "City of Chicago Bank Notes (2002 Commercial Paper Program) (insert name of
Bank)."
"Bank Note Account" means the Bank Note Debt Service Account established
pursuant to Section 4.01(b)(3) hereof
"Bank Note Payment Date" means a date on which principal of or interest on a
Bank Note is due and payable, including both scheduled principal and interest and principal and
interest payable upon prepayment of a Bank Note.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83093

"Bank Obligations" means obligations payable to the Bank imder the
Reimbursement Agreement.
"Bank Rate" shaU have the meaning assigned to such term in the Reimbursement
Agreement pursuant to which a Bank Note is delivered by the City to the Bank.
"Bond Counsel" means an attorney or firm or firms of attorneys of national
recognition selected or employed by the City with knowledge and experience" in thefieldof
municipal finance.
"Business Day" means any day other than (i) a Saturday, Sunday or other day on
which commercial banks in New York, New York, Chicago, Illinois, or the city in which is
located the office of the Bank at which demands for a draw on the Letter of Credit wiU be made,
are authorized or required by law to close, or (ii) a day on which the New York Stock Exchange
is closed.
"City" means the City of Chicago, a municipality and a home rule unit of local
government duly organized and validly existing under the Constimtion and laws of the State of
Illinois.
"Closing Date" means the date on which the Letter of Credit is issued by the Bank.
"Code" means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the applicable
United States Treasury Regulations proposed or in effect with respect thereto.
"Commercial Paper Bank Payment Account" or "Bank Payment Account" means
the accotmt by that name established pursuant to Section 4.01(b)(2) hereof.
"Commercial Paper Debt Service Account" or "Debt Service Account" means the
accoimt by that name established pursuant to Section 4.01(b)(1) hereof.
"Conmiercial Paper Notes" or "Notes" means notes of the City with a maturity of
not more than 270 days from the date of issuance, and which are authorized to be issued and
reissuedfromlime to time under Article n of this Indenture (in the case of the Series A Notes and
the Series B Notes).
"Costs of Issuance" means aU reasonable costs incurred by the City in cotmection
with the issuance of a Series, including, but not limited to:
(a)
counsel fees related to the issuance of such Series (including, but not limited
to, bond coiuisel and the Trustee's counsel);
(b)
Series;

fmancial advisor fees incurred in connection with the issuance of such

 83094

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(c)

rating agency fees;

(d)

the initial fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Issuing and Paying

(e)

accountant fees related to the issuance of such Series;

(f)

printing and publication costs; and

Agent;

(g)
any other fee or cost iocurred in connection with the issuance of such Series
that constitutes an "issuance cost" within the meaning of Section 147(g) of the Code.

on
Notes.

"CP Note Ordinance" means the ordinance adopted by the City CouncU of the City
, 2002 authorizing this Indenture and the issuance of the Commercial Paper

"Dealer" means
for as long as it is acting as
a dealer for the City with respect to the Notes, or any successor Dealer appointed pursuant to the
Dealer Agreement, as approved by the City.
"Dealer Agreement" means the Commercial Paper Dealer Agreement, dated as of
2002, between the City and the Dealer, as amended and supplemented from
time to time, and any such agreement with any successor Dealer.
"Debt Service Fund" means thefiindby that name estabfished pursuant to Section
4.01(b) hereof.
"Designated Representative" means the Chief Financial Officer of the City and if
the Chief Financial Officer is not avaUable, the City ComptroUer of the City, and any additional
individuals designated to complete and deliver Issuance Requests and who have been identified
and whose signatures have been certified in a certificate of an Authorized City Representative
delivered to the Issuing and Paying Agent.
"DTC" means The Depository Trust Company, as Note Depository for one or
more Series of Commercial Paper Notes, and its successors and assigns.
"Event of Default" means any one or more of those events set forth in Section 9.01
hereof, which Event of Default has not been cured.
"Expiration Date" means the date of expiration of the Letter of Credit then in effect
(as such date may be extendedfromtime to time).
"Fiscal Year" shall mean the period of time beginning on January 1 and ending on
December 31 of each year, or such other simUar period as the City designates as the fiscal year
of the City.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83095

"Fitch" means Fitch Ratings, Inc., a corporation organized and existing under the
laws of the State of Delaware, and its successors and assigns, and, if such corporation shaU no
longer perform the fimctions of a securities rating agency, any other rating agency designated by
die City.
"Government Obligations" means (1) United States Obfigations (including
obfigations issued or held in book-entry form), and (2) prerefiuided municipal obligations meeting
the foUowing conditions: (a) the municipal obligations are not subject to reden^tion prior to
maturity, or the tmstee therefor has been given irrevocable instructions concerning their calling
and redemption and the issuer thereof has covenanted not to redeem such obfigations other than
as set forth in such instructions; (b) the municipal obligations are secured by cash and/or United
States Obligations, which United States Obfigations may be appUed only to interest, principal and
premium payments of such municipal obligations; (c) the principal of and interest on the United
States Obligations (plus any cash m the escrow fund) are sufficient to meet thefiabUitiesof the
municipal obfigations; (d) the United States Obfigations serving as security for the municipal
obligations are held by an escrow agent or trustee; (e) the United States Obligations are not
avaUable to satisfy any other claims, including those against the trustee or escrow agent; and (f)
the municipal obfigations are rated in their highest rating category by Moody's and by S&P if
S&P then maintains a rating on such obfigations.
"Indenture" means this Trust Indenture, dated as of
between the City and the Trustee, as supplemented and amendedfromtime to time.

1, 2002,

"Insolvent" shaU be used to describe the Trustee, the Issuing and Paying Agent or
any other agent appointed hereunder or the Bank if (a) such person shaU have instimted
proceedings to be adjudicated a bankrupt or insolvent, shaU have consented to the instimtion of
bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings against it, shaU havefileda petition or answer or consent
seeking reorganization or refief under the United States Bankniptcy Code or any other simUar
appficable Federal or state law, or shaU have consented to thefilingof any such petition or to the
appointment of a receiver, liqitidator, assignee, trustee or sequestrator or other similar official of
itself or of any substantial part of its property, or shaU faU to timely controvert an involuntary
petition fUed against it under the United States Bankruptcy Code, or sbaU consent to the entry of
an order for relief under the United States Bankruptcy Code or shall make an assignment for the
benefit of creditors or shaU admit in writing its inabifity to pay its debts generaUy as they become
due; or (b) a decree or order by a court having jurisdiction in the premises adjudging such person
as bankrupt or insolvent, or approving as properly filed a petition seeking reorganization,
arrangement, adjustment or conqKisition of or in respect of such person under the United States
Bankruptcy Code or any other simUar applicable Federal or state law or for relief under the
United States Bankruptcy Code after an involuntary petition has beenfiledagainst such person,
or appointing a receiver, Uquidator, assignee, trustee or sequestrator or other similar official of
such person or of any substantial part of its property, or ordering the winding up or liquidation
of its affairs, shall have been entered and shall have continued unabated and in effect for a period
of 90 consecutive days.

 83096

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Investment Agreement" means an investment agreement or guaranteed investment
contract with entities which maintain the foUowing credit and collateral requirements: (a) if a
corporation, they are initiaUy rated "Aaa" by Moody's and "AAA" by S&P, if a domestic bank,
they are initially rated Thomson "B/C" or better, and if a foreign bank, they are initially rated
Thomson "B" or better, (b) if credit quality reaches Moody's "Aa3" or S&P "AA" for
corporations, Thomson "B/C" for domestic banks, and Thomson "B" for foreign banks, the
provider thereof (1) wUl respond with adequate coUateralization within ten (10) business days, (2)
wiU value assets weekly, and (3) wiU present collateral at 102% on Government Obfigations and
105% on obligations described in item (2) of the definition of Permitted Investments; (c) the
provider thereof must maintain minimiiTn credit quaUty of Moody's "A2" or S&P "A" for
corporations, Thomson "C" for domestic banks, or Thomson "B/C" for foreign banks; and (d)
the investment agreement wUl be terminated if credit ratings reach Moody's "A3" or S&P "A-"
for corporations, Thomson "C/D" for domestic banks and Thomson "C" for foreign banks.
"Issuance Request" means a request made by the City, acting through a Designated
Representative, to the Issuing and Paying Agent for the delivery of a Commercial Paper Note or
Commercial Paper Notes.
'Issuing and Paying Agent" means
_, Chicago,
Illinois, or any successor or assigns permitted imder the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement or
any other Issuing and Paying Agent which is appointed by the City and has entered into an Issuing
and Paying Agent Agreement.
"Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement" means the Issuing and Paying Agent
Agreement, dated as of
1, 2002, between the City and the Issuing and Paying
Agent, and any and aU modifications, alterations, amendments and supplements thereto, or any
other Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement entered into by the City and the Issuing and Paying
Agent with respect to the Commercial Paper Notes.
"Letter of Credit" means the irrevocable, transferrable, direct-pay letter of credit
issued by the Bank for the benefit of tbe Issuing and Paying Agent on or prior to the date of
issuance of the first Commercial Paper Note, together with any substimte irrevocable,
transferrable, direct-pay letter of credit accepted by the Issuing and Paying Agent as provided in
Section 10.01 hereof; provided that at no time shall more than one letter of credit secure the
Outstanding Commercial Paper Notes.
^Maximum Rate" means

percent (_

%) per annum.

"Moody's" means Moody's Investors Service, a corporation existing under the laws
of the State of Delaware, its successors and assigns, and, if such corporation shaU no longer
perform the functions of a securities rating agency, any other nationaUy recognized rating agency
designated by the City.
"No-Issuance Notice" shaU have the meaning assigned thereto in a Reimbursement
Agreement.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83097

"Nominee" means the nominee of the Note Depository as determined from time
to time in accordance with this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture for any one or more
Series of Commercial Paper Notes.
"Note Depository" means the securities depository for a Series of Commercial
Paper Notes appointed as such pursuant to Section 2.05 hereof, and its successors and assigns.
"Noteholder." "holder." "owner" or "registered owner" means the person in
whose name any Note or Notes are registered on the books maintained by the Registrar or
Trustee.
"Note Proceeds" means proceeds of the sale of the Commercial Paper Notes or any
moneys, securities or other obligations that may be deemed to be proceeds of the Commercial
Paper Notes within the meaning of the Code.
"Outstanding" when tised with respect to Notes shall mean all Notes which have
been authenticated and delivered under this Indenture, except:
(a)
Notes canceUed or purchased by the Issuing and Paying Agent for
canceUation or delivered to or acquired by the Issuing and Paying Agent for cancellation
and, in aU cases, with the intent to extinguish the debt represented thereby;
(b)
Notes in lieu of which other Notes have been authenticated tmder Section
2.07, 2.08 or 2.09 hereof;
(c)
Notes that have become due (at maturity or on redemption, acceleration or
otherwise) and for the payment of which sufficient moneys, including interest accmed to
the due date, are held by the Issuing and Paying Agent or Trustee;
(d)
Notes which, imder the terms of this Indenture, are deemed to be no longer
Outstanding; and
(e)
for purposes of any consent or other action to be taken by the holders of a
specified percentage of Notes under this Indenture, Notes held by or for the accoimt of the
City or by any person controlling, controlled by or under common control with the City.
"Permitted Investments" shaU mean any of the foUowing:
(1)

Government Obligations;

(2)
obligations, debentures, notes or other evidences of indebtedness issued or
guaranteed by any of the foUowing instrumentalities or agencies of the United States of America:
Federal Home Loan Bank System; Export-Import Bank of the United States; Federal Financing
Bank; Government National Mongage Association; Fannie Mae, Student Loan Marketing

 83098

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Association; Federal Farm Credit Bureau; Farmers Home Administration; Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation; and Federal Housing Administration;
(3)
direct and general long-term obligations of any state, which obfigations are
rated in either of the two highest rating categories by Moody's and by S&P, if S&P then rnaintaiTK:
a rating on such obfigations;
(4)
direct and general short-term obligations of any state which obligations are
rated in the highest rating category by Moody's and by S&P, if S&P then maintains a rating on
.such obligations;
(5)
interest-bearing demand or time deposits (including certificates of deposit)
or interests in money market portfolios issued by state banks or trust companies or national
banking associations that are members of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"),
which deposits or interests must either be (a) continuously andfiiUyinsured by FDIC and with
bankstiiatare rated at least" P-1" or "Aa" by Moody's and at least "A-l" or "AA" by S&P, if
such banks are then rated by S&P, or (b) fiUly secured by United States Obligations (i) which are
valued not lessfrequentiythan monthly and have a fair market value, exclusive of accrued
interest, at least equal to the principal amount of the deposits or interests, (u) held by the Trustee
(who shaU not be the provider of the collateral) or by any Federal Reserve Bank or depositary
acceptable to the Trustee, (in) subject to a perfected first lien in the Trustee, and (iv) free and
clearfitnnaU third-party liens;
(6)
long-term or medium-teim corporate debt guaranteed by any corporation
that is rated by both Moody's and S&P in cither of their two highest rating categories;
(7)
repurchase agreements which are (a) entered into with banks or trust
companies organized under state law, national banking associations, insurance companies or
government bond dealers rq)orting to, trading with and recognized as a primary dealer by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and which either are members of the Security Investors
Protection Corporation or with a dealer or parent holding company that has an investment grade
rating from Moody's and S&P, if S&P then Tnaintain<; a rating of such instimtion, and (b) fully
secured by investments specified in Section (1) or (2) of this definition of Permitted Investments
(i) which are valued not less frequentiy than monthly and have a fair market value, exclusive of
accrued interest, at least equal to the amount invested in the repurchase agreements, (ii) held by
the Trustee (who shall not be the provider of the collateral) or by any Federal Reserve Bank or
a depository acceptable to the Trustee, (iii) subject to a perfected first lien in the Trustee, and (iv)
free and clear from all third-party liens;
(8)
prime commercial paper of a United States corporation, fmance company
or banking instimtion rated at least "P-1" by Moody's and at least "A-l" by S&P, if S&P then
maintains a rating on such paper;
(9)
shares of a diversified open-end management investment company (as
defmed in the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended) or shares in a regulated investment

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83099

company (as defined in Section 851(a) of the Code) that is (a) a money market fund that has been
rated in one of the two highest rating categories by Moody's or S&P, or (b) a money market fimd
or account of the Trustee or any state or Federal bank that is rated at least "P-1" or "Aa" by
Moody's, if Moody's then maintains aratingon such bank, and at least "A-l" or "AA" by S&P,
if S&P then maintains a rating on such bank, or whose one bank holding company parent Is rated
at least "P-l" or "Aa" by Moody's, if Moody's then maintains aratingon such holding company,
and "A-l" or "AA" by S&P, if S&P then maintaiTis a rating on such holding company, or that has
a combined capital and surplus of not less than $50,000,000;
(10)

Investment Agreements; and

(11) any other type of investment in which the City directs the Trustee to invest,
provided that there is delivered to the Trustee a certificate of an Authorized City Representative
stating that each of the Ratiag Agencies then maintaining a rating on the Series has been informed
of the proposal to invest in such investment and each of such Rating Agencies has confirmed that
such investment wiU not adversely affect theratingthen assigned by such Rating Agency to any
Series.
"Person" means an individual, a corporation (mcluding a limited liabiUty
company), a partnership (including a limited partnership), an association, a trust or any other
entity or organization, including a government or poUtical subdivision or an agency or
instnimentafity thereof.
"Principal Office" means the principal office of the Issuing and Paying Agent for
purposes of performing its duties under this Indenture, which principal office has been designated
in writing by the Issuing and Paying Agent to an AuUiorized City Representative.
"Proceeds Fund" means the fimd by that name established pursuant to Section
4.01(a) hereof.
"Project or Purpose" means any imdertaking or purpose listed or otherwise
described in a'Tax Certificate of the City, as firom time to time amended, as being financed or
refinanced in whole or in part with the proceeds of the Notes, iacluding working capital and
capital projects.
"Rating Agency" means, as long as it isratinga Series, (i) Standard & Poor's, (ii)
Fitch, (ui) Moody's, or (iv) any other nationally recognized credit rating agency specified in a
Supplemental Indenture.
"Rebate Fund" means any fund required to be maintained by the City pursuant to
a Tax Certificate in connection with the issuance of the Notes or any Series of Notes for the
purpose of complying with the Code, and providing for the collection and holding for and
payment of amounts to the United States of America.

 83100

J O U R N A L - C I T Y COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Registrar" means, with respect to any Series, each person or entity, if any,
designated by the City herein or in a Supplemental Indenture to keep a register of any Series and
of the transfer and exchange of the Notes comprising such Series, and its successors and assigns,
and any other person or entity which may at any time be substimted for it pursuant hereto.
"Reimbursement Agreement" means the Reimbursement Agreement, dated as of
1, 2002, pursuant to which the Letter of Credit is issued and any and all
modifications, alterations, amendments and supplements thereto, and any simUar document
entered into with respect to the deUvery of a substimte Letter of Credit.
"Representation Leger" means the Blanket Issuer Letter of Representations firom
the City to DTC. with respect to a Series.
"Responsible Officer" means an officer or assistant officer of the Trustee assigned
by the Trustee to administer this Indenture.
"Series" means a series'of Commercial Paper Notes issued pursuant to this
Indenture (e.g.. Series A Notes or Series B Notes); each series of Commercial Paper Notes, when
aggregated with aU Outstanding (Commercial Paper Notes of other series, may be in an aggregate
amount up to the fiiU Authorized Amount regardless of when or whether issued.
!

I

"Series A Notes" means the City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002
Program Series A (Tax Exempt), issued under this Indenture.
"Series A Project or Purpose" means any undertaking or purpose listed or
otherwise described in a Tax Certificate of the City as bemg financed or refinanced in whole or
in part with the proceeds of Series A Notes, including working capital and capital projects.
"Series B Notes" means the City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002
Program Series B (Taxable), issued under and secured by this Indenture.
"Series B Project or Purpose" means any undertaking or purpose listed or
otherwise described in a certificate of the City, beuig financed or refinanced in whole or in. part
with the proceeds of the Series B Notes, including working capital and capital projects.
"Standard & Poor's" or "S & P" means Standard & Poor's, A Division of The
McGraw-HiU Companies, Inc., a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State
of New York, and its successors and assigns, and, if such corporation shall no longer perform the
functions of a securitiesratingagency, any other nationaUy recognized securitiesratingagency
designated by the City.
'State" means the State of Ulinois.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83101

"Stated Amount" means, with respect to a Letter of Credit, the amount avaUable
to be drawn imder the Letter of Credit for payment of principal of and interest on Ommercial
Paper Notes issued hereunder.
"Supplemental Indenmre" means any document supplementing or amending this
Indenmre and entered into as provided in Article XI of this Indenture.
"Tax Certificate" means a certificate, as amended firom lime to time, executed and
delivered on behalf of the City by a Designated Representative on the date upon which Series A
Notes are initiaUy issued and delivered, or any fimctionaUy equivalent certificate subsequenUy
executed and delivered on behalf of the City by a Designated Representative with respea to the
requirements of Section 148 (or any successor section) of the Code relating to the Series A Notes.
"Termination Dale" means the sixteenth (16*) day prior to the Expiration Date.
"Tmstee" shaU mean the entity named as such in the heading of this Indenture imtU
a successor replaces it and, thereafter, means such successor.
"United States Obligations" means direct and general obfigations of the United
States of America, or obfigations that are imconditionaUy guaranteed as to principal and interest
by tbe United States of America, including, with respect only to direct and general obfigations and
not to guaranteed obligations, evidences of ownership of proportionate interests in future interest
and/or principal payments of such obligations, provided that investments in such proportionate
interests must be limited to circumstances wherein (1) a bank or trust company acts as custodian
and holds the underlying United States Obligations; (2) the owner of the investment is the real
party in interest and has therightto proceed directiy and individuaUy against the obligor of the
underlying United States Obligations; and (3) the underlying United States Obligations are held
in a special account separate from the custodian's general assets and are not avaUable to satisfy
any claim of the custodian, any person claiming through the custodian or any person to whom the
custodian may be obligated.
Section 1.02. General Authorization. The appropriate officers, agents and
employees of the City are each hereby au±orized and directed, for and in the name and on behaff
of the City, to take all actions and to make and execute any and aU certificates, requisitions,
agreements, notices, consents, warrants and other documents, which they, or any of them, deem
necessary or appropriate in order to consummate the lawful issuance, sale and delivery of one or
more Series of Commercial Paper Notes or Bank Notes in accordance with the provisions hereof.
Section 1.03. Interpretation. All references herein to "Articles," "Sections" and
other subdivisions are to the corresponding Articles, Sections or subdivisions of this Indenture,
and the words "herein," "hereof," "hereimder" and other words of similar irapon refer to this
Indenture as a whole and not to any particular Article, Secrion or subdivision hereof.

 83102

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

ARTICLE nThe Commerdal Paper Notes.Section 2.01. Authorized Amount of Commercial Paper Notes; Terms and
Description of Commercial Paper Notes. No Commercial Paper Notes may be issued under the
provisions of this Indenture except in accordance with this Article.
(a)
The City hereby authorizes the issuance of its Notes to be designated (i)
"City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program Series A (Tax Exempt)", and
(ii) "City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program Series B (Taxable)",
subject to the provisions of this Section and as hereinafter provided. The Series A Notes
shall be issuedfromtime to time as provided herein to finance and refinance the cost of
Series A Projects or Purposes; andtiieSeries B Notes shall be issuedfromtime to time
as provided herein to finance and refinance the cost of Series B Projects or Purposes.
Proceeds of Commercial Paper Notes issued to refinance other Commercial Paper Notes
may be used to pay or to reimburse the Bank for Advances used to pay principal or
interest due on such maturing Commercial Paper Notes; provided, however, that proceeds
of Series A Notes may only be used to pay or to reimburse the Bank for Advances used
to pay principal or interest due on Series A Notes, and proceeds of Series B Notes may
oiUy be used to pay or to reimburse the Bank for Advances used to pay principal or
interest due on Series B Notes. Such authorization specifically includes the authorization
to issue and reissue Commercial Paper Notes for such purposes. The aggregate principal
amount of Commercial Paper Notes that may be Outstanding at any one time hereunder
shaU not exceed the Authorized Amount. The aggregate amount of principal and interest
payable on the Outstanding Commercial Paper Notes shall not exceed the amount available
to be drawn under tbe Letter of Credit.
(b)
The Commercial Paper Notes shaU be dated the date of their respective
authentication and issuance; shaU be issued in bearer or registered form, as shall be
detennined by the Designated Representative, shaU be issued in denominations of
$100,000 and integral multiples of $1,000 in excess tiiereof. Commercial Paper Notes
shaU bear interest from their respective dated dates, payable on their respective maturity
dates.
(c)
Series A Notes (i) shall bear interest payable at maturity at an annual rate
(calculated on the basis of a year consisting of 365/366 days and actual number of days
ebpsed), which shall not in any event exceed the Maximum Rate, (ii) shaU mature on a
Business Day not more than 270 days after their respective dated dates, but in no event
later than the related Termination Date, and (iii) shall be sold by the Dealer pursuant to
a Dealer Agreement at a price of not less than 100% of the principal amount thereof.
Series B Notes (i) shaU bear interest payable at maturity at an aimual rate (calculated on
the basis of a year consisting of 360 days and actual number of days elapsed), which shall
not in any event exceed the Maximum Rate, (ii) shall mamre on a Business Day not more
than 270 days after their dated dates, but in no event later than the related Termination

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83103

Date, and (iii) shall be sold by the Dealer pursuant to a Dealer Agreement at a price of not
less than 100% of the principal amount thereof. The stated interestrateor yield, maturity
date and other terms of the Commercial Paper Notes, as long as not inconsistent with the
tenns of this Indenture, shall be as set forth in the Issuance Request required by Section
2.06 hereof directing the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes.
(d)
maturity.

The Commercial Paper Notes shaU not be subject to redemption prior to

(e)
The Series A Notes and the Series B Notes shall be numbered in such
manner as the Issuing and Paying Agent may deem appropriate.
(f)
Commercial Paper Notes which are issued tofinanceor refinance Series A
Projects or Purposes shaU be designated as Series A Notes. Commercial Paper Notes
which are issued to finance or refinance Series B Projects or Purposes shaU be designated
as Series B Notes.
Section 2.02. Payment. The City covenants to duly and pimctually pay or cause
to be paid, the principal of and interest on each and every Commercial Paper Note when due. To
the extent Advances made by the Bank for the purpose of paying principal of and interest on
maturing Commercial Paper Notes, together with Note ProceedsfromCommercial Paper Notes
issued on such date, are insufficient to pay principal of and interest on maturing Commercial
Paper Notes, the City wiU make aU payments of principal and interest directiy to the Issuing and
Paying Agent in immediately available fimds on or prior to 1:15 p.m.. Chicago, Illinois time, on
the date payment is due on any Commercial Paper Note. To the extent principal of and/or interest
on Commercial Paper Notes is paid with an Advance, the Issuing and Paying Agent is authorized
and directed to use amoimts paid by the City to reimburse the Bank. The principal of and the
interest on the Commercial Paper Notes shall be paid in Federal or other immediately avaUable
fimds in such coin or currency of the United States of America as. at the respective times of
payment, is legal tender for the payment of public and private debts.
The principal of and the interest on the Commercial Paper Notes shall be payable
at the Principal Office of the Issuing and Paying Agent on or before the close of business on any
Business Day upon which such Commercial Paper Notes have become due and payable, provided
that such Commercial Paper Notes are presented and surrendered on a timely basis. Upon
presentation of such a Commercial Paper Note to the Issuing and Paying Agent no later than 2:00
p.m. (Chicago, Ulinois tune) on a Business Day, payment for such Commercial Paper Note shall
be made by the Issuing and Paying Agent in immediately avaUable fiinds on such Business Day.
If a Commercial Paper Note is presented for payment after 2:00 p.m. (Chicago, Illinois time) on
a Business Day, payment therefor may be made by the Issuing and Paying Agent on the next
succeeding Business Day without the accmal of additional interest thereon.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the previous paragraph, in the event the Notes
are issued as a master note or master notes in t)ook-enlry form, they shall be payable at maturity

 83104

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

without physical presentation or surrender in accordance with the procedures of the Note
Def>ository.
Section 2.03. Execution and Authentication of Conunerdal Paper Notes;
Limited Obligation. The Notes, in certificated form, wUl be signed for the City as provided in
the CP Note Ordinance. In case any officer whose signature or whose facsimUe signature shaU
appear on any Notes sbaU cease to be such officer before the authentication of such Notes, such
signature or the facsinule signature thereof shaU, nevertheless, be valid and sufficient for aU
purposes the same as if he or she had remained in office untU authentication. Also, if a person
signing a Note is the proper officer on the actual date of execution, the Note wiU be vafid even
if that person is not the proper officer on the nominal date of action and even though, at the date
of this Indenture, such person was not such officer.
The Issuing and Paying Agent is, by this Indenture, designated by the City as tbe
Authenticating Agent and Registrar for the Commercial Paper Notes in accordance with the terms
of Section 7.01 hereof. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the Issuing and Paying
Agent shall not authenticate Commercial Paper Notes which mature later than the Tetmination
Date, and the Issuing and Paying Agent shall not authenticate Commercial Paper Notes if an Event
of Default then exists of which it has actual knowledge or the Issuing and Paying Agem has
received a No-Issuance Notice from the Bank.
If any Commercial Paper Notes are to be issued in bearer form, the City shaU from
time to time fiimish the Issuing and Paying Agent with an adequate supply of Commercial Paper
Notes, each of which shall have attached such number of copies as the Issuing and Paying Agent
shall reasonably specify. When any Commercial Paper Notes are delivered to the Issuing and
Payuig Agent by the City, the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU execute and deliver to the City a
receipt therefor and shaU hold such Commercial Paper Notes for the account of the City in
safekeeping in accordance with its customary practice.
Section 2.04. Forms of Commercial Paper Notes and Authentication
Certificate. The defmitive Series A Notes and Series B Notes and the Certificate of
Authentication endorsed thereon shaU be substantiaUy in the form set forth ir" Exhibit A attached
hereto and made a part hereof, with such appropriate variations, omissions and insertions as sbaU
be required or appropriate in order to accomplish the purposes of the transactions authorized by
this Indenture.
Section 2.05. Book-Entry System. Unless an Authorized City Representative or
his designee determines that a Series of Commercial Paper Notes shall be issued in bearer form
or registered form other than in book-entry form, the Commercial Paper Notes shaU initiaUy be
issued in book-entry form as fiirther provided in this Section.
(a)
The Notes issued pursuant to this Indenture shall initially be issued in the
form of a separate single fiUly-registered Note for each Series of the Commercial Paper
Notes. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this Section, all of the Commercial Paper
Notes shall be registered in the name of the Nominee. Notwitlistanding any provision to

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83105

the contrary in Section 2.06. as long as the Notes remain in the form of one or more
master notes in book-entry form, the issuance of Notes pursuant to an Issuance Request
against payment therefor shaU not require the physical delivery of note certificates.
The Tiustee, the Issuing and Paying Agent and the City may treat the registered
owner of each Note as the sole and exclusive owner thereof for the purposes of payment
of the principal of or interest on the Series of Notes to which such Note belongs, giving
any notice permitted or required to be given to Noteholders hereunder, registering the
transfer of Notes, obtaining any consent or other action to be taken by Noteholders, and
for all other purposes whatsoever, and neither the Trustee, tbe Issuing and Paying Agent
nor the City shaU be affected by any notice to the contrary.
Neither the Trustee, the Issuing and Paying Agent nor the City shaU have any
responsibifity or obligation to any participant in the Note I>epository (a "Participant"), any
person claiming a beneficial ownership interest in the Commercial Paper Notes under or
through the Note Depository or any Participant, or any other person who is not shown on
the registration books as being a Noteholder, with respect to (i) the accuracy of any
records maintained by the Note Depositoty or any Participant; (ii) the payment by the Note
Depository or any Participant of any amount in respect of the principal of or.interest on
the Commercial Paper Notes; (iu) the delivery of any notice which is permitted or required
to be given to Noteholders hereunder; (iv) any consent given or other action taken by the
Note Depository as Noteholder; or (v) any other purpose.
The Issuing and Paying Agem shaU pay aU principal of and interest on the
Commercial Paper Notes only to or upon the order of the Note Depository, and all such
pajmients shall be valid and effective to fiiUy satisfy and discharge the City's obligations
with respect to the payment of the principal of and interest on the Commercial Paper Notes
to the extent of the sum or sums so paid. Upon delivery by the Note Depository to the
Issuing and Paying Agent of written notice to the effea that the Note Depository has
detennined to substitute a new Nominee in place of the current Nominee, and subject to
the provisions herein with respect to record dates, the word Nominee in tliis Article shaU
refer to such new Nominee.
(b)
In order to qualify each Series of Commercial Paper Notes for the Note
Depository's book-entry system, an Authorized City Representative is hereby authorized
to execute, seal, countersign and deliver on behalf of the City to the Note Depository for
each Series of Commercial Paper Notes, a Representation Letterfroman Authorized City
Representative representing such matters as shaU be necessary to so qualify the
Commercial Paper Notes. The execution and delivery of the Representation Letter shaU
not in any way limit the provisions of this Section or in any other way impose upon the
City any obligation whatsoever with respect to persons having beneficial ownership
interests in the Commercial Paper Notes other than the Noteholders.
(c)
(1) The Note Depository may determine to discontinue providing its
services with respect to a Series of Commercial Paper Notes at any time by giving

 83106

 4

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

reasonable written notice to an Authorized City Representative, the Trustee and the Issuing
and Paying Agent, and by discharging its responsibiUties with respect thereto under
applicable law.
(2)
An Authorized City Representative, exercising the sole discretion
of the City and without the consent of any other person, may terminate, upon
provision of notice to the Note Depository, the Trustee and the Issuing and Paying
Agent, the services of the Note Depository with respect to a Series of Commercial
Paper Notes if the Authorized City Representative determines, on behalf of the
City, that the continuation of the system of book-entry only transfers through the
Note Depository (or a successor securities depository) is not in the best interests
of the owners of a Series of Commercial Paper Notes or is burdensome to the City,
and shaU terminatetiieservices of the Note Depository with respect to a Series of
Commercial Paper Notes upon receipt by the City, the Trustee and the Issuing and
Paying Agent of written noticefromthe Note Depository to the effect that the Note
Depository has received written notice from Direct Participants (as defined in the
Representation Letter) having interests, as shown in the records of the Note
De^sitoiy, in an aggregate principal amount of not less thanfiftypercent (50%)
of the aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding Commercial Paper Notes
to the effect that: (i) the Note Depository is unable to discbarge its responsibilities
with respect to such Series of Commercial Paper Notes, or (ii) a continuation of
the requirement that aU of the outstanding Notes be registered in the registration
books kept by the Issuing and Paying Agent in the name of the Nonunee of the
Note Depository, is not in the best interest of the Noteholders of such Series of
Commercial Paper Notes.
(3)
Upon the termination of the services of the Note Depository with
respect to a Series of Commercial Paper Notes pursuant to subsection (c)(1) or
(c) (2) hereof, after which no substimte Note Depository wiUing to undertake the
functions of the Note Depository hereunder can be found or which, in the opinion
of the City, is wiUing and able to undertake such fimctions upon reasonable and
customary terms, a Series of Commercial Paper Notes shaU no longer be restricted
to being registered in the registration books kept by the Note Registrar in the name
offlieNominee of the Note Depository. In such event,tiieCity shall issue and the
Issuing and Paying Agent shaU transfer and exchange Note certificates as requested
by the Note Depository or Direct Participants of like principal amount. Series and
maturity, in denominations of $100,000 and integral multiples of $1,000 in excess
thereof, to the identifiable Noteholder in replacement of such Noteholder's
beneficial interests in a Series of Commercial Paper Notes.
(d)
Notwidistanding any provision hereof to the contrary, as long as the
Commercial Paper Notes of any Series are registered in the name of the Nominee, all
payments with respect to principal of and interest on the Commercial Paper Notes of such
Series and aU notices with respect to the.Commercial Paper Notes of such Series shaU be

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83107

made and given, respectively, as provided in the Representation Letter for the related
Series of Notes or as otherwise instructed by the Note Depository.
(e)
The initial Note Depository with respect to each Series of Commercial
Paper Notes shaU be DTC. The initial Nominee with respect to each Series of
Commercial Paper Notes shaU be CEDE & CO., as nominee of DTC.
Section 2.06. Conditions Precedent to Delivery of Commercial Paper Notes.
(a)
Prior to the issuance of the first Commercial Paper Notes hereunder.
Commercial Paper Notes of each initial Series shaU be executed on behalf of the City and
defivered to the Issuing and Paying Agent, who shall hold such Commercial Paper Notes
unauthenticated in safekeeping for the City. Subject to the provisions of Sections 2.01 and 2.05
hereof, and paragraphs (0 and (g) of this Section, at anytimeandfromtime to time prior to the
Termination Date, Commercial Paper Notes shaU be manually authenticated and delivered by the
Issuing and Paying Agent for the consideration and in the maimer hereinafter provided, but only
upon receipt by the Issuing and Paying Agent of an Issuance Request, no later than 11:30 a.m.
(Chicago, Illinois time) on the Business Day on which Commerdal Paper Notes are to be
defivered, directing the Issuing and Paying Agent to authenticate the Commercial Paper Notes
referred to therein and to deUver the same to or upon the order of the Dealer. Each Issuance
Request shaU include: (i) the principal amount and date of each Commercial Paper Note then to
be defivered; (ii) therateand amount of interest thereon; (in) the maturity date thereof; and (iv)
the Series designation thereof. No later than 1:30 p.m. (Chicago, Illinois time) on each Business
Day on which the City proposes to issue Commercial Paper Notes, the Dealer shaU report to the
City each transaction made with or arranged by it or shall notify the City and the Issuing and
Paying Agent of Uie difference, if any, between the amount of maturing Notes of a Series and the
amount of Notes of a Series which the Dealer has arranged to seU or has agreed to purchase.
(b)
Upon receipt of such Issuance Request (which may be transmitted by maU,
telecopy or other electronic communications method, or by telephone, promptiy confirmed in
writing by 1:00 p.m. Chicago, Illinois time), the Issuing and Paying Agem shaU, by 2:00 p.m.
(Chicago, Illinois time) on such day, complete each Series A Note and each Series B Note then
to be delivered as to amount, date, maturity date, interestrateand interest amount specified in
such Issuance Request, and defiver each such Commercial Paper Note to or upon the order of the
Dealer upon receipt of payment therefor; provided, however, that no such Commercial Paper
Notes shall be delivered by the Issuing and Paying Agent if such delivery would cause (a) the sum
of the aggregate principal amount of Commercial Paper Notes Outstanding to exceed the
Authorized Amount, or (b) the aggregate principal amount of Commercial Paper Notes described
in each Issuance Request (together with the interest thereon), plus the aggregate principal amount
of all Commercial Paper Notes then Outstanding (together with the interest thereon), less the
aggregate principal amount of any of the then Outstandiog Commercial Paper Notes to be retired
concurrentiy with the issuance of the Commercial Paper Notes described in the Issuance Request
(iiKluding interest thereon), to exceed the amount avaUable to be drawn under the Letter of
Credit. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, no such Commercial Paper Notes
of any Series shall be delivered by the Issuing and Paying Agent if (A) it shall have received

 83108

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

notice from an Authorized City Representative directing the Issuing and Paying Agent to cease
authenticating and delivering Commercial Paper Notes untU such time as such direction is
withdrawn by simUar notice, (B) it shaU have actual knowledge that an Event of Default shaU have
occurred and be cbntinuiag, (C) it shall have received noticefromBond Counsel that its opinion
regarding the exclusion of interest on the Notes of such issue or Series (issued as tax-exempt
Notes) from gross income for Federal income tax purposes of the holders thereof is being
withdrawn. (D) the maturity date of such Commercial Paper Notes would extend beyond the
related Termination Date, or (E) the Tmstee and the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU have received
a No-Issuance Notice from the Bank. If an Issuance Request is received after 11:30 a.m.
(Chicago, Ilfinois time) on a given day, the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU not be obligated to
deliver the requested Commercial Paper Notes untU the next succeeding Business Day.
(c)
The City shaU. upon a change in the identity of any Designated
Representative, provide a Certificate for each new Designated Representative to the Issuing and
Paying Agem,
(d)
A copy of each Commercial Paper Note authenticated in bearer form by the
Issuing and Paying Agent shall be promptiy transmitted by £acsimUe and thereafter maUed by first
class United States maU, postage prepaid, to the City and the Tmstee by the Issuing and Paying
Agent. The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU fiimish the City with such additional infoimation with
respect to the cairyiag out of its duties hereunder as the Cityfromtimeto time shaU reasonably
request.
(e)
In addition to the Issuance Request described above in this Section, and as
afijithercondition to the issuance of any Commercial Paper Notes, the Designated Representative
shaU certify to or instruct, for and on behalf of the City, the Issuing and Paying Agent that, as of
the date of defivery of such Commercial Paper Notes, (i) the Letter of Credit is in fiUl force and
effect; (ii) after the issuance of such Commercial Paper Notes and the application of the proceeds
thereof, the sum of the aggregate principal amount of Commercial Paper Notes Outstanding wUl
not exceed the Authorized Amount; (ifi) the sum of the aggregate principal amoimt of Commercial
Paper Notes then Outstanding (together with the interest thereon) does not exceed the amount
available to be drawn under the Letter of Credit; (iv) unless interest on the Commercial Paper
Notes to be issued is to be taxable, to the City's knowledge there has been no change in the facts,
estimates, circumstances and representations of the City set forth or made (as the case may be)
in the Tax Certificate (appficable to such Commercial Paper Notes); (v) the terms of the
Commercial Paper Notes do not exceed 270 days and the maturity dates of such Commercial
Paper Notes set forth in the Issuance Request do not extend beyond the related Termination Date;
(vi) the City has not been notified by Bond Counsel that its opinion with respect to the validity
of the Commercial Paper Notes and, unless interest on the Notes is to be taxable, the tax treamient
of the interest thereon has been revised or withdrawn or, if any such revision or withdrawal has
occurred, the revised opinion or a substimte opinion acceptable to the Dealer has been delivered;
(vu) to the actual knowledge of the City, no Event of Default has occurred and is then continuing;
(viii) the Note Proceeds shall be deposited into the Commercial Paper Bank Payment Account or
into the Construction Fund pursuant to Section 4.02 hereof in the amounts specified by the

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83109

Designated Representative; and ( K ) aU of the conditions precedent to the issuance of such
Conmiercial Paper Notes set forth in this Section of this Indenture have been satisfied.
The deUvery of any Issuance Request to the Issuing and Paying Agent by a
Designated Representative in the manner provided in this Section shaU constimte the certification
and representation of the City as of the date of such Issuance Request as to the matters set forth
in the immediately preceding paragraph.
(f)
Any Issuance Request made by telephone pursuant to this Section may be
recorded by the Issuing and Paying Agent and shaU be confirmed promptiy in writing by a
Designated Representative; provided, however, that any conflict between any recorded oral
Issuance Request and the written confirmationtiiereof.shall not affect the validity of any recorded
oral Issuance Request received by the Issuing and Paying Agent as provided herein. If the Issuing
and Paying Agent does not record an oral Issuance Request, and a conflict exists between such
oral Issuance Request and the written confirmationtiiereof,tiieterms of the written confirmation
shall control.
(g)
Prior to the initial delivery of Commercial Paper Notes under this Indenture
and as a condition to such initial issuance, the Trustee and the City shall be notified by the Issuing
and Paying Agent that the Issuing and Paying Agent has received:
(1)

a fiiUy executed counterpart of the Reimbursement Agreement;

(2)

the executed Letter of Credit;

(3)
the opinions of the United States counsel and foreign counsel to the Bank,
addressed to the City, the Issuing and Payii^ Agent and the Trustee, to the effect that the
Letter of Credit and the Reimbursement Agreement are valid and legaUy binding
obligations of the Bank, enforceable in accordance with their terms; and
(4)

a fiiUy executed counterpart of the Dealer Agreement.

Section 2.07. Ownership ofCommerdal Paper Notes. The City and the Issuing
and Paying Agent may deem and treat the bearer of Notes in bearer form or the registered'owner
of Notes in registered form as the absolute owner thereof (whether or not such Commercial Paper
Note shaU be overdue and notwithstanding any notation of ownership or other writing thereon
made by anyone other than the Issuing and Paying Agent) for the purpose of receiving payment
thereof or on account thereof and for all other purposes, and neither the City nor the Issuing and
Paying Agent shaU be affected by any notice to the contrary.
Section 2.08. MutUated, Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Notes. In the event any
Commercial Paper Note is mutilated or defeced but identifiable by number and description, the
City shaU execute and the Authenticating Agent shaU authenticate and defiver a new Note of like
Series, date, maturity and denomination as such Note, upon surrender thereof to the Issuing and
Paying Agent; provided that there shaU first be fumished to the Issuing and Paying Agent clear

 83110

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

and unequivocal proof satisfactory to the Issuing and Paying Agent that the Note is mutUated or
defaced to such an extent as to impair its value to the Noteholder. The Noteholder shall
accompany the above with a deposit of money required by the Issuing and Paying Agent for the
cost of preparing the substitute Note and aU other expenses connected with the issuance of such
substimte. The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU then cause proper record to be made of the
cancellation of the original, and thereafter the substimte shall have the vafidity of the original.
(a)
In the event any Note is lost, stolen or destroyed, the City may execute and
the Authenticating Agent may authenticate and deliver a new Note of like Series, date,
maturity and denomination as that Note lost, stolen or destroyed, provided that there shaU
first be fiimished to the Issuing and Paying Agent evidence of such loss, theft or
destmction satisfactory to the Issuing and Paying Agent, together with indemnity
satisfactory to it and the City.
(b)
Except as limited by any Supplemental Indenture, the Issuing and Paying
Agent may charge the holder of any such Note aU governmental charges and transfer
taxes, if any. and its reasonable fees and expenses ui this connection. AU substimte Notes
issued and authenticated pursuant to this Section shaU be issued as a substimte and
numbered, as determined by the Issuing and Paying Agent. In the event any such Note
has matured or been called for redemption, instead of issiung a substimte Note, the Issuing
and Paying Agent may pay the same at its nMturity or redemption without surrender
thereof upon receipt of indemnity satisfactory to it and the City.
Section 2.09. Transfer or Exchange of Notes. Uj>on surrender for transfer of
any Note at the designated corporate trust office of the Registrar, the Registrar shaU deliver in the
name of the transferee or transferees a new fiiUy authenticated and registered Note or Notes of
authorized denominations of the same Series, and maturity for the same aggregate principal
amount.
Noteholders may present Notes at the designated corporate trust office of the
Registrar for exchange for Notes of different authorized denominations and, upon such
presentation, the Registrar shaU defiver to the Noteholder a newfiiUyauthenticated and registered
Note or Notes of the same Series and maturity for the same aggregate principal amount.
All Notes presented for transfer or exchange shaU be accompanied by a written
instrument or instruments of transfer or authorization for exchange, in form and with guaranty of
signamre satisfactory to the Registrar, duly executed by the Noteholder or by his duly authorized
attorney.
Except as luruted by any Supplemental Indenture, the Registrar also may require
paymentfromthe Noteholder of a sum sufficient to cover any tax, or other governmental fee or
charge that may be imposed in relation thereto. Such taxes, fees and charges shall be paid before
any such new Note shaU be delivered.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83111

Supplemental Indentures may designate certain limited periods during which Notes
wiU not be exchanged or transferred.
Notes delivered upon any exchange or transfer as provided herein, or as provided
in Section 2.08 hereof. shaU be valid limited obligations of the City, evidencing the same debt as
the Note or Notes surrendered, shafi be secured by this Indenture and shall be entitied to aU of
the security and benefits hereof to the same extent as the Note or Notes surrendered.
Section 2.10. Destruction of Notes. Whenever any Notes shaU be defivered to
the Issuing and Paying Agent for canceUation pursuant to this Indenture, upon payment of the
principal amount and interest represented thereby or for replacement pursuant to Section 2.08 or
exchange or transfer pursuant to Section 2.09, such Note shaU be canceUed and destroyed by the
Issuing and Paying Agent or the Registrar and counterparts of a certificate of destmction
evidencing such destruction shaU be fiimished by the Issuing and Paying Agent to the City.
Section 2.11. Temporary Notes. Pending preparation of definitive Notes of any
Series, the City may execute and the Issuing and Paymg Agent shall authenticate and deliver, in
fieu of definitive Notes and subject to the same limitations and conditions, interim receipts,
certificates or teinporary Notes which shaU be exchanged for the Notes.
If temporary Notes shafi be issued, the City shaU cause the definitive Notes to be
prepared and to be executed, authenticated and delivered to the T«L<aiing and Paying Agent, and the
Issuing and Paying Agent, upon presentation to it of any temporary Note, shall cancel the same
and defiver in exchange therefor at the place designated by the holder, without charge to the
holder thereof, definitive Notes of an equal aggregate principal amount of the same Series issue
date, maturity and bearing interest the same as the temporary Notes surrendered. UntU so
exchanged, the temporary Notes shaU m aU respects be entitied to the same benefit and security
of this Indenture as the definitive Notes to be issued and authenticated hereunder.
Section 2.12. Nonpresentment of Notes. In the event any Note sbaU not be
presented for payment when the principal thereof becomes due, if moneys suffident to pay such
Note shaU have been deposited with die Trustee for the benefit of the owner thereof, aU fiabUity
of the City to the owner thereof for the payment of such Note shafi forthwith cease, terminate and
be completely discharged, and thereupon it shaU be the duty of the Trustee to hold such moneys,
without liabUity to the City, any owner of any Note or any other person for interest thereon, for
the benefit of the owner of such Note, who shafi thereafter be restricted exclusively to such
moneys, for any claim of whatever nature on his or her part under this Indenture or on, or with
respect to, said Note.
Any moneys so deposited with and held by the Trustee and not so applied to the
payment of Notes within two (2) years after the date on which the same shall have become due
shall be paid by the Trustee to the City,freefromthe trusts created by this Indenmre. Thereafter,
the owners of the Notes shall be entitied to look only to the City for payment, and then only to
the extent of the amount so repaid by the Trustee. The City shall apply the sums paid to it
pursuant to this Section in accordance with applicable law. but shaU not be liable for any interest

 83112

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

on such sums paid to it pursuant to this Section and shall not be regarded as a trustee of such
money.

ARTICLE DI'
Security'
Section 3.01. Limited Tax General Obligations. The Commercial Paper Notes
and the Bank Notes shaU be direct and general obfigations of the City, and shaU be secured by a
pledge of, lien on and security interest in aU amounts in the funds and accounts created or
maintained pursuant to this Indenture, the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement or any Tax
Certificate (except the Rebate Fund), including earnings on such amounts, subject only to the
provisions of this Indenture and the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement permitting the
application thereof for the purposes and on the terms and conditions set forth herein and thereui.
The obfigation of the City to make payments of the principal of, [the reden^)tion
premium of,] and the interest on the Commercial Paper Notes and tbe Bank Notes shaU be payable
firom any fiinds legally available for such purpose. The City covenants and agrees to take aU
necessary action to annually appropriate fimds in a timely manner so as to provide for the making
of aU such payments with respect to the Commercial Paper Notes and the Bank Notes; provided
however, that in no event shaU the City be obfigated to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax
in addition to other City taxes or any special ad valorem or other tax unlimited as to rate or
amoimt to pay such principal, [redemption premium] or interest.
Section 3.02. Punctual Payment. The City covenants that it wiU provide for the
punctual payment of the principal of and interest on each Commercial Paper Note and each Bank
Note as the same shall become due and payable in accordance with its terms.

AlfnCLEIV'
AppUcation of Commerdal Paper Note Proceeds •
Section 4.01. Creation of Funds and Accounts, (a) The Proceeds Fund is
hereby created as a separate fimd and shall be held, maintained and accounted for by the Trustee,
and the moneys in the Proceeds Fund shaU be used for the purposes for which the Notes of any
Series are authorized to be issued, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal of and
interest on the Notes, Costs of Issuance and administrative costs of the commercial paper
program. If so specified in a Tax Certificate, the City shaU establish one or more accounts and
subaccounts within the Proceeds Fund. The Proceeds Fund is designated as the "Commercial
Paper Proceeds Fund" and herein called the "Proceeds Fund."
(b)
The Debt Service Fund is hereby created as a separate trust fund and shall
tie held by the Issuing and Paying Agent. The City may direct the Issuing and Paying Agent to

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83113

establish and rnaintain a separate account or accounts in the Debt Service Fund with respect to any
or aU of the Notes of one or more Series. Moneys in the Debt Service Fund and the accounts
therein shaU be held in trust separate and apartfromaU other moneys, fimds and accounts held
by the Issuing and Paying Agent, and shaU be applied to pay the principal of and interest on
Outstanding Notes in the amounts, at the times and in the manner set forth herein and in any
Supplemental Indenture. Moneys in the accounts in the Debt Service Fund may also be applied
to pay or reimburse the Bank for unreimbursed Advances to the extern provided herein or in any
Supplemental Indenture. The foUowing accounts are hereby established witiiin the Debt Service
Fund, and the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU hold such accounts in trust in accordance herewith
and with the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement:
(1)
"Commercial Paper Debt Service Account," and herein caUed the "Debt
Service Account;"
(2)
three "Commercial Paper Bank Payment Accounts," and herein called the
"Bank Payment Accounts" designated as

(3)
Account."

0)

the "Series A Bank Payment Account." and

(u)

the "Series B Bank Payment Account," and

"Bank Note Debt Service Account," and herein called the "Bank Note

Section 4.02. Deposit of Proceeds of Commerdal Paper Notes. Immediately
upon receipt thereof, the Issuing and Paying Agent shall, if instructed by an Authorized City
Representative, first deposit the proceeds of the sale of Commercial Paper Notes into the
appficable Commercial Paper Bank Payment Account in an amount equal to the unreimbursed
Advances made by the Bank to pay principal of or interest on Commercial Paper Notes of such
Series. Proceeds so deposited shaU be held separate and apartfromaU other fimds and accounts
and shaU not commingled with any other moneys. The remaining proceeds shaU be transferred
to the Trustee for deposit in the Proceeds Fund.
Section 4.03. Application of Moneys in the Proceeds Fund, (a) Moneys in the
Proceeds Fund attributable to each Series shall be appfied to the payment of the costs of the
Project or Purpose for such Series, Costs of Issuance of such Series and administrative costs of
the commercial paper program. An Authorized City Representative mayfromtime to time amend
the list of Projects or Purposes in a Tax Certificate; provided, however, that the Authorized City
Representative shall not amend the list of Projects or Purposes in such a way as to change the tax
status of the related Series of Commercial Paper Notes. An Authorized City Representative is
hereby authorized to execute one or more supplemental Tax Certificates in connection with any
Series of Notes.
(b)
The Trustee shaU make payments or disbursementsfromthe Proceeds Fund
upon receipt firom the City of a written requisition, in substantiaUy the form attached as lExhibit

 83114

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

C to tiiis Indenture, executed by an Authorized City Representative, which requisition shaU state,
with respect to each amount requested thereby, (i) the account, if any, within the Proceeds Fund
from which such amount is to be paid, (u) the number of the requisitionfromsuch account, (iu)
the amount to be paid, the name of the Person (which may include payment to the City) to which
the payment is to be made and the manner in which the payment is to made, (iv) that the amount
to be paid represents a cost of a qualifying Project or Purpose as described in a Tax Certificate
of the City, or is related to a Series B Project, as applicable, and (v) unless related to a Series B
Project, that the amounts requisitioned wiU be expended only in accordance with and subject to
the limitations set foith in the applicable Tax Certificate.
(c)
Moneys held in the Proceeds Fund shall be invested and reinvested by the
Trustee in Permitted Investments as directed by an Authorized City Representative.
(d)
Any amounts remaining in the Proceeds Account for a Series of Notes at
the completion of the Project or Purpose for such Series shaU be transferred to the related Bank
Payment Account and used to repay Advances to the extent that a portion of such Advances is
aUocable to the interest on tbe Notes of such Series.
Section 4.04. Deposits Into and Uses of the Conunerdal Paper Debt Service
Accoimt and the Bank Payment AccounL (a) At or before 3:15 p.m., Chicago, Blinois time,
on the maturity date of each Note, the City may deposit or cause to be deposited,frommoneys
of the City legally avaUable therefor, including, but not limited to. Note Proceeds, an amount
sufficiem, together with other avaUable moneys, if any, with the Issuing and Paying Agent for
deposit into the related Series Bank Paymem Account, to reimburse the Bank in an amount equal
to the principal of and interest due on aU Notes maturing on such maturity date; provided that the
City shaU be required to deposit into a segregated account (hereinafter designated the "ShortfaU
Account") such amountsfromsuch source, at such time, to the extent Advances are not made
under the Letter of Credit to pay the principal of and interest on the Notes maturing on such date.
The "ShortfaU Account" is hereby created as a separate trustfimdand shaU be held by the Trustee
separate and apartfromall other moneys, fimds and accounts held by the Issuing and Paying
Agent. Amounts deposited in the ShortfaU Account, if any, shall be appfied to pay any deficiency
in Advances to pay the fiill amount of the principal of and interest on aU Notes maturing on such
maturity date. The Issumg and Paying Agent shaU notify the City on or before 4:00 p.m.,
Chicago, lUinois time, on the Business Day prior to such maturity date, of the total amoimt due
on such maturity date. Not later than 3:00 p.m., Chicago, Illinois time, on the maturity date of
each Note, either the Issuing and Paying Agent or a Designated Representative shaU notify the
Bank if the City has not deposited or caused to be deposited, with the Issuing and Paying Agent
for deposit into the related Series Bank Payment Account, an amount equal to the Advance drawn
on such date.
(b)
Each Advance received by the Issuing and Paying Agent as a result of a
drawing under the Letter of Credit to pay the principal of and interest on maturing Notes shaU be
deposited into the Debt Service Account, and shall be used to pay the principal of and imerest on
such maturing Notes upon the proper presentment thereof. Each Advance so deposited shall be
held separate and apartfromaU other fiinds. accounts and subaccounts, and shaU not commingled

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83115

with any other moneys. At or before 2:00 p.m., Chicago, Illinois time, on each maturity date,
the Issiung and Paying Agent shall notify the City whether or not the Issuing and Paying Agent
has received a sufficient Advance or Advances to pay aU such maturing principal and interest.
(c)
Amounts deposited imo the Series A Bank Payment Account shaU be used,
on each day that an Advance with respect to Series A Notes is received by the Issuing and Paying
Agent and deposited into the Series A Debt Service Account, by the Issuing and Paying Agent to
reimburse the Bank for tbe amount of such Advance; provided, however, that, if, on any maturity
date of the Series A Notes, the Advances paid under the Letter of Credit with respect to Series
A Notes are not sufficient to pay the fiUl amount of the principal of and interest due on such Series
A Notes on such date, amounts in the Series A Bank Payment Account shall be used to make the
balance of such payment.
(d)
Amounts deposited into' the Series B Bank Payment Account shaU be used,
on each day that an Advance with respect to Series B Notes is received by the Issuing and Paying
Agent and deposited into the Series B Debt Service Account, by the Issiung and Paying Agent to
reimburse the Bank for the amount of such Advance; provided, however, that, if, on any maturity
date of the Series B Notes, the Advances paid under the Letter of Credit with respect to Series B
Notes are not sufficient to pay the fiUl amount of the principal of and interest due on such Series
B Notes on such date, amounts in the Series B Bank Payment Account shall be used to make the
balance of such payment.
(e)
Moneys in the Debt Service Account shaU not be invested. Moneys in any
Bank Payment Account shaU be invested and reinvested by the Issuing and Paying Agent in
Permitted Investments as directed by an Authorized City Representative, or, in the absence of
such direction, in Permitted Investcnents described in subparagraph (9) of the definition thereof
Section 4.05. Drawings Under the Letter of Credit. On or before each maturity
date for any Commercial Paper Note, the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU present all required
drawing certificates and accompanying documentation, if required, to the Bank and demand
payment be made under the Letter of Credit on such maturity date at such time and in such
amount not in excess of the Stated Amount so as to be timely and sufficient to pay the entire
amoimt of principal and interest becoming due on aU Commercial Paper Notes on such date. No
drawings under the Letter of Credit shaU be used to pay principal of and interest due on Bank
Notes or any Notes which are owned or held by or for the account of the City. Without limiting
any other liabifity of the Issuing and Paying Agent for this or any other action, faUure of the
Issuing and Paying Agent to perform the duties and obligations set forth in this covenant shaU
constimte negligence on its pan.

 83116

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

AR'nCLE V.^
Tbe Bank Notes/
Section 5.01. Authorization and Terms of Bank Notes, (a) The City hereby
authorizes the issuance of one or more of its Bank Notes, subject to the provisions of this Article.
Each Bank Note shaU be issued to the Bank and designated the " City of Chicago Bank Note (2(X)2
Commercial Paper Program) (insert name of Bank)." The initial Bank Note shaU be issued by
the City on the Closing Dale in order to evidence the obfigations of the City to reimburse the Bank
for drawings under the Letter of Credit, including unreimbursed Advances, together with interest
thereon at tbe Bank Rate. Subsequent Bank Notes. substantiaUy in the fonn of Exhibit B, may
be issued upon defivery of a substimte Letter of Credit as provided in Artide X hereot.
(b)
The Bank Notes shaU be dated the date of issuance thereof; shaU be issued
in registered form only; shaU be issued in any dcnonunation; and shall bear interest at the Bank
Rate (calculated on the basis of a year consisting of 365/366 days and actual number of days
elapsed); provided, however, that the interestrateon the Bank Notes shall never exceed eighteen
percent (18%) per annum, subject to the applicable provisions of the Reimbursement Agreement.
Bank Notes shall bear interestfinomtheir respective dates, payable in accordance with the
Reimbursement Agreement. Principal of Bank Notes sbaU be payable in accordance with the
Reimbursement Agreement. Thefinalmaturity of the Bank Notes sbaU be no later than such date
as may be provided for in the Reimbursement Agreement.
(c)
The maturity date and other terms of each Bank Note, as long as not
inconsistem with the terms of this Indenture. shaU be as set forth in the certificate of an
Authorized City Representative directing the issuance of such Bank Note.
(d)
Each Bank Note shaU be subject to optional prepayment prior to maturity
in accordance with, and upon notice as provided by, the Reunbursement Agreement.
Section 5.02. Nature of Obfigations. The Bank Notes are direct and general
obligations of the City as described in Section 3.01 hereof.
Section 5.03. Form of Bank Notes. The definitive Bank Notes shafi be
substantially in the form set forth in Exhibit B attached hereto and made a part hereof, with such
appropriate variations, omissions and insertions as shaU be necessary or appropriate in order to
accomplish the purpose of this Indenture. The Bank Notes may have endorsed thereon such
legends or text as may l»e necessary or appropriate to conform to any applicable rules and
regulations of any governmental authority or any usage or requirement of law or regulation with
resped thereto.
Section 5-04. No Transfer of Bank Notes. To the extent permitted by applicable
law, the Bank Notes shall be non-negotiable and non-transferable.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83117

Section 5.05. Deposits in Bank Note Account. On the Business Day before each
Bank Note Payment Date, an Authorized City Representative shall allocate and transfer to the
Issuing and Paying Agem for deposit in the Bank Note Account amounts from available moneys,
as follows:
(a)
an amount equal to the aggregate amoimt of interest due and payable on
such Bank Note Payment Date on all Bank Notes outstanding; and
(b)
an amount equal to the aggregate principal amount due and payable on such
Bank Note Payment Date on the outstanding Bank Notes;
Amounts in the Bank Note Account shall be invested by the Issiung and Paying
Agent in Permitted Investments as directed in writing by an Authorized City Representative, or,
in the absence of direction from an Authorized City Representative, the Issuing and Paying Agent
shall select Permitted Investments described in subparagraph (9) of the definition thereof. The
Bank Notes shall not be payable from the proceeds of the Letter of Credit drawing.

ARTICLE V I .
Covenants •
Section 6.01. Tax Covenants. In order to mamtain the exclusion from gross
income of the interest on the Series A Notes for Federal income tax purposes, the City covenants
to comply with each appficable requirement of Section 103 and Sections 141 through 150 of the
Code, and further agrees to comply with the covenants contained in, and the instructions given
pursuant to, each Tax Certificate, which by this reference is incorporated herein, as a source of
guidance for compliance with such provisions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Indenture or any Supplemental
Indenture to the contrary, upon the City's faUure to observe, or refiisal to comply with the
foregoing covenant, no person other than the holders of any Series A Notes shaU be entitied to
exercise any right or remedy provided to the holders of any Series A Notes under this Indenture
or any Supplemental Indenture on the basis of the City's failure to observe, or refiisal to comply,
with such covenant.
Section 6.02. Taxable Notes. Notwithstanding anything in this Indenture to the
contrary, in the event an Authorized City Representative designates a Series as obligations not
described in Section 103(a) of the Code, including the Series B Notes issued hereunder, the
provisions of Section 6.01 shaU not apply to such Series.
Section 6.03. Letter of Credit. The City hereby covenants to maintain in effect
a Letter of Credit meetmg the requirements hereof at all times that Commercial Paper Notes are
Outstanding hereunder.

 83118

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

ARTICLE V n .
Issuing and Paying Agent; Dealer^
Section 7.01. Appointment of Issuing and Paying Agent. The City hereby
appoints
, as Issuing and Paying Agent, Authenticating Agent
and Registrar, and agrees that, at or prior to tbe time of issuance of the initial Commercial Paper
Notes, the City wUl enter into tbe Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement and wUl at all times, prior
to the Termination Date, maintain in effect an Issuing and Paying Agem Agreement, pursuant to
which the Issuing and Paying Agent wUl agree to holdfimdsand fiUfiU the duties and obfigations
of the Issuing and Paying Agent, as provided for in this Indenture.
The Issuing and Paying Agent, Authenticating Agent, and Registrar shaU (i)
designate to tbe Trustee its principal office, and (ii) signify its acceptance of the duties and
obligations imposed upon it hereunder and under any Supplemental Indenture by written
instrument of acceptance defivered to tbe City and the Trustee.
Section 7.02. Reports and Records. The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU at aU
times keep or cause to be kept proper records in which complete and accurate entries shaU be
made of aU transactions made by it relating to the proceeds of the Notes and any fimds and
accounts established and maintained by the Issuing and Paying Agent pursuant to this Indenture
and any Supplemental Indenture. Such records shaU be avaUable for inspection by the City on
each Business Day upon reasonable notice during reasonable business hours, aixl by any Owner
or its agent orrepresentativeduly authorized in writing at reasonable hours and under reasonable
circumstances. The Issuing and Paying Agent shall not be required to maintain records with
respect to transactions made by the Trustee or an Authorized City Representative, or with respect
to fiinds established and maintained by the Trustee.
(a)
The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU provide to the Authorized City
Representative each month a report of the amounts deposited in each fund and account held
by it under this Indenture, and the amount disbursed from such fimds and accounts, the
earmngs thereon, the ending balance in each of such fimds and accounts, the investments
in each such fimd and account, and the yield on each investment calculated in accordance
with the directions of an Authorized City Representative. Such report shall also include
such information regarding the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes during the subject
month as the City shall request.
(b)
The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU maintain such books, records and
accounts as may be necessary to evidence the obligations of the City resulting from the
Commercial Paper Notes, the principal amounts owing thereunder, the maturity schedule
therefor, the respectiveratesof interest thereon, and the principal and interest paid from
time totimethereunder. As long as the Commercial Paper Notes are in book-entry form,
in any legal action or proceeding with respect to a master note, the entries made in such
books, records or accounts shall be, absent manifest error, conclusive evidence of the
existence and the amounts of the obligations of the City therein recorded.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83119

Section 7.03. Resignation and Replacement of Issuing and Paying Agent. The
Issuing and Paying Agent may at any timeresignand be discharged of the duties and obfigations
created by this Indenture by giving at least 60 days* written notice to the Bank, the Trustee and
the City. The Issuing and Paying Agent may beremoved,with the written consent oftiieBank,
which consent shafi not be unreasonably v/ithheld, at any time by an instniment signed by an
Authorized City Representative and fUed with the Issuing and Paying Agent, the Bank and the
Trustee. No such resignation or removal shaU become effective, however, untU a successor
Issuing and Paying Agent has been selected and assumed the duties of the Issuing and Paying
Agent hereunder and the Letter of Credit has been transferred to the successor Issuing and Paying
Agent in accordance with its terms.
In the event of the resignation orremovalof the Issuing and Paying Agent, the
Issuing and Paying Agent shaU pay over, assign and deUver any moneys held by it in such
capacity to its successor. The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU make any representations and
warranties to the City as may be reasonablyrequestedby the City in connection with any such
assignment.
The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU, at aU times, be a bank or trust company having
an office in Chicago, Ulinois, and shaU at aU times be a corporation or a national banking
association organized and doing business under the laws of the United States of America or of any
state with a combmed capital and surplus of at least $50,0(X),000 and authorized under such laws
to exercise corporate trust powers and be subject to supervision or examination by Federal or state
authority. If such corporation or national banking association publishes reports of condition at
least annuaUy pursuant to law or the requirements of such authority, then for the purposes of this
Section, the combined capital and surplus of such corporation or national banking association shaU
be deemed to be its combined capital and surplus as set forth in its most recent report of condition
so published.
Any corporation or national banking association into which any Issuing and Paying
Agent may be merged or converted or with which it may be consofidated, or any corporation or
national banking association resulting from any merger, consolidation or conversion to which any
Issuing and Paying Agent shaU be a party, or any corporation or national banking association
succeeding to the corporate trust business of any Issuing and Paying Agent shaU be the successor
of the Issuing and Paying Agent if such successor corporation or national banking association is
otherwise eligible under this Section, without the execution or filing of any document or fiirther
act on the pan of the Issuing and Paying Agent or such successor corporation or national banking
association.
Section 7.04. Dealer. The City hereby appoints
,
as Dealer, and agrees that, at or prior to the time of issuance of the initial Commercial Paper
Notes, the City wiU enter into a Dealer Agreement with Dealer. The City covenants that at all
times prior to the Termination Date, it wUl maintain in effect one or more Dealer Agreements,
pursuant to which each Dealer will agree to fiUfUl the duties and obligations of the Dealer as set
forth in this Indenture and its Dealer Agreement.

 83120

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

ARTICLE V m .
TrusteeSection 8.01. Acceptance of Trusts. The Trustee hereby accepts and agrees to
execute tbe trusts specificaUy imposed upon it by this Indenture, but only upon the additional
terms set forth in this Article, to aU of which the City agrees and therespectiveholders agree by
their acceptance of deUveiy of any of the Notes.
Section 8.02. Duties of Trustee, (a) If an Event of Default has occurred and is
continuing, the Trustee sbaU exercise itsrightsand powers and use the same degree of care and
skiU in their exercise as a prudent person would exercise or use under the circumstances in the
conduct of such person's own affairs.
(b)
The Trustee shaU perform the duties set forth in this Indenture; no impUed
duties or obligations shaU be read into this Indenture against the Trustee.
(c)
Except during the continuance of an Event of Default, in the absence of any
negUgence on its part or any knowledge to the contrary, the Trustee may conclusivelyrely,as to
the truth of the statements and the correcmess of the opinions expressed, upon certificates or
opinions fumished to the Trustee and conforming to the requirements of this Indenture. The
Trustee shall examine the certificates and opinions, however, to determine whether they conform
to the requirements of this Indenture.
(d)
The Trustee may not berefievedfiromliabUity for its own negligent action,
its own negfigent failure to act or its own wUlfiU misconduct, except that: (1) the Trustee shaU
not be liable for any error of judgment made in good faith by a Responsible Officer unless the
Trustee was negligent in ascertaining the pertinent facts; and (2) the Trustee shall not be liable
withrespectto any action it takes or omits to take in good faith in accordance with a direction
received by itfromholders or the City in the maimer provided in this Indenture.
(e)
The Thistee shaU not, by any provision of this Indenture, be requiied to
expend orriskits own fimds or otherwise incur anyfinancialfiabUity in the performance of any
of its duties hereunder, or in the exercise of any of itsrightsor powers, if it shaU have reasonable
grounds for believing that repayment of such fiinds or adequate indemnity against such risk or
fiabUity is not reasonably assured to it. The Trustee shall be under no obligation to exercise any
of therightsor powers vested in it by this Indenture at the request or direction of any of the
holders of the Notes, unless such holders shall have offered to the Trusteereasonablesecurity or
indemnity against the costs, expenses and liabUities which might be incurred by it to comply with
such request or direction.
(f)
Every provision of this Indenture that in any way relates to the Trustee is
subject to this Section.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83121

(g)
The Trustee shaU not be deemed to have knowledge of an Event of Default
unless it has received actual knowledge at the corporate trust office of the Trustee located in
Chicago, Illinois.
Section 8.03. Rights of Trustee. Subject to Uie foregomg Section. Uie Trustee
shaU be protected and shaU incur no liabUity in acting or proceeding in good faith upon any
resolution, notice, telegram, request, consent, waiver, certificate, statement, affidavit, voucher,
bond, requisition or otiier paper or document which it shall in good faith believe to be genuine
and to have been passed or signed by the proper person or to have been prepared and furnished
pursuant to any of the provisions of this Indenture, and the Trustee shaU be imder ix> duty to make
investigation or inquiiy as to any statements contained or matters referred to in any such
instrument, but may accept and rely upon the same as conclusive evidence of the tmth and
accura(ty of such statements.
The Trustee may consult with counsel with regard to legal questions, and the
opinion of such counsel shaU be fiiU and complete authorization and protection ui respect of any
action taken or suffered by the Trustee hereunder in good faith in accordance therewith.
Section 8.04. Individual Rights of Trustee. The Trustee in its individual or any
other capacity may become the owner or pledgee of Notes, and may otherwise deal with the City
with the samerightsit would have if it were not Trustee. The Issiung and Paymg Agent or any
other agent may do the same with like rights.
Section 8.05. Trustee's Disclaimer. The Trustee shaU not be accountable for the
City's use of the proceeds from the Notes paid to the City and it shaU not be responsible for any
statement in tbe Notes.
Section 8.06. Notice of Defaults. If (i) an Event of Default has occurred, or (ii)
an event has occurred which with the giving of notice and/or the lapse of time would be an Event
of Default, and, with respect to such events for which notice to the City is required before such
events wiU become Events of Default, such notice has been given, then the Trustee shaU
promptiy, after obtaining acnial notice of such Event of Default or event described in clause (fi)
above, give notice thereof to each holder and to the Issuing and Paying Agent. Except in the case
of a default in payment on any Notes, the Trustee may withhold the notice i f and as long as a
committee of its Responsible Officers in good faith determines that withholding the notice is in
the interests of the holders.
Section 8.07. Compensation of Trustee. For acting under this Indenmre, the
Trustee shaU be entitied to payment of fees for its services and reimbursemem of advances,
counsel fees and other expenses reasonably and necessarUy made or incurred by the Trustee in
connection with its services under this Indenmre and the City agrees to pay such amoimts to the
Trustee. The City agrees to indemnify and hold the Trustee harmless against costs, claims,
expenses and liabUities not arising from the Trustee's own negligence, misconduct or breach of
duty, which the Trustee may incur in the exercise and performance of its rights and obligations

 83122

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

hereunder. Such obligation shaU survive the discharge of this Indenture or the resignation or
removal of the Trustee.
Section 8.08. EligibiUty of Trustee. This Indenture shall always have a Trustee
that is a trust company or a bank having the powers of a trust company and is organized and doing
business under the laws of the United States or any state or the District of Columbia, is authorized
to conduct tnist business under the laws of the State, is subjed to supervision or examination by
United States, state or District of Columbia authority, maintaing a corporate trust office in
Chicago, Illinois, and has a combined capital and surplus of at least $50,000,000 as set forth in
its most recent published armual report of condition.
Section 8.09. Replacement of Trustee. The Trustee may resign by notifying the
City in writing at least 60 days prior to the proposed effective date of the resignation. The holders
of a majority in Outstanding principal amount of the Notes may remove the Trustee by notifying
the removed Trustee and may appoim a successor Trustee with the City's consent. The City may
remove the Trustee, by notice in writing defivered to the Trustee 60 days prior to the proposed
removal date; provided, however, that the City shall have norightto remove the Trustee during
any time when an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, or when an event has occurred
and is continuing, or condition exists, which with the giving of notice or the passage of time or
both would be an Event of Default.
Noresignationor removal of the Trustee under tliis Section shaU be effective untU
a new Trustee has taken office and delivered a written acceptance of its appointment to the retiring
Trustee and to the City. Immediatdy thereafter, the retiring Trustee shall transfer aU property
held by it as Trustee to the successor Trustee, the resignation orremovalof the retiring Trustee
shall then (but only then) become effective and the successor Trustee shall have all the rights,
powers and duties of the Trustee under this Indenture.
If the Trustee resigns or is removed, or for any reason is unable or unwilling to
perform its duties under this Indenmre, the City shaU promptiy appoint a successor Trustee.
If a Trustee is not performing its duties hereunder and a successor Trustee does not
take office within 60 days after the retiring Trustee deUvers notice of resignation or the City
delivers notice of removal, theretiringTrustee, the City or the holders of a majority in aggregate
principal amount of the outstanding Notes may petition any court of competent jurisdiction for the
appointment of a successor Trustee.
Section 8.10. Successor Trustee or Agent by Merger. Ifthe Trustee consolidates
with, merges or converts into, or transfers all or substantially aU its assets (or, in the case of a
bank or trust company, its corporate trust assets) to another corjjoration which meets the
qualifications set forth in this Indenture, the resulting, surviving or transferee corporation, without
any fiirther act, shall be the successor Trustee.
Section 8.11. Other Agents. The City, or the Trustee with the consent of the
City, mayfromtime totimeappoint other agents as may be appropriate at the time to perform

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83123

duties and obligations under this Indenture or under a Supplemental Indenture all as provided by
Supplemental Indenture or resolution or ordinance of the City.
Section 8.12. Several Capadties. Anything in this Indenture to the contrary
notwithstanding, with the written consent of the City, the same entity may serve hereunder as the
Trustee and any other agent as appointed to perform duties or obfigations under this Indenture,
under a Supplemental Indenture or an escrow agreement, or in any combination of such capacities,
to the extent permitted by law.
Section 8.13. Accounting Records and Reports of the Trustee. The Trustee
shall at all times keep, or cause to be kept, proper records in which complete and accurate entries
shall be made of aU transactions made by it relating to the Note Proceeds and aU funds and
accounts established pursuant to this Indenture. Such records shaU be avaUable for inspection by
the City on each Business Day during reasonable business hours and by any holder, or his agent
or representative duly authorized in writing, at reasonable hours and under reasonable
circumstances.
(a)
The Trustee shaU provide to the City each month areportof any Note
Proceeds received during that month, if any, and the amoimts deposited into each fimd and
accoimt held by it under this Indenture and the amount disbursed bom such fimds and
accounts, the earnings thereon, the ending balance in each of such fiinds and accounts and
the investments of each such fimd and account.
(b)
The Trustee shaU annuaUy, within a reasonable period after the end of the
Fiscal Year, fiimish to the City a statement (which need not be audited) covering receipts,
disbursements, allocation and application of Note Proceeds, and any other moneys in any
of the fiinds and accounts held by it established pursuant to this Indenture or any
Supplemental Indenture for the preceding year.

AR'nCLE I X *
Events of Default and Remedies of Noteholders Section 9.01. Events of Default. Each of the foUowing events shall constimte and
is referred to in this Indenture as an "Event of Default":
(a)
a failure to pay the principal of any Commercial Paper Note when the same
shaU become due and payable;
(b)
a faUure to pay any installment of interest on any Commercial Paper Note
when such interest shall become due and payable;
(c)
a failure by the City to observe and perform any covenant, condition,
agreement or provision (other than as specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Section)

 83124

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

contained in the Commercial Paper Notes or in this Indenture on the part of the City to be
observed or performed, which faUure shall continue for a period of 60 days after written
notice, specifying such faUure and requesting that it be remedied. shaU have been given
to the City by the Trustee, which notice may be given at the discretion of the Trustee and
shall be given at the written request of holders of 25% or more in aggregate principal
amount of the Commercial Paper Notes then Outstanding (provided that in the case of a
default with respect to the tax covenants in Section 6.01, the Series B Notes shall be
deemed to be not Outstanding), unless the Trustee, or the Trustee and holders of
Commercial Paper Notes in an amoimt not less than the Outstanding principal amount of
Commercial Paper Notes the holders of which requested such notice, shaU agree in writing
to an extension of such period prior to its expiration; provided, however, that the Trustee,
or the Trustee and the holders of such prindpal amount of Commercial Paper Notes, shaU
be deemed to have agreed to an extension of such period if such faUure can be remedied,
and corrective action is initiated by the City within such period and is being difigentiy
pursued;
(d)
bankruptcy, reorganization, arrangement, insolvency or liquidation
proceedings, including, without limitation, proceedings under Chapter 9 or 11 of the
United States Bankruptcy Code (as the same mayfromtimeto time be hereafter amended),
or other proceedings forrefiefunder any Federal or state bankniptcy law or similar law
for the relief of debtors are instimted by or against the City, and, if instimted against the
City, said proceedings are consented to or are not dismissed within 60 days after such
instimtion; or
(e)
the occurrence of any other Event of Default as is provided in a
Supplemental Indenture.
If any Event of Default has occurred, but is subsequentiy cured or waived, then
such Event of De^lt shaU no longer constimte an Event of Default hereunder.
Section 9.02. Remedies, (a) Upon the occurrence and continuance of any Event
of Default, the Trustee in its discretion may, and upon the written direction of the holders of 25%
or more in aggregate principal amount of the Commercial Paper Notes then Outstanding (provided
that in the case of a default with respect to the tax covenants in Section 6.01, the Series B Notes
shaU be deemed not to be Outstanding) and receipt of indemnity to its satisfaction, shall, in its
own name and as the Trustee of an express trust: (i) by mandamus, or other suit, action or
proceeding at law or in equity, enforce allrightsof the Commercial Paper Noteholders, and
require the City to carry out any agreements with or for the benefit of the Commercial Paper
Noteholders and to perform its or their duties under any law to which it is subject and this
Indenture, provided that any suchremedymay be taken only to the extent permitted under the
appficable provisions of this Indenture; (ii) bring suit upon the Commercial Paper Notes; (iu)
commence an action or suit in equity to require the City to account as if it were the trustee of an
express trust for the Commercial Paper Noteholders; or (iv) by action or suit in equity enjoin any
acts or things which may be unlawful or in violation of the rights of the Commercial Paper
Noteholders.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83125

(b)
Tbe Trustee shaU be under no obUgation to take any action withrespectto
any Event of Default unless the Trustee has actual knowledge of the occurrence of such Event of
Default.
Section 9.03. Restoration to Former Positi'on. In the event that any proceeding
taken by the Trustee to enforce anyrightunder this Indenture shall have been discontinued or
abandoned for any reason, or shaU have been determined adversdy to the Trustee, then the City,
the Trustee, and the Commercial Paper Noteholders shaU be restored to their former positions and
rights hereunder, respectively, and aUrights,remediesand powers of the Trustee shaU continue
as though no such proceeding had been taken.
Section 9.04. Commercial Paper Noteholders' Right To Direct Proceedings.
Subject to Section 9.05 hereof, anything else in this Indenture to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Bank and the holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the Commercial Paper Notes
then Outstanding shaU have the right, at any time, by an instrument in writing executed and
defivered to the Trustee, to direct the time, method and place of conducting aU remedial
proceedings avaUable to the Trustee under this Indenture to be taken in connection with the
enforcement of the terms of this Indenture or exercising any trust or power conferred on the
Trustee by this Indenture; provided that such direction shaU not be otherwise than in accordance
with the provisions of the law and this Indenture; and provided, fimher, that with respect to any
such direction by the holders of Commercial Paper Notes there shaU have been provided to the
Trustee security and indemnity satisfattory to the Trustee against the costs, expenses and liabifities
lo be incurred as a result thereof by the Trustee. In the event of any conflirt in the directions of
the Bank and the holders of Commercial Paper Notes, the direction of the Bank shaU control.
Section 9.05. Limitation on Right To Institute Proceedings.' No Commercial
Paper Noteholder shaU have anyrightto instimte any suit, action or proceeding in equity or at law
for the execution of any trust or power hereunder, or any other remedy hereunder or on such
Commercial Paper Note, unless such Commercial Paper Noteholder or Commercial Paper
NotehoUers previously shall have given to the Trustee written notice of an Event of Default as
hereinabove provided, and unless also holders of 25% or more in aggregate principal amount of
the Commercial Paper Notes then Outstanding shaU have made written request of the Trustee so
to do, after therightto instimte such suit, action or proceeding under Section 9.02 hereof shall
have accrued, and shaU have afforded the Trustee a reasonable opportunity to proceed to instimte
the same in either its or their name, and unless there also shaU have been offered to the Trustee
security and indemnity satisfactory to it against the costs, expenses and liabifities to be incurred
therein or thereby, and the Trustee shall not have complied with such request within a reasonable
time; and such notification, request and offer of indemnity are hereby declared in every such case,
at the option of the Trustee, to be conditions precedent to the instimtion of such suit, action or
proceeding; it being understood and intended that no one or more of the Commercial Paper
Noteholders shaU have anyrightin any manner whatever by his, her or theh action to affect,
disturb or prejudice the security of this Indenture, or to enforce anyrighthereunder or under the
Commercial Paper Notes, except in the maimer herein provided, and that aU suits, actions and
proceedings at law or in equity shaU be instimted, had and maintained in the manner herein
provided and for the equal benefit of aU Commercial Paper Noteholders.

 83126

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 9.06. No Impairment of Right To Enforce Payment. Notwithstanding
any other provision in this Indenture, therightof any Commercial Paper Noteholder to receive
payment of the principal of and interest on such Noteholder's Commercial Paper Notes, on or
after the respective due dates caressed therein, or to instimte suit for tbe enforcement of any such
payment on or after such respective date, shall not be impaired or affected without the consent of
such Commercial Paper Noteholder.
Section 9.07. Proceedings by Trustee Without Possession of Commercial Paper
Notes. AUrightsof action under this Indenture or under any of the Commercial Paper Notes
secured hereby which are enforceable by the Trustee may be enforced by it without the possession
of any of the Commercial Paper Notes, or the production thereof at the trial or other proceedings
relative thereto, and any such suit, action or proceeding instimted by the Trustee shaU be brought
in its name for the equal andratablebenefit of the Commercial Paper Noteholders, subject to the
provisions of this Indenmre.
Section 9.08. No Remedy Exdusive. No remedy herein conferred upon or
reserved to the Trustee or to Commercial Paper Noteholders is intended to be exclusive of any
other remedy or remedies, and each and every suchremedyshaU be cumulative, and shaU be in
addition to every other remedy given hereunder, or now or hereafter existing at law or in equity
or by stamte; provided, however, that any coixfitions set forth herein to the taking of any remedy
to enforce the provisions of this Indenture or the Commerdal Paper Notes shaU also be conditions
to seeking any remedies under any of the foregoing pursuant to this Section.
Section 9.09. No Waiver of Remedies. No delay or omission of the Trustee or
of any Commercial Paper Noteholder to exercise any right or power accruing upon any default
shall impair any suchrightor power, or sbaU be constmed to be a waiver of any such default, or
an acquiescence therein; and every power and remedy given by this Article to the Trustee and to
the Commercial Paper Noteholders, respectively, may be exercised from time to time and as often
as may be deemed expedient.
Section 9.10. Appfication of Moneys. Any moneys received by the Trustee, by
any receiver or by any Commercial Paper Noteholder pursuant to anyrightgiven or action taken
under the provisions of this Article (which shaU not include moneys provided through the Letters
of Credit, which moneys shall be restricted to the specific use for which such moneys were
provided), after paymem of the costs and expenses of the proceedings resulting in the coUection
of such moneys and of the expenses, liabUities and advances inciured or made by the Trustee
(including attorneys' fees), shaU be appfied as follows:
(a) first, to the payment to the Persons entitied thereto of aU installments of
interest then due on the Commercial Paper Notes and Bank Notes, with interest on overdue
installments, if lawful, at therateper armum bome by the Commercial Paper Notes or
Bank Notes, as the case may be, in the order of maturity of the installments of such
interest, and, if the amount avaUable shall not be sufficient to pay in fiUl any particular
installment of interest, then to the payment ratably, according to the amounts due on such
installment.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83127

(b)
second, to the payment to the Persons entitled thereto of the ur^aid
principal amoimt of any of the Commercial Paper Notes and Bank Notes which shaU have
become due with interest on such Commercial Paper Notes or Bank Notes, as applicable,
at their respectiveratefromtherespectivedates upon which they became due, and, if the
amount avaUable shaU not be sufficient to pay in fiUl Commercial Paper Notes due on any
particular date, together with such interest, then to the paymentratably,according to the
amount of principal and interest due on such date, in each case to the Persons entitied
thereto, without any discrimination or privUege,
(c)
third, to the payment to the Bank of any unpaid Bank Obligations (other
than Bank Notes).
Whenever moneys are to be applied pursuant to the provisions of this Section, such
moneys shaU be appfied at such times, andfromtime to time, as the Trustee shaU determine,
having dueregardfor the amount of such moneys available for application and the likelihood of
additional moneys becoming avaUable for such application in the fiiOire. Whenever the Trustee
shall apply such fimds, it shaU fix the date upon which such application is to be made and upon
such date interest on the amounts of principal and interest to be paid on such date shaU cease to
accrue. The Trustee shaU give notice of the deposit with it of any such moneys and of the fixing
of any such date byfirst-classUnited States mail, postage prepaid, to aU Commercial Paper
Noteholders, and shall not be required to make payment to any Commercial Paper Noteholder
untU such Commerdal Paper Notes shaU be presented to the Tmstee for appropriate endorsement,
or for canceUation ifftUlypaid.
Section 9.11. SeverabiUfy of Remedies. It is the purpose and intention of this
Article to provide rights and remedies to the Trustee and the Commercial Paper Noteholders,
which may be lawfiiUy granted under the provisions of applicable law, but should anyrightor
remedy herein granted be held to be unlawful, the Trustee and the Noteholders shall be entitied,
as above set forth, to every otherrightandremedyprovided in this Indenture or by applicable
law.
Section 9.12. Additional Events of Default and Remedies. As long as any
particular Series of Commercial Paper Notes is Outstanding, the remedies as set forth in this
Article may be supplemented with additional remedies as set forth in a Supplemental Indenture.

ARTICLE XMiscellaneous '
Section 10.01. Substitute Letter of Credit. Notwithstanding anything herein to
the contrary, the City may obtain a substitute Letter of Credit to replace the Letter of Credit then
in effect hereunder as long as said substimte Letter of Credu shall go into effect at least one
Business Day prior to the termination of the Letter of Credit then in effect being substimted for;
at no time may more than one Letter of Credit or substimte Letter of Credit secure the Notes.

 83128

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

The Expiration Date with respect to each substimte Letter of Credit shall be no earlier than the
earUer of (i) six (6) months after its date, or (ii) the Expiration Date set forth in the Letter of
Credit then in effect being substimted for. Each substimte Letter of Credit shaU be in an amount
sufficient to pay aU principal and interest scheduled to be paid on all Commercial Paper Notes
Outstanding hereunder as of the effective date of such substimte Letter of Credit. The foUowing
are fiirther conditions to the Issuing and Paying Agent's abifity toreleasean existing Letter of
Credit and accept a substimte Letter of Credit therefor:
(a)
The City shaU deUver written notice of the proposed substimtion to the
Trustee, the Issuing and Paying Agent, the Bank and the Dealer not less than 45 days prior
to the proposed substimtion date.
(b)
There shaU be defivered to the City, the Trustee and the Issuing and Paying
Agent written evidence from each Rating Agency then maintaining aratingon the
(Commercial Paper Notes secured by the Letter of Credit then in effed being substituted
for that the substitution of such Letter of Credit wiU not, in and of itself,resultin any
rating then assigned to the Commercial Paper Notes secured thereby being suspended,
reduced or withdrawn.
(c)
The Issuing and Paying Agem shaU defiver written notice to the registered
Owners of the Commercial Paper Notes secured thereby at least 30 days prior to the
proposed substimtion date. If any Outstanding Note secured thereby is in bearer form, the
Trustee shaU publish notice of the proposed substimtion of such Letter of Credit in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 30 days prior to the proposed
substimtion date.
(d)
An opinion or opinions of counsel to the successor Bank, satisfactory in
form and substance to each Rating Agency then maintaining aratingon the Commercial
Paper Notes to be secured thereby, shall be delivered to the effect that the siibstimte Letter
of Credit is a legal, valid aixi binding obligation of the issuing Bank and is enforceable
against the Bank in accordance with its terms.
(e)
An opinion of Bond Counsel shaU be defivered to the effect that the
substimtion of the Letter of Credit is authorized hereunder and (withrespectto Notes other
than taxable Notes) wiU not, in and of itself, adversely affect the exclusionfromgross
income for Federal tax purposes of interest on the Notes.
Section 10.02. Timeliness of Deposits. Funds shall be deemed transferred for
purposes of timeliness of receipt under this Indenture when transfer instractions for transfer by
Federalreservewire have been given and a Federal wire number confirmation has been received;
provided that the party to receive such funds shall not t>erequiredto take any action required to
be taken hereunder with respect to such fimds untU it has confirmation of actual receipt of such
fimds.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83129

Section 10.03. Waiver of Events of Default. No Event of Default witii respect
to the Commercial Paper Notes or the Bank Notes shall be waived imless after such waiver the
reinstatement provisions of the affected Letters of Credit, if any, shaU be in fiiU force and effect.
Section 10.04. Defeasance of Commercial Paper Notes. Commercial Paper
Notes shall not be deemed to have been paid in fiiU unless payment of the principal of and interest
on the Commercial Paper Notes either (a) shall have been made or caused to be made in
accordance with the terms of the Clortimercial Paper Notes and this Indenture, or (b) shaU have
been provided for by irtevocably depositing with the Trustee in trust and irtevocably setting aside
exclusively for such payment (i) Available Moneys sufficient to make such payment, and/or (u)
noncallable Government Obligations purchased with AvaUable Moneys, maturing as to principal
and interest in such amounts and at such times as wiU insure the availabUity of sufficient moneys
to make such payment.
Section 10.05. Bank to Control Remedies. While the Letter of Credit is in effect
notwithstanding anything else herein to the contrary, as long as the Bank is not Insolvent and is
not in default under the Letter of Credit or the Reimbursement Agreement, noright,power or
remedy withrespectto the Commercial Paper Notes secured by such Letter of Credit may be
pursued without the prior written consent of the Bank, and such Bank shaU have therightto direa
the Trustee to pursue anyright,power or remedy available hereunder with respect to any assets
available hereunder which secure oiUy the Notes secured by such Letter of Credit.
Section 10.06. Payments or Actions Occurring on Non-Business Days. If a
payment date is not a Business Day at the place of payment, or if any action required hereunder
is required on a date that is not a Business Day, then payment may be made at that place on the
next Business Day, or such action may be taken on tlK next Business Day, with the same effect
as if payment were made, or the action taken, on the stated date, and no interest shall accrue for
the intervening period.
Section 10.07. Notices to Rating Agendas. The Authorized City Representative
shaU provide the Rating Agencies with written notice of the occurrence of the foUowing events:
(i) changes in the Dealer or the Trustee, (u) the appointment of a successor Issuing and Paying
Agent, (iii) amendments to the Indenture, the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement or the
Reimbursement Agreement, (iv) the expiration, termination, substimtion, extension or
amendment of the Letter of Credit, and (v) the defeasance of all Outstanding Commercial Paper
Notes.
Section 10.08. Parties in Interest. Except as herein otherwise specifically
provided, nothing in this Indenture expressed or impfied is intended or shaU be construed to
confer upon any Person other than the City, the Trustee, the Paying Agent, other agentsfromtime
to time hereunder, the holders of the Notes, aixi, to the limited extent provided by Section 10.05
of this Indenture, the Bank, anyright,remedy or claim under or by reason of this Indenture, this
Indenture being intended to be for the sole and exclusive benefit of the City, the Trustee, the
Paying Agent, such other agents, the holders of the Notes and, to the limited extent provided in
Section 10.05 of this Indenmre, the Bank.

 83130

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

ARTICLE X I Supplemental Indentures^
Section 11.01. Limitations. This Indenture shall not be modified or amended in
any respect subsequent to the first delivery of frJly executed and authenticated Notes except as
provided in, and in accordance with and subjed to the provisions of. this Article.
Section 11.02.
Supplemental Indentures Not Requiring Consent of
Noteholders. The City may, and whUe the Letter of Credit is in effect and as long as tiie Bank
is not Insolvent and has not faUed to honor a properly presented and conforming drawing under
the Letter of Credit, with the prior written consent of the Bank, from time to time and at any time,
without the consent of or notice to the Noteholders, execute and deliver Supplemental Indentures
supplementing and/or amending this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture as foUows:
(a)
to cure any formal defect, omission, inconsistency or ambiguity in, or
answer any questions arising under, this Indenture or any Supplemental Indentme,
provided that such supplement or amendment is not materiaUy adverse to the Noteholders;
(b)
to add to the covenants and agreements of the City in this Indenture or any
Supplemental Indenture other covenants and agreements, or to surrender any right or
power reserved or conferred upon the City, provided that such supplement or amendment
is not materiaUy adverse to the Noteholders;
(c)
to confirm, as fiirther assurance, any interest of the Issuing and Paying
Agent in and to the fiinds and accounts held by the Trustee or the Issuing and Paying
Agent, or in and to any other moneys, securities or fiinds of the City provided pursuant
to this Indenture, or to otherwise add additional security for the Noteholders;
(d)
to evidence any change made in the terms of any Series of Notes if such
changes are authorized by the Supplemental Indenture at the time the Series of Notes is
issued and such change is made in accordance with the terms of such Supplemental
Indenture;
(e)
to coiiq>ly witii die requirements of the Trust Indenmre Act of 1939, as
from time to time amended;
(f)
to modify, alter, amend or supplement this Indenture or any Supplemental
Indenmre in any other respect which is not materiaUy adverse to the Noteholders;
(g)
to quafify the Notes or a Series of Notes for aratingorratingsby Moody's,
S&P and/or Fitch;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83131

(h)
to accommodate the technical, operational and structural feanires of Notes
which are issued or are proposed to be issued, including, but not limited to, changes
needed to accommodate other forms of commercial paper, or other forms of indebtedness
which the Cityfrx>mtime to tune deems appropriate to incur;
(i)
to con^ly with the requirements of the Code as are necessary, in the
opinion of Bond Counsel, to preserve the exclusion from gross income for Federal income
taxation of the interest on Notes issued as tax-exempt Notes; or
(j)
to take effed only with respect to Notes issued on or after the effective date
of the Supplemental Indenture accompanied by appropriate disclosure of the amendment
or supplemenL
Before the City shall, pursuant to this Section, execute any Supplemental Indenmre,
there shaU have been defivered to the City an opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that such
Supplemental Indenture is authorized or permitted by this Indenture and appficable law, complies
with their respective terms, wiU, upon the execution and defivery thereof, be valid and binding
upon the City in accordance with its terms, aixi wiU not cause interest on any of the Notes which
is then exduded from gross income of the recipient thereof for Federal income tax purposes to
be included in gross income for Federal income tax purposes.
Section 11.03. Supplemental Indentures Requiring Consent of Noteholders.
Except for any Supplemental Indenture entered into pursuant to Section 11.02 hereof and any
Supplemental Indenture entered into pursuant to subsection (b) below, subject to the terms and
provisions contained in this Section and not otherwise, the holders of not less than a majority in
aggregate principal amoimt of the Notes then Outstanding shaU have the right firom time to time,
and whUe the Letter of Credit is in effect, and, as long as the Bank is not Insolvent and has not
faUed to honor a properly presented and conforming drawing under the Letter of Credit, with the
prior written consent of the Bank, to consent to and approve the execution by the City of any
Supplemental Indenture deemed necessary or desirable by the City for the purposes of modifying,
altering, amending, supplementing or rescinding, in any particular, any of the terms or provisions
contained in this Indenture or in any Supplemental Indenmre; provided, however, that, unless
^proved in writing by tbe holders of aU the Notes then Outstanding, or unless such change affects
less than aU Series of Notes and subsection (b) below is applicable, nothing herein contained shaU
permit, or be construed as permitting, (i) an extension in the stated maturity of any CKitstanding
Notes, or a change in the amounts or currency of payment of the principal of or interest on any
Outstanding Notes, or (ii) a reduction in the principal amount or redemption price of any
Outstanding Notes, or Uie rate of interest thereon; and provided that nothing herein contained,
including tbe provisions of subsection (b) below, shaU, unless approved in writing by the holders
of aU the Notes then Outstanding, permit or be construed as permitting (ifi) except with respect
to additional security which may be provided for a particular Series of Notes, a preference or
priority of any Note or Notes over any other Note or Notes withrespectto the security granted
therefor under this Indenture, or (iv) a reduction in the aggregate principal amount of Notes the
consent of tlie Noteholders of which is required for any such Supplemental Indenture. Nothing

 83132

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

herein contained, however, shaU be construed as making necessary the approval by Noteholders
of the execution of any Supplemental Indenture as authorized in Section 11.02 hereof.
(a)
Subject to the provisions of Section 11.02 and 11.03(a) hereof, the City
may, from time to time and at any time, execute a Supplemental Indenture which amends
the provisions of an earlier Supplemental Indenture. If such Supplemental Indenture is
executed for one of the purposes set forth in Section 11.02 hereof, no notice to or consent
of the Noteholders shaU be required. If such Supplemental Indenture contains provisions
which affed the rights and interests of less than all Series of Notes Outstanding and
Section 11.02 hereof is not appficable, then this subsection (b)ratherthan subsection (a)
above shaU control, and, subject to the terms and provisions contained in this Section and
not otherwise, the holders of not less than a majority in aggregate principal amoimt ofthe
Notes of aU Series which are affected by such changes shaU have therightfromtime to
time to consent to any Supplemental Indenmre deemed necessary or desirable by the City
for the purposes of modifying, altering, amending, supplementing or rescinding, in any
particular, any of the terms or provisions contained in such Supplemental Indenture and
affecting only the Notes of such Series; provided, however, that, unless approved in
writing by the holders of aUtiieNotes of aU the affected Series then Outstanding, nothing
herein contained shall perrrut, or be construed as permitting, (i) a change in the scheduled
rimes, amounts or currency of payment of the principal of or interest on any Outstanding
Notes of such Series, or (ii) a reduction in the principal amount or redemption price of any
Outstanding Notes of such Series or the rate of interest thereon. Nothing herein contained.
however, shaU be construed as making necessary the approval by Noteholders of the
adoption of any Supplemental Indenture as authorized in Section 11.02 hereof.
(b)
If at any time the City shaU desire to enter into any Supplemental Indenture
for any of the purposes of this Section, the City shaU cause notice of the proposed
execution ofthe Supplemental Indenture to be given byfirst-classUnited States maU to the
Bank and all Noteholders or, under subsection (b) above, the Bank and all Noteholders of
the Series. Such notice shaU briefly set forth the nature of the proposed Supplemental
Indenture and shaU state that a copy thereof is on fUe at the office of the City for
inspection by aU Noteholders, and it shall not be required that the Noteholders approve the
final form of such Supplemental Indenture but it shall be sufficient if such Noteholders
approve the substance thereof.
(c)
The City may execute and deliver such Supplemental Indenture in
substantially the form described in such notice, but only if there shall have first been
delivered to the City (i) any required consents, in writing, of the Bank and the
Noteholders, and (ii) the opinion of Bond Counsel required by the last paragraph of
Section 11.02 hereof.
(d)
If Noteholders of not less than the percentage of Notes required by this
Section shaU have consented to and approved the execution and delivery thereof as herein
provided, no Noteholders shall have any right to object to the adoption of such
Supplemental Indenture, or to object to any of the terms and provisions contained therein

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83133

or the operation thereof, or in any manner to question the propriety of the execution and
delivery thereof, or to enjoin or restrain the Cityfromexecuting the same orfromtaking
any action pursuant to the provisions thereof.
Section 11.04. Effect of Supplemental Indenture. Upon execution and defivery
of any Supplemental Indenture pursuant to the provisions of this Article, this Indenture or the
Supplemental Indenture shall be. and shaU be deemed to be. modified and amended in accordance
therewith, and the respective rights, duties and obligations under this Indenture and the
Supplemental Indenture of the City, the Trustee, the Issiung and Paying Agent, the Bank and aU
Noteholders shaU thereafter be determined, exercised aixl enforced imder this Indenture and the
Supplemental Indenture, if applicable, subjed in aU respects to such modifications and
amendments.
Section 11.05. Supplemental Indentures To Be Fart of This Indenture. Any
Supplemental Indenture adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Article shaU thereafter
fonn a part of this Indenture or the Supplemental Indenture which they supplement or amend, and
aU of the terms and conditv^ns contained in any such Supplemental Indenture as to any provision
authorized to be contained therein shaU be and shaU be deemed to be part of the temis and
conditions of this Indenture or the Supplemental Indenture which they supplement or amend for
any and all purposes.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Indenture to be
duly executed, aU as of the date first above written.

[SEAL]
CITY OF CHICAGO
ATTEST:
By:

By:
City Clerk

Chief Finandal Officer

[SEAL]

as Trustee

ATTEST:

By:.
Its:

By:
Its:

(Sub)Exhibits "A", "B" and "C" referred to in this Trust Indenture read as follows:

 83134

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(Sub)Exhibit "A".
(To Trust Indenture)
(Form Of Master Note)
City Of Chicago
Commerdal Paper Notes
2002 Program Series
Registered Owner: Cede & Co.
Prindpal Sum:

Not to Exceed the Authorized /Vmount set forth below

The City of Chicago (the "City"), a municipaUty and a home rule unit of local
government duly organized and vafidly existing under the Constitution and laws of the
State of lUlnois, for value received, hereby promises to pay to the registered owner
hereinabove named or registered assigns, the principal amount, together with unpaid
accrued interest thereon, if any, on the maturity date of each obfigation identified on
the records of the City (the "Underlying Records") as being evidenced by this Master
Note, which Underlying Records are maintained by
, as issuing and
paying agent (the "Issuing and Paying Agent") under that certain Issuing and Paying
Agent Agreement, dated as of
1, 2002, between the City and the Issuing
and Paying Agent (the "Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement"). Interest on Series A
Notes shaU be calculated on the basis of actual days dapsed i n a three hundred sixtyfive (365) or three hundred sixty-six (366) day year, as the case may be, at the rate
specified on the Underlying Records. Interest on Series B Notes shaU be calculated on
the basis of a three hundred sixty (360) day year and actual number of days elapsed,
at the rate or yield specified on the Underlying Records. Payments shaU be made from
monies provided by the City and payments of drawings under an irrevocable,
transferrable, direct-pay letter of credit of
, by wire transfer to the
registered owner stated hereinabove from the Issuing and Paying Agent without the
necessity of presentation and surrender of this Master Note.
This Master Note is one of a duly authorized issue of Commercial Paper Notes of the
City (hereinafter called the "Notes") of the series and designation indicated on the face
hereof
Said authorized issue of Notes consists of multiple series of varying
denominations, dates, maturities, interest rates and other provisions, as in the
Indenture hereinafter mentioned provided, aU issued and to be issued pursuant to the
provisions of Section 6(a) of Article VII ofthe 1970 Constitution ofthe State of Ilfinois
and an ordinance (the "CP. Note Ordinance") duly adopted by the City CouncU ofthe
City on
, 2002. This Master Note evidences a series of Notes

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83135

designated as the "City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Note, 2002 Program Series
"
(hereinafter called the "Series Notes"). This Note is issued pursuant to the CP. Note
Ordinance and a Trust Indenture, dated as of
1, 2002 (the "Indenture"),
between the City and
as trustee (the "Trustee"), providing
for the issuance of the Series A Notes and the.Series B Notes in the aggregate principal
amount outstanding at any time not to exceed Two Hundred MiUion DoUars
($200,000,000). The authorized issue of this Series Note is limited to the principal
amount of Two Hundred MiUion DoUars ($200,000,000) reduced by the aggregate
principal amount of Notes ofthe other series then outstanding under the Indenture and
by the outstanding prindpad amount of "Auction Rate Securities" and "Variable Rate
Securities" issued and outstanding under the CP. Note Ordinance.
Reference is hereby made to the Indenture and the CP. Note Ordinance for a
description ofthe terms on which the Notes are issued and to be issued, and the rights
of the registered owners of the Notes; and all the terms of the Indenture and the CP.
Note Ordinance are hereby incorporated herein and made a contract between the City
and the registered owner from time to time of this Master Note, and to all the provisions
thereof the registered owner of this Note, by its acceptance hereof, consents and agrees.
Additioned series of Notes may be issued on a parity with the Notes of this authorized
series.
This Master Note, together with all other Notes, issued under the Indenture, are direct
and general obfigations of the City payable from any funds of the City legaUy available
and annuaUy appropriated for such purpose, including securities and monies held by
the Trustee under the provisions ofthe Indenture. Pursuant to the Indenture, the City
has covenanted and agreed to take aU necessary action to annuaUy appropriate funds
in a timely maimer so as to provide for the punctual payment of the prindpal of,
redemption premium of and interest on aU Notes issued under the Indenture; provided,
however, that in no event wiU the City be obligated to levy any separate ad valorem or
other tax in addition to other City taxes or any special ad valorem or other tax
unlimited as to rate or amount to pay such principal, redemption premium or interest.
At the request of the registered owner, the City shaU promptiy issue and deliver one
(1) or more separate note certificates evidencing each obfigation evidenced by this
Master Note. As of the date any such note certificate or certificates are issued, the
obligations which are evidenced thereby shaU no longer be evidenced by this Master
Note. This Master Note is transferable by the registered owner hereof, in person or by
attorney duly authorized in writing, at the principal office of the Issuing and Paying
Agent in Chicago, but only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment
ofthe charges provided in the Indenture, and upon surrender and cancellation of this
Note. Upon such transfer a new fully registered Note or Notes of the same series
designation, without coupons, of authorized denomination or denominations, for the
same aggregate principal amount wiU be issued to the transferee in exchange herefor.

 83136

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

The City, the Trustee and the Issuing and Paying Agent may deem and treat the
registered owner hereof as the absolute owner hereof for aU purposes, and the City, the
Trustee and the Issuing and Pajring Agent shaU not be affected by any notice to the
contrary.
The rights and obfigations of the City and of the registered owners of the Notes may
be modified or amended at any time in the manner, to the extent, and upon the terms
provided in the Indenture and, under certain circumstances as described in the
Indenture, without the consent ofthe holders ofthe Notes.
It is hereby certified and recited that any and all acts, conditions and things required
to exist, to happen and to be performed, precedent to and in the incurring of the
indebtedness evidenced by this Master Note, and in the issuing of this Master Note, do
exist, have happened and have been performed in due time, form and manner, and that
this Master Note is not in excess of the simount of Notes pemutted to be issued under
the C P . Note Ordinance.
This Master Note shaU not be entitied to any benefit under the Indenture, or become
vafid or obligatoty for any purpose, untU the certificate of authentication hereon
endorsed shaU have been signed by the Issuing and Paying Agent. This Master Note
is a vafid and binding obfigation of City.
In Witness Whereof, The City of Chicago, has caused this Master Note to be executed
in its name and on its behalf by the manual or facsimUe signature of the Mayor of the
Issuer and the seal ofthe Issuer to be impressed or imprinted hereon and attested by the
manual or facsimUe signature of the City Clerk of the Issuer, aU as of the
day of
2002.
City of Chicago
By:
Mayor
[Seal]
Attest:
By:
City Clerk

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F C O M M I T T E E S

83137

Certificate Of Authentication.

This Master Note is the Master Note described in the w i t h i n Master Note and the
within-mentioned Indenture.
Date of Authentication:

as Issuing and Paying Agent

Authorized Signature:

(Form O f Assignment)
Assignment.

For Value Received, The undersigned hereby seUs, assigns and transfers u n t o
(Please Print or IVpewrite Name and Address) (Please
Insert Social Security or other Taxpayer Identification Number of Assignee:
•
) the within Master Note and aU rights and titie therein, and hereby
irrevocably constitutes and appoints
, attorney, to transfer the
within Master Note on the books kept for registration thereof, w i t h fuU power of
substitution i n the premises.

Dated:
(Registered Owner)

Notice:

The signature(s) to this assignment must correspond w i t h the name as i t
appears upon the face o f t h e w i t h i n Master Note i n every particular, w i t h o u t
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

Signature Guaranteed:

 83138

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Notice: Unless this certificate is presented by an authorized representative of The
Depository Trust Company, a New York corporation ("D.T.C"), to the City or
its agent for registration of transfer, exchange or pajmtient, and any certificate
issued is registered in the name of Cede & Co, or in such other name as is
requested by an authorized representative of D.T.C. (and any payment is
made to Cede & Co. or to such other entity as is requested by an authorized
representative of D.T.C, Any Transfer, Pledge Or Other Use Hereof For Value
Or Otherwise By Or To Any Person Is Wrongfiil inasmuch as the registered
owner Hereof, Cede & Co., has an interest herein.

(Sub)Exhibit "B".
(To Trust Indenture)
^Form Of Bank

Note)

City Of Chicago
Bank Note
(2002 Commerdal Paper Program),
{Name Of Bank).
$_
For Value Received, the Undersigned, City of Chicago (the "Borrower"), hereby
promises to pay to the order of
(the "Bank"), at
, in the manner and on the dates provided in the
hereinafter defined Agreement in lawful money ofthe United States of America and in
immediately avaUable funds, the principal amount of
DoUars
($
), or, if less, the aggregate unreimbursed amount ofthe Advances made
by the Bank pursuant to the Agreement. Terms used herein and not otherwise defined
herein shaU have the meanings assigned to them in the Reimbursement Agreement
dated as of
I , 2002 (the "Agreement") between the Borrower and the
Bank, as from time to time in effect.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83139

The Borrower further promises to pay interest from the date hereof on the
outstanding principeU amount hereof and unpaid interest hereon from time to time at
the rates and times and in aU cases in accordance with the terms of the Agreement.
The Bank may endorse its records relating to this Bank Note with appropriate notations
evidencing the Advances and payments of principal hereunder as contemplated by the
Agreement.
This Bank Note is issued pursuant to, is entitied to the benefits of, and is subject to,
the provisions of the Agreement and that certain Trust Indenture dated as of
1, 2002 between the Borrower and
,. as Trustee. The
principal of this Bank Note is subject to prepayment i n whole or in part in accordance
with the terms of the Agreement.
The parties hereto, including the undersigned maker and all guarantors, endorsers
and pledgors that may exist at any time with respect hereto, hereby wmve presentment,
demsmd, notice, protest and aU other demands and notices in connection with the
defivery, acceptance, performance and enforcement of this Bank Note and assent to the
extensions of the time of payment or forbearance or other indulgence without notice.
This Bank Note And The Obfigations Of The Borrower Hereunder ShaU For AU
Purposes Be Governed By And Interpreted And Determined In Accordance With The
Laws Of The State Of Illinois (Excluding The Laws Appficable To Confficts Or Choice Of
Law).
In Witness Whereof, The Borrower has caused this Bank Note to be signed in its
corporate name as an instrument under seal by its duly authorized officer on the date
and in the year first above written.
City of Chicago
[Seal!

By:

Attest:

Name:
Chief Finandal Officer

By:
City Clerk

 83140

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(Sub)Exhibit "C.
(To Trust Indenture)
i^orm Of 2002 Program Series
Proceeds Fund Requisition.
Requisition Number.
To:

Re: Requisition of Funds from City of Chicago
Commerdal Paper Notes, 2002 Programs
Series
Proceeds Funds
The amount requisitioned: $_
Payment to be made to:
Manner in which payment is to be made:
The undersigned, an Authorized City Representative within the meaning ofthe Trust
Indenture, dated as of
1, 2002 (the "Indenture"), by and between the City
of Chicago (the "City") and
, as trustee (the "Trustee"), hereby
requisitions the amount set forth above and directs that such amount be paid to the
party set forth above from funds held in the Series
Proceeds Fund held under the
Indenture, and directs that payment be made in the manner described above.
For Series A Projects or Purposes only: The amount to be paid represents a cost of
the Series A Project or Purpose as described in a Tax Certificate of the City, and the
amounts requisitioned hereby wiU be expended orUy in accordance with and subject to
the limitations set forth in the Tax Certificate, dated
, 2002, and relating
to the Series A Notes issued under the Indenture.
For Series B Projects or Purposes only: The cmiount to be paid represents a cost of
a Series B Projert or Purpose.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83141

City of Chicago

Dated:

By:
Authorized City Representative

Exhibit "B".
(To Ordinance)
Commercial Paper Dealer

Agreement

Between
City Of Chicago
And

Dated.

2002

Relating To
City Of Chicago
Commercial Paper Notes
2002 Program
Series A (Tax Exempt) And Series B (Taxable).
This Commerdal Paper Dealer Agreement, dated
"Agreement"), by and between the City of Chicago (the "Issuer") and
(tiie "CP. Dealer").

, 2002 (the

For and in consideration of the mutual covenants made herein and other valuable
consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, the parties
hereto agree as foUows:

 83142

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 1. Background A n d Defmitions.
(a) The Issuer has authorized the issuance and reissuance from time-to-time of its
Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program, Series A {Tax Exempt) and Series B (Taxable)
(the "Notes") i n the aggregate principed amount not to exceed Two H u n d r e d MiUion
DoUars ($200,000,000) outstanduig at any time.

i!

(b) The Issuer has authorized the issuance o f t h e Notes p u r s u a n t an ordinance duly
adopted by the City CouncU o f t h e Issuer on
, 2002 (the "Ordinance") and
the Trust Indenture dated as of
1, 2002 (the " C P . Indenture") by and
between the Issuer and
, as Trustee, relating to the Notes; and
the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement, dated as of
1, 2002 (the
"CP.
Pajring Agent Agreement") by a n d
between
the
Issuer
and
(the "CP. Paying Agent"). The Ordinance, the C P . Indenture
and the C P . Paying Agent Agreement being herein sometimes referred to coUectively
in this Agreement as the "Authorizing Documents" (the "Authorizing Documents").
(c)
(the "Facifity Issuing Party") has defivered a letter of
credit (the "Facifity") with respect to the Notes to
(the
"Account Party") i n accordance with the terms of the Authorizing Document a n d the
Reimbursement Agreement dated as of
, 2002 between the Issuer and
the Facifity Issuing Party (the "Fadfity Agreement") among the Issuer and the Facifity
Issuing Party.
(d) The Authorizing Documents provide for the appointment of a conunerdal paper
dealer to perform certain duties, including the offering and sale from time-to-time of
the Notes on behalf of the Issuer.
(e)
has agreed to accept the duties and responsibUities o f t h e C P .
Dealer with respect to the Notes under the Authorizing Documents and this
Agreement.
(f) Unless otherwise defined herein, aU capitalized terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them i n the Authorizing Documents.

j

Section 2. Appointment Of C P . Dealer.
(a) Subject to the terms and conditions contcuned herein, the Issuer hereby appoints
. as the C P . Dealer for the Notes, and
hereby accepts
such appointment.
(b) The C P . Dealer shaU act as non-exclusive dealer w i t h respect to the Notes. The
C P . Dealer acknowledges that the Issuer may enter into agreements w i t h other
dealers i n connection with the offering and sale of the Notes on behalf of the Issuer.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF C O M M I T T E E S

83143

Section 3. Responsibifities Of C P . Dealer.
(a) Subject to the terms and conditions set forth i n this Agreement, MerriU Lynch
agrees to perform the duties of C P . Dealer set forth i n this Agreement. I t is
understood that i n undertaking to perform such duties, and i n the performance
thereof, it is the intention of the parties that the C P . Dealer wiU act solely as an agent
and not as a principal, except as expressly provided i n this Agreement. The C P .
Dealer shaU use its best efibrts to soficit and arrange sales o f t h e Notes o n behalf of
the Issuer at such rates and maturities as may prevail from time to time i n the
market. The C P . Dealer and the Issuer agree that any Notes w h i c h the C P . Dealer
may arrange the sale of or which, i n the C P . Dealer's sole discretion, i t may elect to
purchase, wiU be purchased or sold on the terms and conditions and i n the memner
provided i n the Authorizing Documents and this Agreement. A n y t h i n g herein to the
contrary notwithstanding, to the extent of any conffict between the provisions hereof
and o f t h e Authorizing Documents, the provisions o f t h e Authorizing Documents shaU
be controlling.
(b) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the C P . Dealer:
(i) wiU suspend its efforts with respect to the offer or sjile of the Notes on behalf
of the Issuer upon the receipt of notice of the occurrence of an event of default
under the terms o f t h e Notes, the Authorizing Documents, the FacUity or the FacUity
Agreement; and
(fi) may, i n its sole discretion, suspend its efforts w i t h respect to the offer or sale
of the Notes on behalf of the Issuer immediately upon the occurrence of any of the
foUowing events, which suspension wiU continue so long as, i n the C P . Dealer's
reasonable judgment, such event continues to exist as to the Notes:
(1) suspension or material limitation i n trading i n securities generaUy on the
New York Stock Ebcchange;
(2) a general moratorium on commerdal banking activities i n New York is
declared by dther federal or New York State authorities;
(3) the engagement by the United States i n hostifities i f the effect of such
engagement, i n the C P . Dealer's judgment, makes i t impracticed or inadvisable to
proceed with the soficitation of offers to purchase the Notes;
(4) legislation shall be introduced by committee, by amendment or otherwise,
i n , or be enacted by, the House of Representatives or the Senate o f t h e Congress
of the United States or w i t h i n a legislative body w i t h i n the State of Ilfinois having
jurisdiction over the issuance of the Notes, or a decision by a court of the United
States or the State of Ilfinois shaU be rendered, or a stop order, ruling, regulation
or oflDdal statement by, or on behalf of, the United States Securities and Exchange
Commission or other governmental agency having j u r i s d i c t i o n of the subject

 83144

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

matter shaU be made or proposed, to the effect t h a t the offering or sale of
obligations of the general character of the Notes, as contemplated hereby, is or
would be i n violation of any provision of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended
(the "Securities Act") as then i n effect, or the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended (the "Exchange Act") as then i n effect, or w i t h the purpose or effect of
otherwise prohibiting the offering or sale of obfigations o f t h e genersd character of
the Notes, or the Notes themselves, as contemplated hereby;
(5) any event shaU occur or information shaU become k n o w n , w h i c h , i n the C P .
Dealer's reasonable opinion, makes u n t r u e , incorrect or misleading i n any
material respect any statement or information contained i n any disclosure
documents provided to the C P . Dealer i n cormection w i t h the performance of its
duties hereunder, whether provided pursuant to Section 8 hereof or otherwise, or
causes such documents to contain an u n t r u e , incorrect or misleading statement
of a material fact or to o m i t to state a material fact required to be stated therein
or necessary to make the statements made therein, i n fight o f t h e circumstances
under which they were made, not misleading;
(6) any govemmentcd a u t h o r i t y shaU impose, as to the Notes, or obfigations of
the general character of the Notes, any material restrictions not now i n force, or
increase materiaUy those now i n force;
(7) any of the representations and warranties of the Issuer made hereunder
shaU not have been true and correct on the date made;

11

(8) the Issuer faUs to observe any o f t h e covenants or agreements made herein;
(9) any of the rating agencies then rating the Notes or the Facifity Issuing Party
shaU either (i) downgrade the ratings assigned to either the Notes or the Facifity
Issuing Party so that such Notes are not "Efigjble Notes" as defined under Rule 2a7 o f t h e Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended or (fi) suspend or w i t h d r a w
the then current ratings assigned to either the Notes or the Facility Issuing Party;
or
(10) an actual or i m m i n e n t default or a m o r a t o r i u m i n respect of payment of any
Uiuted States Treasury biUs, bonds or notes the effect of which i n the C P .
Deeder's judgment makes i t impractical to market the Notes or to enforce contracts
for the sale of the Notes.

Section 4. Transactions I n Notes.
AU transactions in Notes between the C P . Deader and the Issuer shaU be i n
accordance with the Authorizing Documents, this Agreement, the Facifity Agreement
and with the customs and practices i n the commercitd paper market regarding
settiement emd defivery formally adopted i n writing from time to time by the New York

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F C O M M I T T E E S

83145

Clearinghouse, to the extent not inconsistent with the Authorizing Documents. As
early as possible, but not later t h a n 11:30 A.M. (Chicago time) on the day on which
any Notes are to be issued, the C P . Dealer shaU notify the Issuer o f t h e proposed f i n a l
maturities, prices and interest rates (which interest rates shaU n o t exceed
%
per annum) at which the C P . Dealer wUl purchase or cause the purchase of the
Notes, and provide the Issuer w i t h any other information as required for defivery of
such Notes. Except as described below, the C P . Dealer shall n o t be obligated to
purchase or cause the purchase of any Notes uiUess and untU agreement has been
reached i n each case on the foregoing points and the C P . Dealer has agreed to such
purchase. Not later than 11:30 A.M. (Chicago time) on the date of each transaction,
the C P . Dealer shaU either (a) confirm each transaction made w i t h or arranged by i t
or (b) notify the Issuer and the C P . Pajong Agent o f t h e difference, i f any, between the
amount of maturing Notes and the amount of Notes w h i c h the C P . Dealer has
arranged to seU or has agreed to purchase. Such confirmation or notification shafi
be given by telephone (or by other telecommunications m e d i u m acceptable to the
Issuer) and i n writing to the Issuer and the C P . Paying Agent.

Section 5. Payment For Notes.
The C P . Dealer shaU pay for the Notes sold by the C P . Deader (or purchased by the
C P . Dealer for its own account) i n immediately avaUable f u n d s by 1:15 P.M. (Chicago
time) on the Business Day such Notes are defivered to the C P . Dealer (provided that
such Notes are so delivered to the C P . Dealer by 1:15 P.M. (Chicago time) on such
Business Day). AU Notes wiU be sold at par, and w i l l be evidenced either by (i) a
global note immobUized w i t h The Depository Trust Company of New York or (u) i f not,
wiU be executed i n the manner provided for i n the C P . Indenture.

Section 6. Designated Representative.
Note fransactions with the Issuer, pursuant to Section 4 hereof, shaU be w i t h any
one of the officers or employees of the Issuer who are designated as a Designated
Representative by certificate signed by the Chief Financial Officer of the Issuer. The
initial written designation of the Designated Representatives is appended hereto as
Appendix A. The Issuer agrees to provide the C P . Dealer w i t h revised written
designations i n the form of Appendix A when and as required by changes i n the
Designated Representatives. The C P . Dealer may rely u p o n such designation unless
and untU otherwise notified i n writing by the Issuer.

Section 7. Resignation And Removal Of C P . Dealer.
The C P . Dealer may at any time resign and be discharged of its duties and
obUgations hereunder upon providing the Issuer, the C P . Trustee and the C P . Paying
Agent with thirty (30) days prior written notice. The C P . Dealer may be removed at

 83146

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

I '1'
any time, at the direction ofthe Issuer upon seven (7) days prior written notice to the
CP. Dealer and the CP. Trustee and the CP. Paying Agent. Upon removal or
resignation ofthe CP. Dealer, the Issuer shaU promptiy cause the CP. Trustee and
the CP. Paying Agent to give notice thereofby maU to aU owners ofthe Notes and to
any rating agency which has assigned a rating to the Notes. The CP. Dealer shall
assign and deliver this Agreement to its successor if requested by the Issuer.
Section 8. Furnishing Of Disclosure Materieds.
(a) The Issuer agrees to fiimish the CP. Dealer with as many copies as the CP.
Dealer may reasonably request of the Offering Memorandum dated
,
2002 of the Issuer relating to the Notes (the "Offering Memorandum"), and such other
information with respect to the Issuer and the Notes as the CP. Dealer shaU
reasonably request from time to time.
(b) The Issuer agrees to cooperate with the CP. Dealer in the preparation from
time-to-time of a new Offering Memorandum for the Notes in the event the CP. Dealer
determines that the preparation and distribution of such Offering Memorandum is
necessary or desirable in connection with offering and sale on behaff of the Issuer of
the Notes, and to furnish or to cause to be funushed to the CP. Dealer as many
copies of such new Offering Memorandum as the CP. Dealer shaU request.
(c) If, at any time during the term of this Agreement, any event shaU occur or facts
become known to either party that might affect the correctness or completeness
(under standards appficable to letter of credit backed commercial paper) of any
statement of a material fact contained in the then current Offering Memorandum,
such party shaU promptiy notify the other in writing of the circumstances and detaUs
of such event.
(d) ff any material adverse changes that may affect the offering and sale on behaff
of the Issuer of the Notes or any fact or circumstance which may constitute, or with
the passage of time wiU constitute, an event of default under the Notes, any
Authorizing Document, the Facifity or the Facifity Agreement, the Issuer wUl promptly
notify the CP. Dealer by electronic means (telephone, facsinule communication or emaU).
Section 9. Fees And Expenses.
For the CP. Dealer's services under this Agreement, the Issuer wiU pay the CP.
Dealer a fee of
of one percent (.
%) per annum ofthe weighted
average ofthe principal amount of Notes outstanding during each three (3) month
period. The Issuer will pay the fee quarterly in arrears commencing
1, 2002, and each March 1, June 1, September 1 and December 1 thereafter.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83147

Section 10. Representations, Warranties, Covenants And Agreements Of The
Issuer.
The Issuer, by its acceptance hereof, represents, warrants, covenants, and agrees
with the C.P. Dealer that:
(a) it is a munidpafity and a home rule unit of local government duly organized
and vafidly existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois;
(b) it has fuU power and authority to take aU actions required or permitted to be
taken by the Issuer by or under, and to perform and observe the covenants and
agreements on its part contained in, this Agreement and any other instrument or
agreement relating hereto to which the Issuer is a party;
(c) it has, on or before the date hereof, duly taken aU action necessary to be taken
by it prior to such date to authorize (i) the execution, defivery and performance of
this Agreement, the Authorizing Documents, the Facifity Agreement and any other
instrument or agreement to which the Issuer is a party and which has been or wUl
be executed in connection with the transactions contemplated by the foregoing
documents; and (ii) the carrying out, giving effect to, consummation and
performance of the transactions and obfigations contemplated by the foregoing
agreements and by the current Offering Memorandum;
(d) Offering Memoranda and supplements, amendments and updates to any
thereof, fumished by the Issuer and used by the C.P. Dealer (including
amendments, supplements and replacements thereof), untU such time as they shaU
have been subsequentiy amended, updated or replaced, shaU not, to the personal
knowledge emd beUef of the Chief Financial Officer of the Issuer (or the officer who
executes this Agreement on behedf of the Issuer, if other than the Chief Financial
Officer) or the City ComptroUer, contain any untrue, incorrect or misleading
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated
therein or necessary to make the statements made therein, under common industry
standards of disclosure appficable, as of the date of this Agreement, to letter of
credit backed commercial paper, in fight of the circumstances under which they
were made, not misleading.
Section 11. Term Of Agreement.
This Agreement shaU become effective on tlie date hereof and shaU continue in fuU
force and effect untU the cessation of the Notes program, subject to the right of
suspension and termination as provided herein.

 83148

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

li

Section 12. Governing Law.
This Agreement shaU be governed by and constmed in accordance with the laws of
the State of Ulinois.
Section 13. Dealing In Notes By The C.P. Dealer; No Obfigation To Purchase
Notes.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein or elsewhere:
(a) The C.P. Dealer, in its individual capacity, may in good faith buy, seU, own,
hold and deal in any ofthe Notes, including, without limitation, any Notes offered
and sold by the C.P. Dealer pursuant to this Agreement, and may join in any action
which any owner of the Notes may be entitied to take with fike effect as if it did not
act in any capacity hereunder. The C.P. Dealer, in its individuad capacity, either as
prindpal or agent, may also engage in or be interested in any financial or other
transaction with the Issuer and may act as depositary, account party, or agent for
any committee or body of owners of the Notes or other obUgations of the Issuer as
freely as ff it did not act in any capadty hereunder.
(b) Nothing in this Agreement shaU be deemed to constitute the C.P. Dealer am
underwriter of the Notes or to obligate the C.P. Deader to purchase any Notes for its
own account at any time.
Section 14. MisceUaneous.
(a) Eiccept as otherwise specificaUy provided in this Agreement, aU notices, demands
and formal actions under this Agreement shaU be in writing and either (i) handdefivered, (u) sent by electroruc means, or (ifi) maUed by registered or certified maU,
retum receipt requested, postage prepaid, to
The C.P. Dealer:

Attention:
Telephone:
Telecopy:

 5/1/2002

The Issuer:

REPORTS O F C O M M I T T E E S

83149

City of Chicago
Chief Financial Officer
33 North LaSaUe Street, Sixth Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602
Attention: Walter K. Knorr
Telephone: (Omitted for p r i n t i n g
purposes)
Telecopy: (Omitted for p r i n t i n g
purposes)
E-maU: (Omitted for p r i n t i n g purposes)

The Issuing and
Pa.ying Agent:

Attention: .
Telephone:
Telecopy:
E-maU:

Each party hereto may, by notice given under this Agreement to the other parties
described above, designate other addresses to which subsequent notices, requests,
reports or other commuiucations shaU be directed.
(b) This Agreement shaU inure to the benefit of amd be binding only upon the parties
hereto and their respective successors and assigns. The terms "successors" and
"assigns" shaU not include any purchaser of any o f t h e Notes merely because of such
purchase. Neither the Facifity Issuing Party nor any owner of the Notes or other t h i r d
party shaU have any rights or privUeges hereunder.
(c) AU o f t h e representations and warranties o f t h e Issuer and the C.P. Dealer i n this
Agreement shaiU remain operative and i n fuU force and effect, regardless of (i) any
investigation made by or on behaff of the C.P. Dealer or the Issuer, (ii) the offering and
sale of and any payment for any Notes hereunder, or (ui) suspension, termination or
CcUiceUation of this Agreement.
(d) This Agreement and each provision hereof may be amended, changed, waived,
discharged or terminated only by an i n s t m m e n t i n v m t i n g signed by the parties hereto.
(e) Nothing herein shaU be construed to make amy party an employee of the other or
to estabfish any fiduciary relationship between the parties except as expressly provided
herein.

 83150

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(f) If any provision of this Agreement shall be held or deemed to be or shadl, in fact,
be invafid, inoperative or unenforceable for any reason, such circumstances shaU not
have the effect of rendering any other provision or provisions of this Agreement uivalid,
inoperative or unenforceable to any extent whatsoever.
(g) This Agreement may be executed i n several counterparts, each of which shaU be
regarded as an original and aU of which shaU constitute one (1) and the same
document.
In Witness Whereof, The parties hereto have executed this Agreement as of the date
first above written.
City of Chicago
By:
Name: Walter K. Knorr
Title:

Chief Financial Officer

By:
Name:
Titie:
Appendix "A" referred to in this Commercial Paper Dealer Agreement reads as foUows:
Appendix "A".
(To Commercial Paper Dealer Agreement)
Certificate Of Designated

Representative.

I am the Chief Finandal Officer ofthe City of Chicago (the "Issuer") duly authorized
pursuant to em ordinance adopted by the City CouncU ofthe Issuer on

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83151

2002, as supplemented (the "Authorizing Document") to appoint Designated
Representatives ofthe Issuer in connection vAth the issuance, from time to time, by the
Issuer of commercial paper notes (the "Notes") in accordance with the Authorizing
Document. I hereby designate the foUowing persons to act on my behaff in accordance
with the Authorizing Document and specimen signatures of such persons are set forth
beside their names.
Designated Persons

Executed this.

Specimen Signature

day of.
Name: Walter K. Knorr
Titie:

Chief Finandal

Exhibit "C".
(To Ordinance)
Issuing And Paying Agent

Agreement.

This Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement (this "Agreement") is entered into as of
I , 2002, by amd between the City of Chicago (the "City"), a municipal
corporatipn and home mle unit of local government duly organized aind existing under
the laws ofthe State of Ilfinois, and
(the "Issuing and
Paying Agent"), a
organized amd existing under the laws of the
. AU capitadized terms used but not otherwise defined herein shall have
the meanings specified in the Commercial Paper Indenture (as hereinafter defined).

 1^1;

83152

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 1. Appointment.
The City has appointed
and
hereby accepts such
appointment, as the Issuing and Paying Agent in connection with the issuamce and
payment of up to Two Hundred MiUion DoUar ($200,000,000) aggregate principal
amount of City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program, Series A (Tax
Exempt) and Series B (Taxable) (the "Commerdad Paper Notes"), pursuant to that
certain Tmst Indenture, dated as of
1, 2002 (the "CommerciaU Paper
Indenture"), providing for the issuance ofthe Conunerdal Paper Notes in such Series.
Such Commercial Paper Notes are to be initiaUy issued in book-entry form oiUy amd are
to be irutiaUy evidenced by Master Note Certificates (the "Master Note Certificates") in
the form attached to the Commercial Paper Indenture as (Sub)Exhibit A.
The Issuing amd Paying Agent agrees to observe and perform its duties and obfigations
hereunder and under the Commercial Paper Indenture. Without limiting the generafity
of the foregoing, the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU estabfish amd maintain the
Commerciad Paper Bank Payment Account, the Commerdal Paper Debt Service Account
and the Bauik Note Debt Service Account, and aU required subaccounts therein. The
Issuing amd Paying Agent agrees to provide to the City and the Tmstee a monthly report
on the first (1") business day of each month, which report shall set forth such
information regarding the authentication and issuance of Commercial Paper Notes
during the prior month, as the City and the Issuing and Paying Agent shadl have agreed
upon.
The Issuing and Paying Agent agrees to keep such books and records, including,
without limitation, a complete record of aU Issuance Requests, as shall be consistent
with industry practice and as may reasonably be requested by the City, and to make
such books and records avaUable for inspection by the City, the Tmstee and the Bank,
such books and records to be avaUable on each business day during reasonable
business hours, and, ff so requested, to send copies of such books and records to the
City, the Tmstee or the Bank (at their expense), as appficable.
Section 2. Certificate Agreement.
The City acknowledges that (i) the Issuing and Paying Agent has previously entered
into a commerdal paper certificate agreement (the "Certificate Agreement") with The
Depository Tmst Compamy, New York, New York ("D.T.C"), and (u) the continuation in
effect ofthe Certificate Agreement is a necessary prerequisite to the Issuing and Paying
Agent's providing services related to the issuance and payment of the Commerciad
Paper Notes whUe the Commerdal Paper Notes are in book-entty only form and D.T.C.
is the Note Depository.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83153

Section 3. Letter Of Representations; Commercial Paper Indenture; Designated
Representatives.
Prior to the issuance of any Commercial Paper Notes, the City shafi defiver to Issuing
and Paying Agent ain executed Letter of Representations (the "Letter of
Representations"), a copy of which is attached hereto a (Sub)Exhibit A. The Letter of
Representations, when executed by the City, the Issuing amd Paying Agent and D.T.C,
shaU supplement the provisions of this Agreement, and the City and the Issuing and
Paying Agent shaU be bound by the provisions ofthe Letter of Representations, to the
extent not inconsistent with the provisions of the Commerciad Paper Indenture.
The City has defivered to the Issuing and Paying Agent (a) a certified copy of the
Commerdal Paper Indenture, w^ich copy is attached hereto a (Sub)Exhibit B, (b) a
certified originad Certificate of the Chief Finauidad Officer setting forth the Authorized
City Representatives (the "Certificate of Chief Finandal Officer"), contauning the name,
titie and tme signature of those officers and employees of the City designated by the
City as an Authorized City Representative, and (c) a certified originad of a Certificate of
an Authorized City Representative setting forth the Designated Representatives (the
"Certificate of Authorized City Representative" and, together with the Certificate of Chief
Finandal Officer, the "Certificates"), containing the naune, titie and true signature of
those officers and employees ofthe City authorized, pursuant to the Commercial Paper
Indenture, to take action with respect to the Commercial Paper Notes, which
Certificates are attached hereto as (Sub)Exhibit C. The City agrees to provide the
Issuing and Paying Agent with revised Certificates when there are chamges in the
Authorized City Representatives or Designated Representatives. Until the Issuing amd
Paying Agent receives any subsequent Certificate, the Issuing and Paying Agent shadl
be entitied to rely on the last Certificate defivered to it for the purpose of determining
the Authorized City Representatives or Designated Representatives.
Section 4. Master Note Certificate.
Prior to the issuamce of any Commerdal Paper Notes, the City shaU defiver to the
Issuing and Paying Agent the Master Note Certificates evidencing the Commerciad Paper
Notes. Such Master Note Certificates shadl be duly executed, specify the date of
issuance, the series of Commercial Paper Notes, and be registered in the naime of Cede
& Co., as nominee of D.T.C, all as provided in the Commercial Paper Indenture.
Section 5. Issuance Requests.
Issuance Requests shall be in the form attached hereto as (Sub)Exhibit D. Issuance
Requests may be delivered by a Designated Representative through a electronic
instmction and reporting communication service offered by either the Dealer or the
Issuing and Pajdng Agent pursuant to Section 10 hereof, in each case received by the
Issuing and Paying Agent at the address specified in Section 17 hereof prior to 11:30

 83154

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

A.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) on the day on which such Issuance Request is to be
operative.
If the Issuing and Paying Agent, at its option, acts upon an Issuamce Request received
affter 11:30 A.M. (Chicago, lUinois time) on the day on which the Issuamce Request is
to be operative, the City understands and agrees that (a) such Issuamce Request shaU
be acted upon a best efforts basis, and (b) the Issuing and Paying Agent makes no
representation or waurranty that the issuance and defivery of any Commerdal Paper
Note pursuant to such Issuance Request shaU be completed prior to the close of
business on such date.
Any Issuance Request given by telephone shaU be confimaed to the Issuing and
Paying Agent in writing, either by regular maU (upon receipt), electronic tramsmission
or facsimUe, by a Designated Representative prior to 1:00 P.M. (Chicago, Ilfinois time)
in the form of (Sub)Exhibit D hereto on the day on which such Issuance Request is to
be operative.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, upon receipt of a notice from the
Bank under the Reimbursement Agreement in the form described i n Section [9.02) of
the Reimbursement Agreement (a "No-Issuance Notice"), the Issuing amd Paying Agent
shaU cease issuing Commercial Paper Notes untU such time as the Bank shaU have
retracted (by defivery of a written notice to the Issuing and Paying Agent) such NoIssuance Notice.
Section 6. Issuamce.
The Issuing aind Paying Agent's duties and responsibiUties in connection with the
issuance of the Commercial Paper Notes shall include:
(a) holding the Master Note Certificates in safekeeping and completing or causing
to be completed, each Master Note as to amount, date, maturity date, interest rate
and interest aumount upon receipt of Issuance Requests in accordance with the
Commerdal Paper Indenture;
(b) (1) verifying that the aggregate prindpal amount of Commercial Paper Notes
described in each Issuance Request (together with the interest thereon), plus the
aggregate prindpal amount of aU Commercial Paper Notes then outstanding (together
with the interest thereon), less the aggregate principal amount of any of the then
Outstanding Commercial Paper Notes to be retired concurrently with the issuance of
the Commerciad Paper Notes described in the Issuance Request (including interest
thereon), does not exceed the amount available to be drawn under the Letter of Credit
securing such Commercial Paper Notes, and (2) assigning to each Issuance Request
received from the City a C.U.S.I.P. Number;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83155

(c) causing to be delivered a Commerdad Paper Note on behaff of the City upon
receipt of instmctions from a Designated Representative ofthe City, as to the series,
principaU amount, registered owner, date of issue, maturity date (which shadl be no
more than two hundred seventy (270) days from the date of issuance thereof) and
interest rate, (ff appficable) by way of data entry transfer to the D.T.C. M.M.I. Same
Day Funds Settiement System ("S.D.F.S."), and to receive from S.D.F.S a confirmation
receipt that such defivery was effected;
(d) ff instructed by an Authorized City Representative, crediting the proceeds of
sales ofthe Commercial Paper Notes to the appropriate subaccount within the Bank
Payment Account estabfished with the Issuing and Pajnng Agent pursuant to the
Commercial Paper Indenture in an amount equal to the unreimbursed Advances
made by the Bank to pay principal of or interest on the Commerciad Paper Notes of
such Series;
(e) transferring to the Tmstee for deposit in the Proceeds Fund any remaining
proceeds of the sale of the Commerdal Paper Notes after the credits pursuauit to
subsection (d) above; and
(f) holding the aunounts on deposit in the appropriate subaccount of the Bank
Pajnment Account separate from aU other funds, accounts and subaccounts of the
Issuing and Paying Agent, and applying such amounts in accordance with the terms
hereof and ofthe Commercial Paper Indenture.
The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU have no duty or responsibUity to make any
transfer of the proceeds of the sade of the Commercial Paper Notes, or to advance any
monies or effect any credit with respect to such proceeds or transfers unless and until
the Issuing and Paying Agent has actuadly received the proceeds of the sale of the
Commercial Paper Notes.
Section 7. Payment.
The Issuing and Paying Agent's duties and responsibUities in connection with the
payment ofthe Commercial Paper Notes shaU include:
(a) upon presentment at maturity of a Commercial Paper Note, paying the principad
of and interest on the Commercial Paper Note to the Owner thereof;
(b) maiking the necessaty and timely drawings under the Letter of Credit in
accordance with the terms and provisions thereof in order to effectuate the timely
payment of principal and interest on the Commercial Paper Notes as the same become
due;

 83156

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(c) crediting amounts received from the City for the pa3rment of the principal of or
interest on the Commerciad Paper Notes to the related Series subaccount of the Bank
Payment Account;
(d) crediting amounts received from the Bank as a result of drawings under the
Letter of Credit to the Commercial Paper Debt Service Account; and
(e) keeping amounts on deposit in the Commerciad Paper Debt Service Account
separate from all other funds, accounts and subaccounts of the Issuing and Paying
Agent, and utilizing such amounts in accordance with the terms hereof and of the
Conunerdal Paper Indenture.
In making draws under the Letter of Credit, the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU be
acting solely on behaff and for the benefit ofthe Owners ofthe Commercial Paper Notes,
and not as agent of the City.
The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU have no obfigation to pay amounts due on the
Commerdad Paper Notes at their maturity other than from funds received by the
Issuing and Paying Agent from, or for the account of, the City, or from draws under the
Letter of Credit.
Section 8. Bank Notes.
(a) The City agrees from time to time to instmct the Tmstee to furnish the Issuing
and Paying Agent with an adequate supply of executed Bank Notes, which are in form
satisfactoty to comply with the provisions of the Commerdal Paper Indenture and
which are seriaUy numbered and executed by facsimile signatures i n accordamcc with
the Commerdal Paper Indenture, with the principal aunount, date of issue, maturity
date and Owner left blank. The Issuing and Pa3ang Agent agrees to hold the unissued
Bank Notes in safekeeping for the account of the City i n accordance with the customarypractice of the Issuing and Pajdng Agent.
(b) Upon receipt of written notice from the Bank that an Advance made by the Bamk
has not been reimbursed on the day thereof and ofthe certificate of an Authorized City
Representative, the Issuing and Paying Agent agrees to withdraw the necessary Bamk
Note(s) from safekeeping and, in accordance with such notice and certificate, agrees to:
(i) complete each Bank Note as to principal amount, date of issue, series and
maturity date in accordance with the Commercial Paper Indenture, register such
Bank Note in the name of the Bank and record each payment and prepayment on the
schedule attached thereto;
(u) manually authenticate each Bank Note by any officer or employee duly
authorized and designated for such purpose;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83157

(ui) defiver the Bank Note(s) to or upon the order of the Bank; amd
(iv) promptiy defiver one (1) nonnegotiable copy of each Bank Note to the City.
(c) The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU credit amounts received from the City for
pajmient of the principal of and interest on Bank Notes to the Bamk Note Account.
Section 9. Notice.
The Issuing and Paying Agent's duties and responsibifities in connection with
providing notification of certain matters described in the Commerdad Paper Indenture
shadl include:
(a) notification by 4:00 P.M. (Chicago, lUinois time) one (1) Business Day prior to
the maturity date of any Commercial Paper Notes to the City of the total amount due
with respect to such maturing Commercial Paper Notes;
(b) notification by 2:00 P.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) on the maturity date, of amy
Commercial Paper Notes to the City, ff funds held in the Bank Payment Account on
such maturity date, together with the proceeds of Commerciad Paper Notes to be
issued on such date, are insuffident to repay aui Advance made pursuant to a
Reimbursement Agreement in connection with the maturity of such Commercial
Paper Notes, which notification shadl specify the amount ofthe defidency;
(c) notification by 3:00 P.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) on the maturity date of any
Commerdal Paper Notes to the Bank, if insuffident funds have been deposited in the
Series Bank Payment Accounts to reimburse the Bank for an Interest Advance made
on such day;
(d) monthly notification to the City on the first (1") business day of each month
stating the amount of interest paid on Commerdal Paper Notes during the prior
month; and
(e) amy notification to be provided by the Issuing and Pa3dng Agent as specified in
the Commerciad Paper Indenture.
Section 10. Operating System.
Issuance Requests may be defivered by a Designated Representative through either
the Dealer's or the Issuing and Paying Agent's commerciad paper electronic instmction
and reporting communication service (each a "System", and collectively the "Systems").
Electroruc instmctions must be transmitted in accordance with the procedures
fumished by the either the Dealer or the Issuing and Pajnng Agent, as appficable, to the

 83158

ij

[i

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

City in connection with the Systems. These transnussions shaU be the equivalent to
the giving of a written Issuance Request to the Issuing and Paying Agent, ff either
System is inoperable at any time, a Designated Representative may deUver written,
telephone or facsimUe instmctions to the Issuing and Paying Agent, which instmctions
shaU be verified in accordance with any security procedures agreed upon by the
parties.
Section 11. Representati'ons.
(a) The City represents to the Issuing and Paying Agent that this Agreement, the
Commercial Paper Notes and the Bank Notes have been duly authorized, amd that this
Agreement, when executed, and the Commercial Paper Notes and the Bank Notes,
when issued in accordance with the Issuance Requests and the Commerciad Paper
Indenture, wiU be vafid and binding obfigations of the City, enforceable in accordance
with their respective terms, subject to bankmptcy, insolvency, moratorium and other
simUar laws affecting creditors* rights generaUy and to equitable principles when
equitable remedies are sought.

i

(b) The City represents to the Issuing and Paying Agent that each Commercial Paper
Note and each Baink Note issued under this Agreement wiU be exempt from registration
under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
Each Issuance Request to issue Commerdad Paper Notes under this Agreement and
the Commerdal Paper Indenture shaU be deemed a representation by the City as ofthe
date thereof that such issuance conforms in all respects to the requirements of the
Commercial Paper Indenture and this Agreement, and that the representations herein
are tme and correct as ff made on and as of such date.
Section 12. Additional Information.
Upon the reasonable request of the City, the Tmstee or the Bank, as appficable, given
at any time and from time to time, the Issuing and Paying Agent agrees promptly to
provide the City, the Tmstee or the Bank, as appficable, with information with respect
to the Commerdal Paper Note(s), including, without limitation, the Bank Notes, issued
and paid hereunder. Such request shaU be in written form and shaU include the
prindpal amount, date of issue, maturity date, interest rate and aunount of interest, as
appficable, of each Commerdal Paper Note which has been issued or paid by the
Issuing and Paying Agent, and for which the request is being mace.
Section 13.

Compensation.

The City agrees to pay compensation for the Issuing and Paying Agent's services
pursuant to this Agreement in accordance with the Issuing and Paying Agent's fee

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS O F C O M M I T T E E S

83159

schedule, as amended from time to time, and to reimburse the Issuing and Paying
Agent for such disbursements (including the reasonable fees and expenses of counsel).
The City shafi ailso reimburse the Issuing and Pajdng Agent for any fees and charges
imposed by the Note Depository w i t h respect to Commercial Paper Notes issued i n
book-entry form.

Section 14. Liabifity.
The City agrees that the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU not be fiable for any losses,
damages, UabiUties or costs suffered or incurred by the City or the Issuing and Paying
Agent as a result of (a) the Issuing and Paying Agent's having d u l y executed Issuance
Requests i n good faith i n accordance therewith and w i t h the Commercial Paper
Indenture and this Agreement, except to the extent, ff any, t h a t such execution
constitutes negfigence by the Issuing and Paying Agent; (b) the Issuing and Paying
Agent's improperly executing or failing to execute any Issuance Requests because of
any material error contained i n information provided by the City to the Issuing and
Paying Agent for the purpose of preparing such Issuance Request, faUure of
communications media or any other circumstances beyond the Issuing a n d Paying
Agent's control; (c) the actions or inactions of D.T.C. or any broker, dealer, consignee
or agent not selected by the Issuing and Pa5ang Agent; or (d) any other acts or
omissions o f t h e Issuing and Paying Agent (or of any of its agents, directors, officers,
employees or correspondents) relating to this Agreement or the transactions or
activities contemplated hereby, except to the extent, ff any, that such other acts or
omissions constitute negUgence or wiUfijl misconduct by the Issuing and Paying Agent.
This section shaU survive any termination of this Agreement, the issuance and payment
of any Note(s) and the resignation or removal of the Issuing and Pajdng Agent.

Section 15. Indemnity.
The City agrees to indemnify and hold the Issuing and Paying Agent, its employees
and any of its officers and agents harmless from and agaiinst, and the Issuing and
Pa5Ting Agent shaU not be fiable for, any and aU losses, fiabUities (including fiabUities
for penalties), actions, suits, judgments, demands, damages, costs and expenses of any
nature (including, without limitation, attorneys' fees and expenses) airising out of or
resulting from the exercise of its rights and/or the performance of its duties (or those
of its agents and employees) hereunder; provided, however, that the City shaU not be
liable to indemnify or pay the Issuing and Paying Agent or any of its officers or
employees with respect to any loss, fiabUity, action, suit, judgment, demand, damage,
cost or expense that results from or is attributable to the Issuing and Paying Agent's
negligence or wilfful misconduct or that of its officers or employees. The foregoing
indenmity includes, but is not limited to, amy action taiken or omitted to be taken by the
Issuing and Paying Agent or any of its officers or employees u p o n written, telecopy,
telephonic or other electronicaUy transmitted Instmctions (authorized herein) received
by the Issuing and Paying Agent from, or befievcd by it i n good faith to have been given

 83160

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

by, an Authorized City Representative or Designated Representative. The provisions
of this section shall survive (i) the Issuing and Paying Agent's resignation or removal
hereunder, and (u) the termination of this Agreement.
Section 16. Termination.
Subject to the terms of the Commercial Paper Indenture, either the Issuing and
Paying Agent or the City may terminate this Agreement at amy time, upon not less than
sixty (60) days prior written notice in the case of the Issuing and Paying Agent, and
upon written notice in the case of the City, to the other and to the Tmstee and the
Bank. No such termination shaU affect the rights aind obfigations of the City and the
Issuing and Paying Agent which have accmed under this Agreement prior to
termination. No termination can occur prior to (1) a substitute Issuing and Paying
Agent being appointed by the City and assuming its duties under the Commerdal Paper
Indenture, and (2) the Letter of Credit being transferred to the substitute Issuing and
Paying Agent, ff no substitute Issuing and Paying Agent has been appointed at the end
ofthe sixty (60) day period, then the Issuing and Paying Agent may petition a court of
competent jurisdiction to make such appointment.
Section 17. Addresses.
Issuamce Requests hereunder shall be (a) maUed, (b) telephoned, (c) transmitted by
facsimUe device, and/or (d) transmitted electronicaUy to the Issuing amd Paying Agent
at the address, telephone number and/or facsimUe number specffied below, and shaU
be deemed deUvered upon receipt by the Issuing and Paying Agent at the address,
telephone number and/or facsimUe number specified below.
AU notices, requests, demands, including any No Issuance Notices amd other
communications hereunder (excluding Issuamce Requests) shadl be in writing and shaU
be deemed to have been duly given (a) upon defivery by hand (against receipt), (b) by
facsimUe, or (c) three (3) days after such notice, request, demand or other
communication is defivered to a United States Post Office certffied maU (agaunst receipt)
or byregularmaU (upon receipt) to the pairty and at the address set forth below or at
such other address as a party may designate by written notice:
City of Chicago
33 North LaSaUe Street. 6*^ Floor
Chicago, niinois 60602
Attention: Chief Financial Officer

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83161

(b) ff To The Issuing
and Paying Agent:

(c) ffTo The Bank:

to the address set forth in the
Reimbursement Agreement

Section 18. MisceUaneous.
(a) Governing Law. This Agreement shaU be governed and interpreted in accordance
with the laws of the State of Illinois.
(b) Assignment, Modffication And Amendment; Issuing And Paving Agent's
Successor In Interest. This Agreement may not be assigned by either the City or the
Issuing and Paying Agent, and may not be modffied, aunended or supplemented except
by awriting or writings duly executed by the duly authorized representatives ofthe City
aind the Issuing and Paying Agent. Anything i n this Agreement to the contrary
notwithstanding, any corporation or nationad banking association into which the
Issuing and Paying Agent may be merged or converted, or with which it may be
consofidated, or any corporation or nationad banking association resulting from any
merger, consoUdation or conversion to which the Issuing amd Pa3ring Agent shaU be a
party, or any corporation or national banking assodation succeeding to the corporate
tmst business of the Issuing and Paying Agent, shadl be the successor of the Issuing
and Paying Agent ff such successor corporation or national bamking association is
otherwise efi^ble under Section 7.03 ofthe Commercial Paper Indenture, without the
execution or filing of any document or the undertaking of any further act on the part
of the Issuing and Paying Agent or such successor corporation or nationad banking
association.
(c) Complete Agreement. This Agreement contains the entire understanding and
agreement between the parties with respect to the subject matter hereof, and aU prior
agreements, understandings, representations, statements, promises, inducements,
negotiations and undertakings between the parties with respect to said subject matter
are superseded hereby. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions hereof
and the Commerdal Paper Indenture, the provisions of the Commerciad Paper
Indenture shaU govern.

 83162

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(d) Singular Plurad And Gender References. With respect to adl references of the
Commercial Paper Indenture shaiU govern herein to nouns, insofar as the context
requires, the singular form shaU be deemed to include the plurad, the plural form shaU
be deemed to include the singular, and the neuter, masculine and feminine genders
shaU be deemed to refer to all such genders. The words "hereof", "herein", "hereby" and
"hereunder" and words of similar import, refer to this Agreement as a whole.
(e) Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in counterparts, each of which
shaU be an original, and adl of which shadl constitute but one and the same instmment.
(f) Section Headings. Section headings in this Agreement are for convenience of
reference only, shaU not constitute part of this Agreement and shaU not be used to
constme the meaning or intent of the provisions hereof.
(g) Waiver Of Set-Off, Offset Lien Or Counterclaims. The Issuing and Paying
Agent hereby waives to the fuUest extent possible under appficable law any and aU
rights of set-off, offset, Uen or counterclaim it may have with respect to any amounts
held by it in the Bank Payment Account, the Bank Note Account and the Commercial
Paper Debt Service Account by reason of amy claum it may have agaunst the City, the
Tmstee, the Bank or any other person.
(h) Benefit Of Agreement. This Agreement is solely for the benefit of the parties
hereto amd the owners of the Commercial Paper Notes amd the Bank Notes, and no
other person shaU acquire or have any right under or by virtue hereof
In Witness Whereof, The parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly executed
and defivered by their respective officers thereunto duly authorized as of the date first
above written.
City of Chicago
By:
Chief Finandal Officer
[Seal]

 REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

5/1/2002

83163

Attest:

City Clerk

as Issuing and Pajring Agent
By:
Its:
[(Sub)Exhibits "A" and "B" referred to in this Issuing
and Paying Agent Agreement unavaUable
at time of printing.]
[(Sub)Exhibit "C" referred to in this Issuing
and Paying Agent Agreement constitutes
Appendix "A" to the Commercial Paper
Deader Agreement and is printed
on pages 83150 through 83151
of this JoumaZ.]

(Sub)Exhibit "D" referred to in this Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement reads as
foUows:

(Sub)Exhibit "D".
(To Issuing And Paying Agent Agreement)
Issuance Rerjuest
(2002 Program).
The undersigned, a Designated Representative ofthe City of Chicago (the "City") does
hereby request
, as Issuing and Paying Agent (the

 I
Ii

i
I

83164

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Issuing and Paying Agent") under the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement, dated as
of
1, 2002 (the "Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement"), between the
City and the Issuing amd Paying Agent, to issue Commercial Paper Notes as foUows:
1-

Date of Issuance;

2.

Prindpal Amount:
A.

B.

3.

Series A fTax Exempt)
Refunding Notes, 2002 Program Series A

$

New Money Notes. 2002 Program Series A

$

Series B (Taxable)
Refunding Notes, 2002 Program Series B

$_

New Money Notes, 2002 Program Series B

$_

Total Prindpal Amount and Purchase Price
for Notes

$_

*Terms of Series A Notes (Tax Exempt):
Maturity Date

Principal Amount

Interest Rate

Interest Amount

To be completed by 11:30 A.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) on ttie Date of Issuance specified in Paragraph 1.

 REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

5/1/2002

4.

83165

*Terms of Series B Notes (Taxable):
Maturity Date

Principal Amount

Interest Rate

Interest Amount

Pursuant to Section 2.06(b) of that certain Tmst Indenture, dated as of
1, 2002 (the "Indenture"), by and between the City and
as tmstee, relating to Commercial Paper Notes, 2002
Program, the undersigned hereby certifies as follows:
(i)

a Letter of Credit with respect to the Series
amd effect;

(ii)

after the issuance of Commerdad Paper Notes as requested hereby amd
the appfication of proceeds thereof, the aggregate principal aunount of
Commercial Paper Notes Outstanding wiU not exceed the amount
currentiy authorized to be Outstanding under the Indenture as
provided in Section 2.0 1(b) thereof;

(ui)

the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes, Series A requested hereby,
if refunding notes issued under the 2002 Prograim, wiU be appfied to
pay $
of Commercial Paper Notes, Series A maturing
on the date hereof and wUI not be used to pay any Commerciad Paper
Notes, Series B;

Notes is i n fuU force

To be completed by 11:30 A.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) on the Date of Issuance specified Ln Peo-agraph 1.

 i
JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

83166

5/1/2002

I
(iv)

the issuamce of Commercial Paper Notes, Series B requested hereby,
ff refunding notes issued under the 2002 Program, wUl be appfied to
pay $
of Commercial Paper Notes, Series B maturing
on the date hereof and wiU not be used to pay any Commercial Paper
Notes, Series A;

(v)

the aggregate prindpal amount of Commercial Paper Notes described
in this Issuance Request (together with the interest thereon), plus the
aggregate principal amount of aU Commercial Paper Notes currently
outstanding (together with the interest thereon), less the aggregate
principal amount of any of the currently Outstanding Commercial
Paper Notes to be retired concurrentiy with the issuance of the
Commercial Paper Notes described in this Issuance Request (including
interest thereon), does not exceed the amount avaUable to be drawn
under the Letter of Credit securing such Commercial Paper Notes;

(vi)

unless interest on the Commerdal Paper Notes to be issued is taxable,
to the City's knowledge there has been no change in the facts,
estimates, drcumstances and representations of the City set forth or
made (as the case may be) i n each Tax Certificate applicable to the
Commercial Paper Notes being issued amd to the extent that Note
Proceeds are being deposited to the Proceeds Fund or are being used
during the eighteen (18) month period described in the Tax Certificate
to reimburse interest on Commerciad Paper Notes then maturing, a
certfficate regarding the use of such proceeds, as required by the Tax
Certificate, is attached hereto as Attachment A;

(vii)

the term to maturity of the Commercial Paper Notes to be defivered
does not exceed two hundred seventy (270) days, and the maturity
dates of such Commercial Paper Notes set forth herein do not extend
beyond the Termination Date of the Letter of Credit securing such
Commerdal Paper Notes;

(viu)

the City has not been notffied by Bond Counsel that its opinion with
respect to the vafidity of the Commercial Paper Notes and, unless
interest on the Commerdal Paper Notes is to be taixable, the tax
treatment ofthe interest thereon has been revised or withdrawn or, ff
any such revision or withdrawal has occurred, the revised opinion or
substitute opinion has not been revised or withdrawn;

 I •

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

5/1/2002

(ix)

(X)

83167

to the actual knowledge of the City, no Event of Default has occurred
and is now continuing;
of Note Proceeds shaU be deposited into the
$_
appropriate subaccount of the Bank Payment Account;
of Note Proceeds shadl be deposited into the
$_
appropriate account of the Proceeds Fund; and
$
of funds shaU be deposited by the City into the
appropriate subaccount of the Bank Pajrment Account to reimburse
interest currentiy payable on maturing Commercial Paper Notes; and

(xi)

aU of the conditions precedent to the issuance of Commercial Paper
Notes set forth in Section 2.06 ofthe Indenture have been satisfied.

AU capitalized terms used but not defined herein shaU have the meanings ascribed
thereto in the Indenture.
Date:

City of Chicago

Request Number:

By.
Designated Representative

[Attachment "A" referred to in this Issuance
Request unavaUable at time of printing.)

 The following is said ordinance as passed;
WHEREAS, the City of Chicago (the 'CHy") is a body politic and corporate under the laws
of Ihe Slate of Illinois and a home rule unit under Artide Vll of the Illinois Constitulidn of 1970'.:
and .
'
.

. WHEREAS, the Cily has heretofore authorized the issuance of its general obligation
- bonds and notes and has established a comme'rdal paper program autlibr^g the Issuance of
its general obligation commercial paper from time to time; and
WHEREAS, the City's general obligation bonds and notes currently outstanding and its
general obligation commerciat paper curreiilly or. hereafter outstanding frorh lime to time- (collectively, the 'Outstanding Indebtedness^ mature and are subject lo optional and mandatory
redemption as provided in the . respective proceedings authorizing the Outstanding
IndelJtedness; and'

WhBiEAS, the City has heretofore entered into agreements of the type described in
Section 14 hereof which are in existence as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance (the
'Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements'): and
WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of the inhabitants of the City and necessary for the
welfare of the government and affeirs of Ihe City to authorize (i) refunding all or a portion of the •.
Outstanding Indebtedness and (ii)terminating, amending or otherwise modifying all or anyportion of the Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements and paying any settlement,
breakage or tenninatron amounts that may be due and owing in connection therewith, in order to.
achieve, debt service savings for the City, restructure debt, service of the Outstanding
Indebtedness or reduce, limit or manage the City's exposure to inlerest rate risk (coltectiveiy,
Ihe'Refunding PuiposesT); and

• WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of the inhabitants of tfie City and neoesiaiy for the
welfare of the government and affairs of the City tofinance(i) publicright-^rf-wayinfrastfudure
improvements in City neighbortxxxls, Induding street and alley construdion and improvements,
lighting improvements, sidewalk improvements and replacement, and curti and gutter repairs '
^nd replaoement; (y) infrastructure Improvemerits to enhance the development of economic
acthnty,. induding • industrial street construction and Improvemenls, streetscaping, -medfanlandscaping. demoCtion of hazardous, vacant or dilapkJated buildings that pose a threat to
public safety and welfare, shorelirie reconstruction, riverbank stabilization, residential and
commercial infrastructure redevelopment arxl railroad viaduct dearance improvemenls;
(iii) transportation Improvements (to City property andfedHiesarid to orocertv and fadlities

 21708

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

located within the City limits wtiich are owned by other governmental entities), including street
resurfacing, bridge and freigtit tunnel rehabilitation, traffic signal modemizalipn,' new traffic
signal installation, intersection safely improvemenls and transit facility improvemenls; (iv) grants
or loans to assist not-for-profit organizations or educational or cultural institutions, or to assist
other munidpal corporations, units of local government, sdiool districts, the State of lUinois or
the United States of America; (v) cash flow needs of the City; (vi) the acquisition of personal
property, including, but not limited lo. computer hardware and software, vehicles or other capital
items useful or necessary for City purposes; (vii) the duly authorized acquisition of improved and
unimproved real property within the City for municipal, industrial, commercial or residential
purposes, or any combination Ihereof, and the improvement,, demolition and/or remediation of
any such property; (viii) construding, equipping, altering and repairing various mur^idpal
facilities including fire stations, police stations, libraries, senior and tiealth centers and other
municipal facilities; (ix) the enhancement of economic development within the Cily by making
direct grants or loans to, or deposits to funds or accounts to' secure the obligations of,
not-for-profit or for-profit organizations doing business or seeking to do business in the City;
(x)the funding of (A) judgments entered against ttie City. (B) certain settlements or other
payments required to be made by the City as a condition to the resolution of litigation or
threatened litigation or arbitration and (C) such escrow accounts or oilier reserves as shall be
deemed necessary for any of said purposes: (xi) the payment of certain contributions (the
"Pension Contributions') lo the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund, the Firemen's Annuity
and Benefit Fund, the Municipal Employees'. Officers' and Officials' Annuity and Benefit Fund
and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund (collectively, the
"Pension Funds'); (xii) the provision of facilities, services and equipment to protect and enhance
public safely, including,, but not limited to, increased costs for police and fire protedion services,
emergency medical .services, staffing at the City's emergency call center and other City
facilities, and enhanced security measures at.airports and other major City facilities; and (xiii)
acquiring motor vehicles for a term of years or lease period (the purposes described in clauses
(i) through (xiii) above being referred to herein asthe 'Project"); and
WHEREAS, the cost of the Refunding Purposes and the Project is estimated to be nol
less than $900,000,000 and the City expects lo pay a portion of such costs by t>orrowing money
and issuing its general obligation bonds in one or more series and at one or more times in Ihe
aggregate principal amount of not to exceed $900,000,000 (plus the amount of any original
issue discount as herein provided); and
^
WHEREAS, the City has detennined that it is advisable and necessary lo authorize the
bonowing of the sum necessary al this time for any or all of the purposes of (i) paying costs of
the Refunding Purposes, (ii) paying costs of the Project, Including capitalizing or funding such
interest on the bonds herein authorized for said purpose as rnay be necessary, (iii) capitalizing
or funding interest on Outstanding Indebtedness and (iv) paying the expenses of issuing the
bonds herein authorized for the purposes described herein, and in evidence thereof to authorize
the issuance of its General Obligation Bonds (the 'Bonds'), in one or more series and at one or

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21709

more times as herein provided, such borrowing being for a proper public purpose and in the
public interest, and the City, by virtue of its constitutional home rule powers and all laws
applicable thereto, has the power to issue such Bonds; and
WHEREAS, the Bonds may include one or more series of bonds ihe interest on which is,
ais designated by series, either includible or excludable from gross income for federal income
tax purposes under Sedion 103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. as amended (the
"Code"); and
WHEREAS, the City-has authorized the issuance of certain bonds, notes and commercial
paper of the City secured by and payable, from a specified revenue source, iricluding. without
limitation, airport revenues, sales tax revenues, motor fuel tax revenues, water system revenues
and sewer system revenues (such bonds and notes being hereinafter referred to as .'Revenue
Bonds and Notes" and such commercial paper being hereinafter~referred lo as 'Revenue
Cdmrnercial Paper^; and
WHEREAS, .the .City has determined that it is necessary to provide for various
restruduririg-amendments (i) to the-Outstanding Indebtedness, (ii) to the Revenue Bonds and
Notes currentiy oulsta'nding arid the Revenue Commerdal Paper currently or hereafter
outstanding from time to time (collectively, the'Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness") and (iii) to
the extent issued and outstanding from lime lo time in the future, the Bonds; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined lhat it is necessary to amend certain sections of the
ordinance adopted by the Cily Council of the Cily of Chicago on May 1. 2002. (the "2002
Ordinance"), which authorized the issuance of Coifnmercial Paper Notes Series A and Series B
in an amount not to exceed $200.000;000^and pursuant lb which the City proposed-to establish
a commerdal. paper program, an auction rate securities program, a variable rate securities
program and a line of credit program (colledively. the "Borrowing Plan"); and
WHEREAS; the Borrowing Plan authorizes the issuance of one or more series of
Authorized Debt (as defined in the 2002 Ordinance) for (i)the payment, or reimbursement of the
Cily for the.payment, of Ihe cost of all or any portion of any capital project approved by City
Council, (ii) cash flow needs of the City, (iii) the deposit of monies into funds and accounts as
are provided for in any indenture entered into under ttie Borrowing Plan, and (iv) the payment of
costs of issuance incurred iri connection wilh each series of Authorized Debt; and
WHEREAS, the City desires to amend the 2002 Ordinance iri order to, among other
things, (i) increase the maximum aggregate principal amount of Aulhorized Debt to be
outstanding under the 2002 Ordinance from $200,000,000 to $500,000,000 and (ii) further
delegate authority and establish the borrowing parameters for the line of credit program; now.
therefore,
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHICAGO:

Section 1. The City Coundl of the City (ttie 'City Council'), after a public meeting
heretofore tield on this Ordinance by the Committee on Finance of the City Council, pursuant to

 21710

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

proper notice and in accordance with the findings and recommendations of such Committee,
hereby finds that all of the recitals contained in the preambles lo this Ordinance are full, true and .
corred and does incorporate them into this Ordinance by this relerence.
Section 2. There shall be borrowed on the credit of and for and on behalf of the City in
one or more series and at one br more limes the sum of not lo exceed $900,000,000 plus an
amount equal to the amount of any net original issue discount used in the mariteting of the
Bonds (nol to exceed 10 percent of the principal amount of each series thereoO for the
purposes aforesaid; and the- Bonds stiall be issued from time to time in said aggregate principal
amount, or such lesser amount, as may be determined by the City's Chief Rnancial Officer or
the City Comptroller (each such officer being hereinafter refened to as an 'Authorized Officer^.
. All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds payable in one payment on a
fixed date {'Capital AppreciatioQ Bonds"). Each series of Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be
dated the dale of issuance thereof and shall al^d bear the date of authentication, shall be in fully
registered form, shall be numbered, as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar (as
hereinafter defined), and shall' t>e° in' denominations equal to the original prindpal amounts ol
such Capital Appreciation Bonds or any integral multiple thereof, each such original principal
amount representing Compound Accreted Value (as hereinafter defined) at maturity (the
'Maturity Amount') of such minimum amounts and integral multiples Ihereof as shalj be agreed
upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Capital Appreciation- Bonds (but no
single Bond shall represent Compound Accreted Value maturing on more than one date). As
used herein, the "Compound Accreted Value" of a Capital Appreciatkin Bond on any dale of
determination shall be an amount equal lo the original principal amount (or integral multiple
thereof) plus an investment return accrued to the dale of such detenninalion al a seriiiannual
compoundirig rate which is necessary to produce the yield to maturity bome by such Capital
Appreciation Bond (Uie T/e/d to Ma/uriJy').
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at fixed rates
and paying interest, semiannually as "described below (the "Current Interest Bonds'). Each
series of Current Interest Bonds shall be dated such date as shall be agreed upon by an
Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Current Interest Bonds, shall be in fully registered
form, shall be in such minimum denominations and integral multiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an Authorised Officer and the purchasers of such Current Interest Bonds (but no single
Current interest Bond shall represent installments of principal maturing ori more than one date),
and shall be numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar.
The Bonds may be initially issiied as Capital Appreciation Bonds containing provisions
for the conversion of the Compound Accreted Value of such Bonds into Current Interest Bonds
(the 'Convertible Bonds') at such time following the initial issuance as shall be approved by an
Authorized Officer. .While in the form of Capital Appreciation Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shall be subjert to all of the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance relating to Capital
Appredalion Bonds, and while in the form of Current Interest Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
stiall be subject to all of the provisions and limitations of Itiis Ordinance relating to Current
Interest Ponds. In particular, when Convertible Bonds are in the fonm of Capital Appreciation
Bonds prior to their conversion lo Current Interest Bonds, the ti^ansfer, exchange and

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21711

replacement provisions of this Ordinance with resped lo Capital Appreciation Bonds shall apply
to such Convertible Bonds; provided tiiat the Convertible Bonds delivered in the form of Capital
Appreciation Bonds in connection with any such transfer, exchange or replacement shall have
identical provisions for conversion to Cunenl Interest Bonds as set forth in the Convertible
Bonds being ti-ansferred, exchanged or replaced. In conneclion vyith the issuance and sale of
any Convertible Bonds, the terms and provisions relating lo the conversion ot the Compound
Accreted Value'of such Convertible Bonds into Current Interest Bonds shall be as approved by
an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Convertible Bonds. Notwithstanding any other
provision hereof, any series of Bonds may be issued as Capital Appreciation Bonds. Current
Interest Bonds. Convertible Bonds or any combination thereof.
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at variable rales
established by reference to such indices or othenwise and adjustable and payable from time to
time as shall be determined by an Abthorized Officer and as agreed upon by an Authorized
Officer and the purchaser of the Borids (the 'Variable Rate Bonds"). Each series of Variable
Rate Bonds shall be dated such date as shall be agreed upon by an Authorized Officer arid the
purchasers of such Bonds, shall be'in fully registered form, shall be in sijch denominations as
shall be agreed upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of the Bonds (but no single
Bond shall represent installments of prindpal maturing on more than one date), and shall be
numbered as detenniried by the applicable Bond Registrar. Each series of Variable Rate Bonds
may be issued pursuant lo. and have such terms and provisions as are set forth in. a trust
indenture between the City and a bank or trust company selected by an Authorized Officer. The
Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby aulhorized to enter into one or more such trusl
indentures on behalf of ttie Cit/. Each such trust indenture shall be in substantially the form of
trust indentures previously entered into by the City in • cormedion with tbe sale bf general
obligalion bonds or-notes bearing interest at variablis rates. but with such revisions in text asthe
Mayor or the Aulhorized Officer executing- the same shall determine are necessary or desirable,
including such revisions as shall be necessary lo incorporate provisions relating to.the manner
of establishing the interest rate and the payment of interest from lime to lime on the Variable
Rate Bonds, .the execution thereof, and any- amendment thereto, by the Mayor or such
Authorized Officer to evidence the City Council's approval of all such revisions.
All or any portion of the Bonds niay be issued and sold from time to time on a retail basis
to individual investors (the 'Retail Bonds') or as a dired purchase to holders (the "Direct
Purchase Bonds"). The Retail Bonds and the Direct Purchase Bonds shall be sold as provided
in Sedion 12 hereof
The principal ofthe Bonds of each series shall become due and payable on or before
the eariier of (i) January 1, 2054. or (ii) 40 years after the date of issuance thereof. Each series
of Current Interest Bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates and each series of Capital
Appredalion Bonds shall have Yields to Maturity not to exceed 15 percent per annum. Each
series of Variable Rale Bonds shall bear interest from lime to time at such rales determined by
such remarketing or other indexing agent as shall be seleded by an Aulhorized Officer for that
purpose or as provided in the related trust indenture referred to above not to exceed 15 percent
per annum. Any portion of ttie Bonds may be issued as bonds the interest on which is not

 21712

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes if
determined by an Authorized Officer to be benefidal to the Cily.
Each Capital Appreciation Bond shall accrue interest from its date at the rate per annum
compounded semiannually on each January 1 and July 1. commencing on such January 1 or
July 1 as determined by ah Aulhorized Officer at the time of sale of such Capital Appreciation
Bonds, which will produce the Yield to Maturity identified therein until the maturity date thereof
Interest on the Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be payable only at the respective maturity dates
thereof.
Each Current Interest-Bond shall bear interest from the later of its date or the most
recent interest payment dale to which interest has been paid or duly provided for. until the
prindpal amount of such Bond is paid, such interest (computed upon the basis of a 360-day
period of twelve 30-day months) being payable on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
commendng on such-January 1 or July 1 as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the
lime of the sale, of each series of Current Interest Bonds. Interest on each Current Interest
Bond shall be paid' to the person in whose-ndme such Bond is registered at the close of
business on the 15th day of the month next preceding the interest payment date, by' check or
draft of the applicable Bond Registrar, or. at the option of any registered owner of $1,000,000 or
more in aggregate principal amount of Current Interest Bonds of a series, by wire transfer of
Immediately available funds'to such bank in the continental United Slates of America as the
registered owner of such Bonds shall request in writing to the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each series of Variable Rate Bonds shall bear Interest (computed from time to time atsuch rates and on such basis as shall be determined by an. Authorized Officer or at the time of
sale of such series of Variable Rate Bonds) payable on such dates as shall be determined by an
Authorized Officer at the time of 'sale of such Variable Rale Bonds. Ariy Variable Rale Borids
may be made subject to optional or mandatory tender for purchase by the owners Ihereof al
such times and at such prices (not to exceed 105 percent of the principal amount thereof) a s .
stiall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds. In
connedion with the remarketing of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series so tendered for
purchase under the terms and conditions so specified by an Aulhorized Officer, Uie Mayor and
each Authorized Officer, are hereby authorized to execute on behalf of the City a remarketing
agreement, and any ameridme'rit thereto, with respect to such series of Variable Rate Bonds in
substantially the form previously used for variable rate finahdngs of the City with appropriate
revisions to refled'the terms and provisions of such Bonds sold as Variable Rale Bonds and
such other revisions in text as an Authorized Officer shall determine are necessary or desirable
in Connection with ttie sale of such Bonds as Variable Rate Bonds. The annual fee paid to any
remarketing agent serving in such capacity pursuant lo any such remarketing agreement with
resped to a series of Variable Rate Bonds shall not exceed one-quarter of one percent (0.25%)
of the average principal amount of such Variable Rale Bonds of such series outstanding during
such annual period.
The Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appreciation Bonds, the principal of the
Current Interest Bonds and the Variable Rate Bonds and any redemption premium shall t>e

 3/14/2012

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

21713

payable in lawful money of the United States of America upon presentation and surrender
thereof at the designated corporate tmst office of the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each of the Bonds shall be designated "General Obligation Bonds. Series
" with
such additions, modifications or revisions as shall be determined lo be necessary by an
Authorized Officer at the time of the sale of such Bonds lo reflect the calendar year of issuance
of the Bonds, the order'of sale of the Bonds, the specific series of the Bonds, whether the
Bonds are being issued on a taxable basis, whether the Bonds are Capital Appreciation Bonds.
Current Interest Bonds. Convertible Bonds. Variable Rate Bonds. Retail Bonds or Direct
Purchase Bonds, whether the Bdnds are being issued and sold for the purpose of paying costs
of the Refunding Purposes, paying costs of the Projed or a combination Ihereof and any other
authorized features of the Bonds determined- by an Authorized Officer as desirable to be
reflected in the titie of Ihe Bonds being issued and sold.
The seal of the Cily or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed lo or printed on each of the
Bonds, and the Bonds shall be executed by the manual or facsimile signature, of the. Mayor arid
attested'by th6 manual or facsimile sigriature of the City CI6rk. arid'iri case any officer whose
signature shall, appear on any Bond shall cease to be such bfficer t>efore the delivery of such
Bond, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and suffident for all proposes, the same as-if
such officer had remained in office until delivery. As used in. this Ordiriance-. 'Cify Clerk" shall
mean the duly qualified and acting City Clerk of the City or any Deputy Cily Clerk or other
person lhat may lawfully lake a specific actnn or pertorm a specific duty prescribed for the Cily
Clerk pursuant to this'Ordinance.
•!''
. All Bonds shall have thereon a certificate of authentication substantially in the form
hfereinafter set forth duly executed by the applicable Bond Registrar as authenticating agent of
the City and showing the dale of authenti'cation. No Bond shall be valid or obligatory for any
purpose or be entitied to any security or benefit under this'Ordinance unless and until such
certificate of authenticatidn shall'have been duly executed bythe applicable Bond Registrar by
mariual signa'tijre, and such certificate of authentication upon any such Bond'shall be conclusive
evidence that such Bond has been autheriticated and delivered under this Ordinance. The.
certificate of authentication on any Bond shall be deemed to hiave been executed by the
applicable Bond Registrar if signed by an authorized officer of such Bond Registrar, but it shall
not be necessary Uiat the same officer sign the certificate of authentication on all of the Bonds
issued hereunder.
Section 3. ' (a) Reg/sfradori and Transfer. The City shall cause books (the 'Bond
Register^ for the registration and for the transfer of each series of Bonds as provided in this
Ordinance to be kept at the designated corporate trust office of a bank or trust company
designated by ah Authorized Officer (the 'Bond Registrar^, as the regisli-ar for the City in
connedion vi/ith such Series of Bonds. The City is authorized to prepare riiultiple Bond blanks
executed by the City for use in the transfer and exchange of Bonds.
Upon surrender for transfer of any Bond at the designated corporate taisi office of the
applicable Bond Registrar, duly endorsed by. or accompanied by a written instrument or
instruments of b^ansfer iri forni satisfactory to such Bond Registrar and duly executed by the

 21714

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

registered owner or its attorney duly aulhorized in writing, the Cily shall execute and such Bond
f^egistra'r shall authenticate, dale and deliver in the name of the transferee or transferees (a) in
the case of any Capital Appreciation Bond, a new fully registered Capital Appreciation Bond or
Bonds of the same series, maturity and yield lo maturity of authorized denominations, for a like
aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same series,
maturity and yield to maturity of other authorized denominations, or (b) in the. case of any-other
Bonds, one or more fully registered Bonds of the same series, type (Current lt)lerest Bonds or
Variable Rale Bonds), interest rate (or in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of interest
rate determination) and maturity of authorized denominations, for a like principal amount. Any
Capital Appredalion B.ond or Bonds may be exchanged at said office of the applicable Bond
Registrar for a like aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of
the same series, maturity and yield to maturity of other authorized denominations. Any other
Bond or Bonds may be exchanged' at said office of the applicable Bond Registrar for a like
aggregate principal amount of Bonds of tiie same series, type, interest rate and riialurity of other
authorized denominations. The execution by the City of any fully registered Borid shall
constitute full and due authorization of such Bond, and the applicable' Bond Registrar shall
thereby be autiiori2;ed to authenticate, date and deliver such Bond; provided that (a)-the
aggregate original principal amount of outstanding Capital Appreciation Bonds'of each series,
maturity and yield lo maturity authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall not exceed
Ihe autiiorized aggregate original principal amount of Capital-Appredalion Bonds of such series
and maturity less previous retirements and (b) the principal amount of Current Interest-Bonds or
Variable Fiate Bonds of each series, maturity and interest rate (or interest rate determination
method) authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall not exceed Ihe authorized
prindpal amoijnt of Current Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds for such series, maturity and
interest rate (or interest riate determination method) less previous retirements.
The applicable Bond Registrar shall not be required' to transfer or exchange (a) any
Bond after notice calling such Bond, for redemption has been mailed, or (b) any Bond during a
period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of such Bond; provided,
however, tiiat provisions relating to the transfer or exchange of Variable Rate Bonds of a series
shall be as determined by an Aulhorized Officer at the time of the sale thereof dnd may t>e set
forth in the trust indenture securing such series of Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in
Section 2 hereof
The person in whose name any Bond shall be registered shall be deemed and regarded
as the absolute owner thereof for all purposes, and payment of the Compound Accreted Value
of. principal of. redemption premium, if any. or interest on any Bond, as appropriate, shall be
made only to or upon the order of the registered owner thereof or its legal representative. All
such payments shall be valid and effectual to satisfy and discharge ihe liability upon such Bond
to the extent of the sum or sums so paid.
f
hJo service charge shall tie made for any transfer or exchange of Bonds, but the City or
the applicable Bond Registrar may require payment of a sum sufficieni to cover any tax or other
governmental charge that may be imposed in connection with any transfer or exchange of
Bonds, except that no such payment may be i-equired in the case of the issuance of a Bond or
Bonds for the unredeemed portion of a Bond surrendered for redemption.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21715

(b) Book-Entry Only System. If so determined and directed by ah Authorized Officer in
connection wilh the sale of any of the Bonds, such Bonds may'be issued in book-entry only
form. In connection with the issuance of Bonds in book-entry only form, an Authorized Officer is
authorized to execute and deliver to .the book-entry depository selected by such Aulhorized
Officer such depository's standard form of representation letter. If any of the Bonds are
registered in the name of a securities depository wrfiich uses a book-entry system, the standing
of the beneficial owner to enforce any of the covenants herein may be established through the
books and records of such securities depository or a participant therisin.
(c) Bonds Losf, Destroyed, etc. If any Bond, whether in temporary or definitive form, is
lost (whether by reason of theft or otherwise), destroyed (whether by mutilation, damage, in
whole or in part, or othenvise) or improperly cancelled, the applicable Bond Registrar may
authenticate a new Bond of like series, date, maturity dale, interest rate (or. in° the case of
CapKal Appreciation Bonds, yield lo maturity, and in the case of-Variable Rate Bonds, method of
interest rale determination), denomination and original prindpal amount (in the case of Capital
Appreciation Bonds) or principal amount (in the case of dher-Bonds) and bearing a number not
contemporaneously outstanding; provided that-(i) in the case of any mutilated- Bond, such
mutilated Bond shall first be surrendered.to the applicable Bond Registrar, and (ii) iri the i:ase of
any "lost Bdnd or Bond destroyed in whole, there shall be firsl fumished to the applicable Bond
Registrar evidence of such'loss or destmction, together with indemnification of the City and'
such Bond Registrar, satisfactory to such Bond Registrar.' If any lost, destroyed or improperly
cancelled Bond shall have matured or is about to mature, or has been called for'redernplion.
instead o f issuing' a duplicate Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar shall pay the same without
sunrender tiiereof if there shallbe first fumished to such. Bond Registrar evidence of such loss;
destrudion or cancellation. logeUier with indemnity, satisfadory to it. Upon the issuance of any
substitute. Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar may require the payment of a sum sufficieni to
cover any tax br other governmental charge that may be impbsed . in relation thereto.
(d) ^ Redemption and Repurchase. The Bondis'may. be made subject to redemption
prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole or.in part on any date, at such times and al
such redemption prices (tO'be expressed as a percentage of the prindpal amount'of Current
Interest Bonds or Variable Rale Bonds being redeemed or as a fonmula as described below and
expressed as a percentage of the Compound Accreted Value of Capital Appreciation'Bonds to
be redeemed or as a formula as descritJed below) riot to exceed 105 percent, plus, in the case
of Current Interest Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, accrued interest to the" date of redemption,
as determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale Ihereof.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, such 105 percent limitation on the redemption price of
Bonds shall not apply where the redemption price is based upon a formula designed to
compensate th'e owner of the Bonds to be redeemed based upon prevailing market conditions
on the date fixed for redemption, commonly known as a 'make-whole' redemption price (the
'Make-Whole Redernplion Price"). At the tirne of sale of the Borids. an Authorized Officer shall
determine the provisions of the formula to be used to establish ariy Make-Whole Redemption
Price, which may vary depending on whether the Bonds are issued ori a taxabfe or tax-exempt
basis. An Authorized Officer shall confirm and transmit the applicable Make-Whole Redemption
Price on such dates and to such parties as shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.

 21716

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

If fewer than all of ihe outstanding Bonds of a series are to be optionally redeemed, the
Bonds to be called shall be called from such maturities and interest rates of such series as may
be determined by an Authorized Officer.
Certain of the Bonds of a series may be made subject to mandatory redemption, at par
and accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption, as determined by an Aulhorized Officer at
the time of the sale thereof Further, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell (at a
price determined by such Authori?ed Officer lo be in the best interests of the City) or waive any
right the City may have to call any of the Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness for optional
redemption, in whole or in part, and is hereby further authorized to expend the proceeds of any
such sales for any purpose for which the proceeds of the Bonds are aulhorized to be expended
and for the payment or prepayment bf any City debt obligations, all as determined by an
Authorized Officer, provided however, lo the extent lhat interest on such Bonds or Outstanding
Indebtedness is excluded from gross income for federal income lax purposes, such
expenditures shall not adversely affed such exclusion. If determined to be necessary or
appropriate, an Authorized Officer is authorized to solicit Ihe consent of holders of outstanding
Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness lo any such sale or waiver.
Retail Bonds may be made subjed to repurchase by the City upon the demand of
certain holders thereof at a price of not to exceed-105 percent of par. as more fully described in
Section 12 hereof.
At the time of sale of Bonds of a series, an Authorized Officer is authorized to determine
the manner of redeeming such Bonds, either by lot in the manner hereinafter provided or
pro-rata in the manner determined byan Authorized Officer at the time of sale, in the event less.
than all of the Bonds of the same series, maturity and interest rate are to be redeemed.
The Current Interest Bonds shall be redeemed only in amounts equal to the respedive
minimum autiiorized denominations and Integral multiples'ihereof and tiie Capital Appredalion
Bonds shall be redeemed only in amounts representing the respedive minimum authorized
Maturity Amounts and integral multiples thereof Iri the event of the redemption of fewer than all
the Bonds of the same series, maturity and interest rate by lot. the aggregate prindpal amount
or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) thereof lo be redeemed shall be the minimum authorized
denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for such series or an integral multiple Ihereof.
arid the applicable Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of such series, maturity and
interest rate, a distinctive number for each minimum authorized denomination or Maturity
Amount (as appropriate) of such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as
many numbers as, at such minimum authorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) for each number, shall equal the principal amount or. Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of such Bonds to be redeemed. In such case. Ihe Bonds to be redeemed shall be
those to which were assigned numbers so selected; provided that only so much of the prindpal
amount or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall equal
such minimum authorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for each number
assigned to it and so selected. In tiie event of tiie redemption of fewer than all Bonds of the
same series, maturity and interest rate on a pro-rata basis, if the Bonds are held in book-entry
form at tiie time of redemption, at the time of sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21717

aulhorized to dired the Bond Registrar to instruct the book-entry depository to select the
specific Bonds within such maturity and interest rate for redemption pro-rata among such
Bonds. The City shall have no responsibility or obligalion to ensure that the book-entry
depository property selects such Bonds for redemption. •
The City shall, at least 45 days prior lo any optional redemption dale (unless a shorter
lime period shall be satisfactory to the applicable Bond Registrar), notify the applicable Bond
Registrar of such redemption dale and of the principal amount or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of Bonds of such series to be redeemed.
In conriection with any mandatory redemption of Bonds of a series as authorized above,
the principal amounts of Bonds (or the Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appredalion
Bonds) of such series lo be mandatorily redeemed in each year may be reduced through the
eariier'optional redemption Ihereof. vvith any partial optional redemptions of such Bonds of sudi
series' credited against future mandatory redemption requirements in such order of the
mandatory redemption dates as an Authorized Officer may determine. In addition, on br prior to
the 60lh day preceding any' mandatory redemption date of Bonds of a series, the applicable
Bond Registi^ar may. and if direded by an Authorized Officer shall, purchase Bonds of such
series 'required lo be retired on such mandatory redemption date at such prices as an
Authorized Officer shall determine. Any such Bonds so purchased shall be cancelled and the
principal amount (or Compound Accreted Value, as appropriate) Ihereof shall be credited
against the payment required on such next mandatory redemption date with respect to such
series of Bonds.
"Die applicable Bond Registrar shall promptiy notify the City in writing of tiie Bonds, or
portions thereof, selected for redemption and, in the case of any Bond seleded for partial
redemption, the principal amount. Compound Accreted Value or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) thereof, and the interest rate Ihereof lo be redeemed.
Subjed to the limitation on redemption price set forth above, in the-case of redemption of
any Variable Rale Bonds, the terms of such redemption shall be determined by an Aulhorized
Officer at tiie lime of sale of such Variable Rale Bonds and may be sel forth in Ihe trust
indenture securing such Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in Sedion 2 hereof.
Section 4.
Except as may othenwise be determined as provided below for Variable
Rate Bonds, unless waived by any owner of Bonds to be redeemed, notice of the call for ariy
such redemption shall t>e given by the applicable Bond Registrar on behalf of the City by mailing
Itie redemption notice by first class mail at least 30 days and nol more than 60 days prior to the
date fixed for redemption lo the registered owner of the Bond or Bonds to be redeemed at the
address shown on the applicable Bond Register or al such other address as is fumished in
writing by such registered owner to such Bond Registrar, but the failure to mail any such notice
or any defed therein as to any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the
redemption of any other Bond. Any notice of redemption mailed as provided in this Section
shall be conclusively presumed lo have been given whether or not adually received by thie
addressee. In the case of redemption of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series, the time and
manner of giving such notice shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of

 21718

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

such Variable Rate Bonds and may be sel forth in the trust indenture securing such Variable
Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof
All notices of redemption shall state:
(1)

the series designation of the Bonds to be redeemed.

(2)

the redemption date.

(3)
the redemption price, or in Ihe case of.a. redertiption of Bonds at a
Make-Whole Redemption Price, a description pf the formula by which the redemption
price shall be determined.
(4)
if less than all outstanding Bonds of a series are to be redeemed, the
identification (and. in the case of partial redemption, the respective principal amounts
and interest rates. Compound Accreted Values or Maturity Amounts) of the Bonds to be
redeemed.
(5)
that on the redemption date the redemption price will become due and
payable upon each such Bond or.portion thereof called for redemption, and that interest
thereon shall cease to accrue or compound from and after said date.
(6)
the place where such Bonds are lo be surrendered for payment of the
redemption price, which pl.ace of payment shalj be the designated corporate trust office
of the applicable Bond Regisb-ar. and
(7)
such other infomiation as shall be deemed necessary by the applicable
Bond Registrar at the time such notice is given lb comply wilh law^, regulation or industry
standard.
With respect to an optional redemption of any series of Bonds, such notice may state
that said redemption-is conditioned upon the receipt .by the applicable Bond Registrar on or prior
to the date fixed for redemption of moneys sufficient to pay the redemption price of the Bonds of
such series. If such moneys are not so received, such redemption notice shall be of no force
and effed. the City shall nol redeem such Bonds and the applicable Bond Registrar shall give
notice, in the same manner in which Ihe notice of redemption was given, that such moneys were
not so received and lhat such Bonds will not be redeemed. Unless the notice of redemption
shall be made conditional as provided above, on or prior to any redemption date for a series of
Bonds, the City shall deposit with the applicable Bond Registrar an amount of money sufficient
to pay the redemption price of all the Bonds or portions thereof of such series which are to be
redeemed ori that date.
Notice of redemption having been given as aforesaid, the Bonds, or portions thereof, so
lo be redeemed shall, on the redemption date, become due and payable at the redemption price
therein specified, and from and after such date (unless the City shall default in the payment of
the redemption price or unless, in the event of a conditional notice as described above, the

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21719

necessary moneys were not deposited) such Bonds, or portions thereof, shall cease to tiear.
accrue or compound interest. Upon sunrender of such Bonds for redemption in accordance with
said notice, such Bonds shall be paid by the applicable Bond Registrar at the redemption price.
Installments of interest due on or prior to the redemption date shall be payable as herein
provided for payment of interest Upon surrender for any partial redernption (i) of any Current
Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond, there shall be prepared for the registered ovmer a new
Bond or Bonds of Uie same series, type (Cunent Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds),
interest rate or. in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of interest rale deteriTiinalion. and
maturity in the amount of the unpaid prindpal or (ii) of any Capital Appreciation Bond, there shall
be prepared for the registered owner a new Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same
series. Yield to Maturity and maturity dale in the amount of the unpaid Maturity Amount.
If any Current Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond, or portion Ihereof. called for
redemption shall not be so paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the principal shall, until
paid, bear interest from the redemption date at the rate borne by such Bond, or portion Ihereof,
so called for redemption. If any Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof, called for
redemption shall not be so paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the Compound Accreted
Value at such redemption date shall continue to accrue interest from such redemption date at
the Yield to Maturity bome by such Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof, so called for
redemption. All Bonds which have been redeemed shall be cancelled and destroyed by the
applicable Bond Registrar and shall not be reissued.
If any Bond is nol presented for payment when the principal amount. Compiound
Accreted Value or Maturity Amount thereof becomes due. either at maturity or at a date fixed for
redemption thereof or otherwise, and if moneys sufficient to pay such Bond are held by the
applicable Bond Registrai- for the t}enefit of the registered owner of such Bond, such Bond
Registrar shall hold such moneys for Ihe tienefil of Ihe registered owner of such Bond without
liability to the registered owner for interest. The registered owner of such Bond thereafter shall
be restricted exclusively to such funds for satisfaction of any daims relating to such Bond.
Section 5. The Capital Appreciation Bonds and the Current Interest Bonds of each
series shall be prepared in substantially the following forms with such insertions and revisions
as shall be necessary lo reflect tlie terms and provisions of the sale of the Bonds of such series
pursuant to Sedion 12 hereof; provided lhat if the text of any Bond is to be printed in its entirety
on the front side of such Bond, then the text shown or appearing on the reverse side of such
Bond shall replace paragraph  2J and Uie legend. "See Reverse Side for Additional Provisions."
shall be omitted. The Convertible Bonds shall be prepared incorporating the provisions of the
forms of Capital Appreciation Bonds and Current Interest Bonds sel forth below as necessary to
reflect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Convertible Bonds pursuant to Section 12
hereof. The Variable Rate Bonds shall be prepared in substantially the form of the Current
Interest Bonds set forth below, or as provided in the applicable tmst indenture securing such
Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof, with such insertions and revisions as
shall be necessary lo reflect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Variable Rate Bonds
pursuant lo Section 12 hereof.
All Bonds may be prepared with such insertions and revisions as shall be necessary in
conneclion with the issuance of such Bonds as Retail Bonds or Direct Purchase Bonds.

 21720

3/14/2012

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

[Fomn of Capital Appreciation Bond — Front Side]

REGISTEI^ED

$
Compound Accreted
Value al Maturity
{'Maturity Amount")

NO.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF ILLINOIS
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBUGATION B O N D
SERIES

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT PER

$
MATURrrY
20_
Registered Owner

000

YIELD TO

- MATURITY

DATED

MATURITY

AMOUNT:

DATE

CUSIP
20

%

$•_

The City of Chicago (tiie 'City") hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for. value,
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date identified above, Uie Maturity Amount identified
above. The amount of interest payable on this Bond on the /yiaturity Date hereof is the amount
of interest accrued from the Dated Date hereof al a semiannual compounding rate necessary to
produce the Yield to Maturity set forth above, compounded semiannually on each January 1 and
July 1, commencing
1, 20 . The Maturity Amount of this Bond is payable
in lawful money of the United States of America'upon presentation and surrender of this Bond at
the designated corporate trust office of
, Chicago. Illinois, or its
successor, as bond registrar and paying agent (ttie "Bond Registrar'). The Compound Accreted
Value of this Bond per $
.0(30 Maturity Amount on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
commencing
1, 20 . determined by the semiannual compounding described in
this paragraph shall be as set forth in the Table of Compound Accreted Value Per $
.000
of Compound Accreted Value at Maturity contained herein.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21721

Reference is hereby made lo the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth al
Ihis place.
•
.
. , . It is hereby certified and recited that all condition's, ads and things required by law to
exist or to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and diie fonm and time as required by law; that the
indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Bonds of which this is one. does not exceed any
limitation imposed by law; and that provision has tieen made for the colledion of a direct annual
lax suffident to pay the Maturity Amount hereof al maturity.
This Bond shall nol be valid or tiecome obligatory.for any purpose'until the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have beeri signed by the Bond Registrar.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by the. City Council has caused its corporate
seal 10 be imprinted, by facsimile hereon and this Bond to be signed by the duly authorized
facsimile signature bf the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Clerk, all as
of the Dated Date kJentified above.

(Facsimile Signature)
-Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature)
City Cleri<
City of Chicago
(SEAL)
Date of AuUienticatioh;
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Bond Is one of the Bonds described in the VAthin-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of the Ceneral Obligation Bonds, Series
. of the City of Chicago.

(Manual Signature)
Aulhorized Officer

 21722

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

[Forni of Capital Appreciation Bond — Reverse Side]
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBUGATION BOND
SERIES

For the prompt payment ofthe Maturity Amount of this Bond as the same becomes due,
and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full failh. credit and resources of the Cily
are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the original principal amount of
$_
issued pursuant lo the constitutional home rule powers of the City for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Purposes de^scribed in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described in the Bond Ordinance, and
(iii) paying expenses incidental to the issuance of the. Bonds, and was authorized by an
Ordinance adopted by tiie City Council of the City on
, 20
(the 'Bond,
Ordinance").
The Bonds maturing on or after January 1.
. are redeemable prior lo maturity al the
option of the City, in whole or in part on any date on or after
1.
. and if
less than all of the outstanding Bonds are lo be redeemed, the Bonds to be called shall be
called from such maturities as shall be determined by the City., and it less than all of the Bonds
of the same maturity and yield to maturity are to be redeemed; then [by lot) [pro-rata) for the
Bonds of the same maturity and yield to.maturity in Uie manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds
lo be redeemed at the redemption prices (being expressed as a percentage of the Compound
Accreted Value of the Bonds to be redeemed) set forth below:
DATES OF REDEMPTION

REDEMPTION PRICE

(Redemption by lot] In the event of the redemption of less than all Uie Bonds of like
maturity and yield lo maturity, the aggregate Maturity Amount Ihereof lo be redeemed shall be
$
_.000 or an integral multiple thereof, and the Bond Registrar shall assign lo each Bond of
such maturity and yield to maturity- a distinctive number for each $
,000 Maturity Amount of
such Bond and shall seJed by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as. al
$
,000 for each number, shall equal the Maturity Amount of such Bonds lo be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so selected;
provided that only so much of the Maturity Amount of each.Bond shall t>e redeemed as. shall
equal $
.000 for each numtier assigned lo it and so selected.
[Redemption pro-rata] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and yield to maturity, the Bonds to be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
delermined pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21723

Notice of any such redemption shall be sent by first dass mail not fewer than 30 days
nor more than 60 days prior to the dale fixed for redemption to the Registered Owner of each
Bond lo be redeemed at the address shown on Ihe registration Ijooks of Uie City maintained by
the Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner
to the Bond Registrar, provided that the failure to mail any such notice or any defect therein as
to any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Bond.
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease lo accrue interest on the specified
redemption date; provided lhat funds for redemption are on deposit al the place of payment al
thai lime, and shall not tje deemed to be outstanding.
' This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly authorized in writing at the designated corporate tmst office of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago. Illinois, but only-in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Bdnd Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon such transfer a new Bond or Bdnds of aulhorized denominations, of the same maturity
and yield lo maturity arid for the same aiggregale Original Prindpal Amount will be issued to Ihe
transferee iri exchange therefor. The Bond Registrar shall nol be required to transfer or
exchange this Bond (A) after notice calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of .15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.
' Tbe Bonds are issued in fully registered form in Original Principal Amounts representing
$
,000 Maturity Amount or any integral multiple Ihereof. .This Bond may be exchanged at
the designated corporate tmst office of the Bond Registi'arfor a like aggregate Original Princfpal
Amount of. Bonds of the same series and maturity, upon ttie terms set forth in the Bond
Ordinance.'
*
The City and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving'payment of or on account of the Maturity
Amount hereof and redemption premium, if any. hereon and for..aII other purposes and neither
the City nor the Bond Registrar shall be affected by any notice to the conti-ary.

TABLE OF COMPOUND ACCRETED VALUE
- PER $

-. .000 OF COMPOUND ACCRETED VALUE A T MATURITY

(ASSIGNMENT)

FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)
the within Bond and does hereby irrevocably conslilule and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Bond on the books kept for registration thereof wilh full power of
substitution in the premises.

 JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

21724

3/14/2012

Dated:
Signature guaranteed:.
NOTICE:

The signature to this assignment must correspond with the name of the Registered
Owner as il appears upon the face of the within Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.
(Fomn of Cunent Interest Bond — Front Side)

REGISTERED
NO.
._
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF ILUNOIS
CITY OF CHICAGOGENERAL OBUGATION BOND
SERIES

i_-

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
Interest
Rate:

Maturity Date:
%

January 1,20

Dated Date:
. 20

CUSIP:

Registered Owner:
Principal Amount:
The City of Chicago (Uie 'City) hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for value
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns a s .
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date identified above, the Prindpal Amount identified
above and to pay interest (computed on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months)
on such Prindpal Amount from the later of the date of this Bond or the most recent interest
payment date to which interest has been paid at Uie Interest Rate per annuni set forth above on
January 1 and July 1 of each year commencing
1 . 2 0 _ , until said Prindpal
Amount is pakl. Principal of this Bond and redemption premium, if any, shall be payable in
lawful money of the United States of America upon presentation and surrender al the
designated corporate trust office of
'. Chicago, Illinois, .as bond
registrar and paying agent (the 'Bond Rogistrai"). Payment of the inslallmenls of interest shall
be made to the Registered Owner hereof as shown on the registration books of the City
maintained by the Bond Registrar at the close of business on the 15th day ol the month next
preceding each interest payment date and shall be paid by check or draft of the Bond Registrar
mailed lo the address of such Registered Owmer as il appears on such registration txjoks or at
such other address furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to the Bond Registrar or, at
the option of any Registered Owner of 51,000,000 or more in aggregate principal amount of the
Bonds, by wire transfer of immediately available funds to such bank in the continental United
States of Amenca as the Registered Owner hereof shall request in writing lo the Bond Registrar.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21725

Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effed as if set forth at
this place.
It is hereby certified and recited that all conditions, ads and things required by law to
exist or lo be done precedent to and in the issuance of Uiis Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and due form and time as required by law; that the
indebtedness of the City, induding the issue of Bonds of which this is one; does nol exceed any
limitation imposed by law, and that provision has t>een made for the colledion.of a direct annual
lax sufficient to pay the interest hereon as it falls due and also to pay and discharge the
principal hereof at maturity.
This Bond shall not be valid or become obligatory for any purpose until the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Bond Registrar. IN WrrNESs WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by the City Council has caused its corporate
seal lo be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Bond to be signed'by the duly authorized
facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the Cily Cleric, all as
of the Dated Date identified above.

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature)
City Clerk
City of Chicago
[SEAL]

Date of Authentication:
CERTIFICATE OF AirtHENTicATioN

This Bond is one of the Bonds described in the within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of Ihe General Obligation Bonds, Series
. of Ihe City of Chicago.

By:

(Manual Signature)
Authorized Officer

 21726

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(Form of Cunent Interest Bond — Reverse Side]
CrrY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBUGATION BONO
SERIES

For the prornpt payment of this Bond, both prindpal and interest, as aforesaid, as the
same become due. and for the levy of taxes sufficieni for lhat purpose, the full faith, credit and
resources of the City are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the principal amount of
$
issued pursuant to the constitutional home rule powers of the City for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Purposes described in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described in the Bond Ordinance, and
(iii) paying expenses incidental lo the issuance of the .Bonds, and was authorized by an
Ordinance adopted by the Cily Council of the City on
._, 20
(the Bond
Ordinance").
'
The Bonds maturing on or after January 1,
. are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the City, in whole or in part on any dale on or after
1,"
. and if less
than all of the outstanding Bonds are to be redeemed. Uie Bonds lo be called shall be called
from such maturities and interest rates as shall be determined by the City and if less than all of
the Bonds of a single maturity and the same interest rale are to be redeemed then [by lot]
[pro-rata] within such maturity and interest rate in the manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds lo
be redeemed at the redemption prices (t>eing expressed as a percentage of the principal
arnount) set forth below, plus accrued interest lo Uie date of redemption:
DATES OF REDEMPTION

-

REDEMPTION PRICE

The Bonds maturing on January 1,
. are subject to mandatory redemption prior to
maturity on January 1 of the'-years _:
to
. inclusive, and the Bonds maturing on
January 1.
. are subject to mandatory redemption prior'to maturity on January 1 of the
years •
to
. inclusive, in each case al par and accrued interest to the date fixed for
redemption.
^
[Redemption by lot] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the aggregate prindpal amount Ihereof to be redeemed shall be
$
,000 or an integral multiple thereof, and the Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of
such maturity and interest rate a distinctive number for each $
.000 principal amount of
such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as. at
S
.000 for each number, shall equal the principal amount of such Bonds to be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds lo which were assigned numl>er5 so selected;
provided that only so much of the pirincipal amount of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall
equal $
,000 for each numtjer assigned to it and so seleded.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21727

(Redemption pro-rata] In the event ofthe redemption of less than all of the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the Bonds to be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
determined pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.

Notice of any such redemption shall be sent by first class mail nol less than 30 days nor
more than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption lo the Registered Owner of each Bond
to be redeemed at the address shown on the registi^alion books of the City maintained by the
Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to
the Bond Registrar, provided that Uie failure lo mail any such notice or any defect therein as to
any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Bond.
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease to bear interest on the specified
redemption date, provided lhat funds for redemption are on deposit at the place of payment at
lhat time, and shall not tie deemed lo be outstanding.

This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly aulhorized in writing at the designated corporate trust office of the Borid Registrar in
Chicago, Illinois, but only in the manner, subject lo the limitations and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon such transfer a new Bond or Bonds of aulhorized denominations, of the same interest
rate, series and maturity and for the same aggregate principal amount will be issued to the
transferee in exchange therefor The Bond Registrar shall not be required to transfer or
exchange this Bond (A) after notice calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.

The Bonds are issued in fully registered form in the denomination of $
,000 each or
authorized integral multiples thereof. This Bond may be exchanged at the designated corporate
trust office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate principal amount of Bonds of the same
interest rate, series and maturity of other authorized denominations, upon the terms sel forth in
the Bond Ordinance.

The City and Uie Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment of or on account of principal
hereof and interest due hereon and redemption premium, if any.'and for all other purposes and
neither the Cily nor the Bond Registrar shall be affected by any notice lo the contrary.

 21728

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(ASSIGNMENT)

FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)
the within Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Bond on the books kept for registration thereof with full power of
substitution in the premises.
Dated:
Signature guaranteed:.
NOTICE: . The. signature lo this assignment must correspond wilh the name of the-Registered
Owner as il appears upon the face of the within Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.
, Section 6.
Each Bond shall be a dired and general obligation of the Cily for the
payment of which (as to Compound Accreted Value. • prindpal. interest and redemption
:premium. if any. as appropriate) the. Cily pledges its full faith and credit. Each Bond shall be
payable (as to Compound Accreted'Value, principal, interest and redemption premium, if any,
as appropriate) from any moneys, revenues, receipts,' income, assets or funds of the City legally
available for such purpose, including but nol limited to Uie proceeds of the Pledged. Taxes (as
defined in Sedion 7 hereof).
Section 7. For the purpose of providing the funds required to pay as the same
become due (i) the principal of and interest and redemption premium,, if any, on the Bonds
(induding the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds).' (il) the purchase
price of Bonds that are subjed to optional or mandatory tender for purchase fay tbe owners
thereof, to the extent not otherwise provided for.pursuant to the terms of a Credit Facility (as
defined in Sedion 12 hereoO. (iii) such amounts as may be payable under Interest Rate'
Exchange Agreements (as defined in Sedion 14 hereoQ from the dired anriual lax described
below, (iv) amounts (other than periodic fees and expenses) payable lo providers of Credit
Facilities as described in Sedion 12 hereof and (v) to the extent determined by an Authorized
Officer lo be necessary or desirable, periodic fees and expenses payable to parties involved in
the provision of ongoing services relating to the Bonds, the Outstanding Indebtedness, the
Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements or Interest Rale Exchange Agreements, induding
parties such as those identified by an Authorized Officer in a notification of sale as described in
Sedion 12 hereof and parties providing similar ongoing services, such as'rating agencies and
entities providing financial market information to be used in connection with the stiuduring and
sale of the Bonds (the 'Ongoing Financing Services"), there is hereby levied and Uiere shall t>e
colleded a direct annual tax upon all taxable property'' in the Gily for the years and in the
amounts as follows:

 3/14/2012

21729

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

YEAR

AMOUNT

2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027.
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032

$150,000,000
. 150,000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000.
150,000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150,000.000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150i000.00,0
150,000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150.000,000
. 150.000.000
150.000.000.

YEAR
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037 :
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
• 2047
2048
2049
2050
2051
2052

AMOUNT
$150,000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150,000.000
150.600.000
150,000.000
150.000.000
- 150.000,000
150.000.000

; provided that collections of such levy for any year in an amount in excess of that necessary to
make the payments described in clauses (i). (ii). (iii), (iv) and (v) above (a) may be used for any
lawful public purpose designated by the City Coundl or (b) may be reduced and abated by an
Authorized Officer if such reduction is deemed desirable by an Authorized Offii:;er in connection
with the sale or'sales of the Bonds, in each case as determined from time to time by an
Authorized Offioer as provided in Sedion 12 hereof.
'
The tax levy made in Uiis Sedion is not subject to the "Aggregate Levy" limitation
contained in the Chicago Property Tax Limitation Ordinance contained in Chapter 3-92 of the
Municipal Code of Chicago (the "Municipal Code"), and Sedion S-92-020 of the Municipal Code
is hereby superseded to exdude ttie lax levy herein from the definition of "Aggregate Levy"
contained therein.
.
The term 'Pledged Taxes' means (i) the taxes hereinabove levied for collection for the
purpose of providing the funds necessary to make the payments descritied in clauses (i). (ii),
(iii). (iv) and (v) bf the first paragraph of this Section 7. and (ii) subject to the provisions of
Section 15 hereof, the proceeds of taxes levied for the years from and after 2011 in connection
with the issuance of the Outstanding Indebtedness to the extent such tax collections are not
necessary for the-payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein "or pursuant to any other authorization, and the term 'Pledged Taxes' shall
also indude any amounts deposited into the hereinafter-defined Bond Fund or deposited with

 21730

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent (as hereinafter defined) by an Authorized Officer for the
purpose of paying principal of and interest on the Bonds and any accrued interest received and
deposited in the Bond Fund or the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Account, if established pursuant lo
Section 9 hereof.
As provided in Section 12 or othenwise. the City reserves Uie right to abate all or a
portion of the Pledged Taxes required to be levied in any year if and to the extent on or before
March 31 of the next succeeding calendar year (or such earlier date as may be required by law),
the City has on hand amounts dedicated lo the payments descritied in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of the first paragraph of this Section 7. due during the one-year period commendng on
January 2 of such succeeding, calendar year. The Cily may. but shall not be required to. cause
the levy or extension in any year of taxes for Ihe payment of Uie costs of Ongoing Financing
Services.
Section 8.
The City shall appropriate or othenwise provide amounts sufficieni to pay
(i) principal of and interest on Uie Bonds (including the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital
Appreciation Bonds), (ii) amounts (other than periodic tees and expenses) payable to providers
bf Credit Facilities as' described in Section 12 hereof to the payment of which the'City has
pledged its full faith and credit and (iii) Interest Rate Exchange Agreements to the payment of
which the City has pledged its full failh and credit for Ihe years such amounts are due, and Ihe
City hereby covenants to lake limely.aclion as required by law to carry out the provisions of this
Sedion. but. if for any such year it fails to do so; this Ordinance shall constitute a continuing
appropriation ordinance of such amounts without any further adion on ttie part of the Cily
Council.
.
SeclidriQ.
Each Authorized Officer is aulhorized to establish one Or niore special
accounts, if determined lb be necessary in connection with the sale of "any of the Bonds,
separate and segregated from all other funds and accounts of the City, which-shall either be
(i) held by an Aulhorized Officer (each a.'Bond Fund') or (ii) riiaintained with a bank or'trust
company to be designated by an Authorized Officer (each' an 'Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Accounf) pursuant to an escrow agreement (each an 'Ad.Valorem Tax Escrow Agreemenf),
between'lhe City and the applicable Escrow Agent named therein (each an 'Ad Valorem Tax
Escmw Agenf), and one or more of the Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer are hereby authorized lo
. execute and deliver one or more Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreements in connedion with the
sale of the Bonds in such form as the officers so executing such agreement may deem
appropriate in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
In lieu of the proceeds of such taxes being deposited with the City Treasurer, any such
Ad Valorem Tax E'saow Agreement may authorize the County Colledors of Cook and DuPage
Counties. Illinois lo deposit the proceeds of such taxes directly into the applicable Ad Valorem
Tax Escrow Account, if such Accourit has been created.
Section 10.
If the Pledged Taxes to be applied to the payment of the Bonds are not
available in time to make any payments of prindpal of or interest-on the Bonds yjhen due, then
the appropriate fiscal officers of the Cily are hereby directed to make such payments from any
other moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City that are legally available

 3/14/2012

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

21731

for that purpose in advancement of the collection of such Pledged Taxes, and when the
proceeds thereof are received, such other funds shall be replenished, all to the end that the
credit of the City may be preserved by the prompt payment of the principal of and interest on the
Bonds as Ihe same become due.
Section 11.
A copy of this Ordinance, duly certified tiy the City Clerk, shall tie filed in
the respective offices of the County Clerics of Cook and DuPage Counties. Illinois (the "County
Clerks'), and such filing shall constitute the authority for and il shall be ttie duly of said County
Clerks, in each year beginning in 2013. to and induding 2053. to extend the taxes levied
pursuant to Section 7 hereof for colledion in such year, such taxes to be in addition to and in
excess of all other taxes heretofore or hereafter authorized to be levied by the City on its behalf.
A'copy of this Ordinance, duty certified by the City Clerk, shall also be filed with .each
applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, if any. each applicable Bond Registrar, and if the
County Collectors of Cook and DuPage Counties are aulhorized 16 deposit the proceeds of the
taxes levied pursuant lo Sedion 7 - hereof directiy wilh an Ad Valoreni Tax Escrow Agent
pursuant to Section 9 hereof, with such County Collectors.
Section 12. Each Authorized Officer is hereby aulhorized lo sell all or any portion of the
Bonds, other than the Retail Bonds arid the Dired Purchase Bonds which shall be sold as
provided in Ihe following Ivifo paragraphs, from time lo time to or at the diredion of an
iinderwriter or group of underwriters lo. be selected by such Authorized Officer (the'
'Underwriters"), with the concurrence of the Chairman ofthe Committee on Finance of the Cily
Council (the 'Chairman'), on such terms as such Aulhorized Officer may deem lo be in the best
interests of the City wfllhln the limitations sel forth in this Ordinance. '
Each Aulhorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell Retail Bonds from time to time:on
such terms as such Aulhorized Officer may deem to be in the. best interests-of the City within
the limitations contained in this Ordinance and.' in connedion therewith, to-appoint an agent or
group of agents to be seleded by such Authorized Officer (the 'Selling Agents'), with the
concurrence of the Chairman, for the purpose of soliciting purchases of Ihe Retail Bonds'by
individual investors, each sale of Retail Bonds solicited by the Selling Agenls lo be made with
the concurrence ofthe Chairman.
The Bonds rnay be sold as Direct Purchase Bonds in a manner and containinig such
terms authorized, by an Authorized Officer, induding pursuant to a placement agent
arrangement, to a purchaser or purchasers other than the Underwriters (the 'Direct
Purchasers), such Direct Purchasers to be selected by an Authorized Officer and such sale
being permitted either at par or with a discount or premium. The Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer
is hereby authorized lo do all such things and lo execute and deliver such additional documents,
agreements and certificates as shall be necessary in connection wilh the sale of Direct
Purchase Bonds.
The principal amount of and the interest on Ihe Bonds (induding the Compound
Accreted Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds and based on reasonable estimates of the
interest to be paid on Variable Rate Bonds) sold of each series and maturity in the aggregate

 21732

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(after taking into account mandatory redemptions) shall not exceed the amouril levied therefor
as spedfied in Sedion 7 hereof. The Bonds may be sold from time to lime as an Authorized
Officer shall determine that the proceeds of such sales are needed.
Subsequent to the sale of any series of Bonds or. in the case of the Retail Bonds,
subsequent to the sale of all Bonds that are the subjed of a Selling Agent Agreement (as
hereinafter defined), an Aulhorized Officer shall file in the office of the City Clerk a notification of
sale directed to the Cily Council setting forth (i) the series designation, the aggregate prindpal
amount and aulhorized denomiriations of, maturity schedule and redemption provisions for the
Bonds sold, (ii) the principal amounts of the Bonds sold as Current Interest Bonds. Capital
' Appreciation Bonds. Convertible Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respectively, and whether
any of the Bonds are sold as Retail Bonds, (iii) in the case of the sale of the Retail Bonds or
Direct Purchase Bonds, the prindpal amounts of such Bonds sold as Current Interest Bonds.
Capitalized Appreciation Bonds, Convertible: Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respectively,
(iv) in the case of Bonds sold as Capital Appreciation Bonds. (A) the Original Prindpal Amounts
of and Yields to Maturity on the Capital Appreciation Bonds being sold and (B) a table of
Compound Accreted Values per minimum aulhorized Compound Accreted Value at maturity for
any Capital Appreciation Bonds tpeing sold, setting forth the Compound Accreted Value of each .
such Capital Appreciation Bond on each semiannual compounding date, (v) the interest rates on
the Cunent Interest Bonds sold or. in the case bf Variable Rate Bonds, a description of the
method of detemiining the interest rate applicable to such Variable Rate Bonds from time to
lime, (vi) the specific maturities, series and amounts of the Outstanding Indebtedness to be
refunded wiUi proceeds of the Bonds, (vii) a description of any Existing Interest Rate Exchange
Agreements to be terminated, amended or otherwise modified iri connection with the refunding
of 'Such Qutslandirig Indebtedness and identifying any settlement, breakage or termination
amount to be. paid in connedioriWith each such terminationi amendment or modification,
(viii) the dale on and price at which the Outstanding Indebtedness.seleded for refunding shall.
be redeemed (if such redemptwn shall occur prior to stated maturity or pursuant lo mandatory
sinking fund redemption), (ix) the disposition of the taxes levied for the years from and afler
2011 for ttie payment-of the Outstanding Indebtedness or any Existing Interest Rate Exchange
Agreements as authorized by Section 15 hereof, (x) the identity of the insurer or insurers issuing
the. insurance policy or polides, if any. referred to below, and Ihe identity of the provider o^r
providers of one or more Credit Facilities, if any,' for such Bonds, (xi) the identity of the
Underwriters (or, in Ihe case of Retail Bonds, the Selling Agents and in the case of Direct
Purchase Bonds, the Dired Purchasers) selected for such Bonds, (xii) the identity bf the
applicable Bond Registrar and any trustee or trustees selected by an Authorized Officer for such
Bonds, (xiii) the identity of any remarketing agent retained iri. connection with Ihe issuance of
Variable Rate Bonds, if any. (xiv) the compensation pakt lo the Underwriters (br, in the case of
Retail Bonds, ttie Selling Agents) in connedion with such sale, (xv) the identity of any Refunding
Escrow Agent (as defined in Sedion 13(b) hereoO appointed by an Authorized Officer in
connection with the refunding of Outstanding Indebtedness, and (xvi) any olher matter
authorized by this Ordinance to be determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale of
the Bonds of each series.
Either Authorized Officer is hereby authorized and direded lo cause all necessary
notices of redemption of the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding as provided

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF C O M M I T T E E S

21733

above to be givenin accordance with the terms of the respedive ordinances or indentures, as
applicable, authorizing the Outstanding Indebtedness.
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby auttiorized to execute and deliver a
conlrad of purchase with resped to each sale of the Bonds to. or al the direction of. Uie
Underwriters in substantially the form previously used for similar general obligation bonds of the
Cily or to the Dired Purchasers, with appropriate revisions to reflect tiie terms and provisions of
the Bonds and such other revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authoreed Officer shall determine
are necessary or desirable in connection wiUi the sale of the Bonds. The compensation paid to
the Underwriters in conneclion with any sale of Bonds shall not exceed three percent of the
principal amount of the Bonds being sold. NoUiing contained in this Ordinance shall limit the
sale of the Bonds or any maturity or maturities thereof at- a price or prices iri excess of the
principal amount ihereof.
Ttie Mayor or an Authorized Officer , is. hereby authorized to execute and deliver a
contract with Selling Agents pursuant to which the Selling Agents shall solicit purchases of the
Retail Bonds by individual investors (a "Selling Agent Agreement") substantially in the. form of
the selling agent agreement previously entered into by the City in connection wilh the sale of
Retail Borids, but with such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer executing the
same shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or such
Aulhorized Officer lo evidence the Cily Council's'approval of all such revisions. - The aggregate
compensation paid to the Selling Agents pursuant to any Selling Agent Agreement shall not
exceed three percent of the prindpal amount of the Retail Bond's sold pursuant.lo such Selling
Agent Agreeriienl. The lerms of any Selling Agent Agreement may provide for the delegation by
an Aulhorized Officer lo one or more Deputy Comptrollers of authority lo approve the final terms
of sale of any Retail Bonds pursuant lo such Selling Agent Agreement within parameters
established by an Authorized Officer consistent wiUi Ihe lerms-and limitations of this-Ordinance.
AnySelling Agenf Agreement may also contain proviskins pursuant to which a person receiving
an ownership interest in any Retail Bonds through the deaUi of a Bondholder shall have the right
to sell such Retail Bonds back to the Cily at a price of not to exceed 105 percent of par and
setting forth the tenns and conditions of Ihe exercise of such right; The Mayor or an Authorized
(Officer (or delegate as authorized above) is hereby aulhorized to do all such things and lo
execute and deliver such additional documents, agreements and certificates as shall t>e
necessary in connection with the sale of Retail Bonds from time to lime pursuant to a Selling
Agent /^reemenl, induding any such document, agreement or certificate necessary lo describe
the terms of Retail Bonds Uien being sold.
In connedion with any sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to
obtain one or more policies of bond insurance from recognized bond insurers selected by an
Authorized Officer, if such Authorized Officer determines such tiond insurance to be desirable in
corinectioh wilh such sale of the Bonds. Either Authorized Officer may. on behalf of the City,
make covenants wilh such bond insurer that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance and are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance.
In connedion with any sale of the Bonds. Uie Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby
aulhorized to oblairi one or more letters of credit, lines of credit, standby bond purchase

 21734

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

agreements, or similar credit or liquidity facilities (a 'Credit Facility") wilh one or more financial
institutions. Thq Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into a
reimbursement agreement and/or standby bond purchase agreement and lo execute and issue
a promissory note in connection with the provisions of each Credit Facility. Any Credit Facility,
reimbursement agreement or standby bond purchase agreement shall be in substantially the
fonm of the credit facilities, reimbursement agreements and standby bond purchase agreements
previously entered into by the City in conneclion wilh Uie sale of general obligation bonds or
notes, but wilh such revisions in text as the Mayor or an AuUiorized Officer eiifeaiting the same
shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or an Aulhorized
Officer to evidence the City Council's approval of all such revisions. The annual fee paid to any
financial institution that provides a Credit Facility wilh resped lo all or a portion of a series of the
Bonds shall nol exceed one and one-half percent of the average prindpal amount of such
Bonds outstanding" during such annual period. The final form of any reimbursement agreement
and/or standby bond purchase agreement entered into by the City wilh respect lo ihe Bonds
shall be attached lo the notification of sale filed in the office of the City Clerk pursuant lo this
sedion. Each such promissory note shall be a-general obligation of the City for the payment of
which, both principal and interest, the City pledges its full faiUi. credit and resources. Each
promissory note, and any Bond owned or held as collateral by any such finandal institution in its
capacity as a provider of a Credit Facility shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding 15 percent
per annum and shall mature not later than the final maturity date of the related Bonds secured
by such reimbursement agreement or standby bond purchase -agreement. The Mayor or an
Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver any such reimbursement
agreement or standby bond purchase agreement, and any amendment thereto or replacement
thereof, under the seal of the City affixed arid attested by the Cily Cleric.
Iri the event that Bonds are sold so as to require the levy of taxes for any year spedfied
in Section 7 hereof for the purpose of making the payments described in clauses (i). (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of the first paragraph of Sedion 7 hereof in an amount less than the amount specified for
such year in the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, then an Authorized Officer shall, on or prior
to -March 31 of the calendar year next succeeding such year, notify the City Council of the
determination made pursuant to clauses (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Sedion 7 hereof
regarding the application of any resulting excess levy collections, and. in addition. In connection
with a determination made pursuant to clause (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, an
Authorized Officer shall file in the respedive offices of the County Clerks certificates of lax
abatement for such year. In the event that upon the final sale of the Bonds of all series, such
Bonds have been sold so as to require the levy of taxes in any year specified in Section 7
hereof for the purpose of making the payments described in clauses (i), (ii). (iii) and (iv) of the
first paragraph of Sedion 7 hereof in an amount less than the amount specified for such year in
Section 7 hereof, then there shall t)e.included, in the final notitication of sale to the City Council
described in the fourth (4"") paragraph of Uiis Sedion 12. the determination made pursuant to
clauses (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof regarding the application of any
resultirig excess levy collections for such year and any succeeding year and, in addition, in
connection with a determination made pursuant to clause (b) of the firsl paragraph of Sedion 7
hereof, an Authorized Officer shall file in the respective offices of the County Clerks certificates
of tax abatement for such year or years. If any of the Bonds are not to be sold and issued as
provided herein and no levy colledions are lo be applied for the purposes of paying the costs of

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21735

Ongoing Ftnandng Services as determined by an AuUiorized Officer, the corresponding taxes
herein levied lo pay debt service thereon shall be abated in full. Any certificate of abatement
delivered pursuant to Uiis paragraph shall refer to the amount of taxes levied pursuant to
Section 7 hereof, shall indicate the amount of redudion in the amount of taxes levied by the City
resulting from the sale or sales of Uie Bonds or the non-issuance Ihereof. which reduced
amount is to be abated from such taxes, and shall further indicate the remainder of such taxes
Which is to be extended for colledion by said'County Clerks.
The preparation, use and distribution of a preliminary offidal statement, an official
statement or any other disclosure document relating to each sale and issuance of the Bonds are
hereby ratified and approved. The Mayor and each Authorized. Officer are each hereby
authorized to execute and deliver an official statement or other disclosure document relating to
each sale and issuance of the Bonds on behalf of the City. The preliniiriary official statement,
official statement and other disdosure documents herein authorized shall be substantially
similar to those previously used for general obligation bonds of the City.'and shall contain the
terms and provisions of the Bonds. Uie mariner in which the Bonds shall be sold, the use of
proceeds of the Bonds, financial infonnalion for the City, and such other information as the
Mayor or any Authorized Officer detemnines to be advisable under the.cirdjmslances.
In connection with any sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to
execute and deliver one or more Continuing Disclosure Undertakings (each a 'Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking) evidencing Uie City's agreement to comply wilh Uie requirements of
Section (b)(5) .of Rule 15c2-12. adopted b y t h e Securities and Exchange Commission (the
' S E C ) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. in a form approved by. the Corporation
Counsisl. Upon .its execution and delivery on behalf of the City as herein'provided, each
Coritinuing Disdosure Undertaking will be binding on the,Cily. and the officers, employees arid
agents of the City are hereby authorized to do all .such acts and things and to execute all such
documents.as may be necessary to carry out and comply with.the provisions of each Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking as executed. Either Authorized Officer is hereby-further aulhorized lo
amend each Continuing Disdosure Undertaking in accordance with its. respective tenms from
time lo time following its execution and delivery as said officer shall deem necessary. In
addition, an Authorized Officer is authorized, to make all future filings with the Eledronic
Municipal Mari<et Access system operated by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board or
such other municipal securities information repository as shall be designated by the SEC. all in
accordance with the provisions of Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 15c2-12(b)(5)
promulgated under the Securities Exchange A d of 1934.' Notwithstanding any other provision
of this Ordinance, .the sole remedies for any failure by the City to comply wilh any Continuing
Disdosure Undertaking shall be the ability of the tjeneficial owner of any applicable Bond lo
seek rnandamus or specific performance by court order to cause the City to comply with its
obligations under such Continuing Disdosure Undertaking.
The Bonds shall be duly prepared and executed in Uie form and manner provided herein
and delivered to the purchasers in accordance wiUi the applicable lerms of sale.
The Mayor, each Aulhorized Officer, the Cily Treasurer and the City Cleric are each
hereby authorized to execute and deliver such other documents and agreements (including

 21736

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

such contracts, such intergovernmental agreements or such grant agreements wilh not-for-profit
organizations, educational or cultural institutions or for-profit organizations or to assist the State
of Illinois, the United States of America, or olher munidpal corporations, units of local
government or school districts in the Stale of Illinois, receiving proceeds of the Bonds as an
AuUiorized Officer shall deem necessary and appropriate) and perfonm such other ads prior lo
or following Ihe issuance of the Bonds as may be necessary or desirable in conneclion wilh the
issuance of the Bonds and any transactions contemplated herein related to the application of
the proceeds of the Bonds or collections or application of taxes levied for the payment of the
Bonds or the Outstanding Indebtedness or other purposes hereunder, but subjed to any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth, and any such actions
heretofore taken by the Mayor, an Authorized Officer, the City Treasurer or the Cily Clerk in
. accordance with the provisions hereof are hereby ratified and approved. Wilh resped to each
grant of Bond proceeds, each Aulhorized Officer is hereby autiiorized to designate in writing,
with the written concurrence of the Budget Director of the Cily (the 'Budget Directof), (i) one or
more City - departments or agencies lo administer such grant, and (ii)'the head of the City
department or agency who shall be authorized to execute a grant agreement and such other
documerils. agreements or instrumerits as shall be deemed necessary or desirable by suth City
department o r agency head. Upon any such written designation by a n Authorized Officer vvith
resped to a grant of Bond proceeds, such City department or agency shall be authorized lo
administer such grant and the head of such City department or agency shall be aulhorized to
execute a grant agreement and such other documents, agreements or instruments as such
offidal shall deem necessary or desirable. .
Secfion 13. The proceeds from the sale of any series of the Bonds shall be used as
follows; - •
- .
(a) " The sum representing the accrued interest received; if any, shall be used
to pay the first interest becoming due on the Bonds sold, and to-lhat end. shall be
deposited in Ihe applicable Bond Fund or the applicable Ad' Valorem Tax Escrow
Account, if established.
(b)
From the sale proceeds derived from any such sale of a series of the
Bonds; (i) such sum as may t>e determined by ah Authorized Officer to be necessary to
pay not more than Uiree years of interest on the Bonds issued to pay costs of the Projed
may be used to pay such interest, and to that end. may be deposited in the'applicable
Bond Fund or the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Account., if established; (ii) the
sum determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary to pay the costs of the Project
shall be set aside, held and invested at the diredion of an Authorized. Officer, as
separate funds of Ihe City pending such payment, provided that proceeds of the Bonds
issued lo finance the Pension Contributions shall be paid into the Pension Funds as and
when required by law; (iii) the sum determined by an Authorized Officer to capitalize or
fund iriterest ori Outstanding Indebtedness shall be deposited into the respedive debt
service funds established for the Outstanding Indebtedness; (iv) the sum determined by
an Authorized Officer to be sufficient to pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being
refunded at or prior to their respective maturities, at a price of par, the applicable
redemption premium and accrued interest thereon up to and including said redemption

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF C O M M I T T E E S

21737

or maturity dates shall be deposited into the respective debt service funds established
for the Outstanding Indebtedness or into one or more 'Refunded Bonds Escrow
Accounts" to be held by one or more banks or trust companies lo be designated by an
Authorized Officer (each a 'Refunding Escrow Agent"), each pursuant to the terms of an
- escrow agreement (each a 'Refunding Escrow Agreement"), and the Mayor, an
Aulhorized Officer and the City Clerk, or any of them, are hereby authorized to execute
and deliver each Refunding Escrow Agreement, and any amendment thereto, in such
form as the officer so executing shall deem appropriate to effect Ihe refunding or
refundings described in this paragraph and (v) the sum determined by an Authorized
Officer to be sufficieni lo provide for the payment ot any settlement, breakage or
lerminalion amount payable in conneclion with the termination, amendment or
-. modification of an Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreement shall be paid lo the City's
counterparty or counterparties thereunder.
Notwithstanding any provision of the
Municipal Code, investments acquired with proceeds of the Bonds or investment income
thereon may mature beyond ten years from the dale of acquisition, and may include but
are .riol limited lo agreements entered into t>etween the City and providers of securities
under which agreements' such providers agree to purchase from or sell to the City
specified securities on specific dales at predetermined prices, all as established at the
lime of execution of any such agreement and as sel forth iri such agreement, and
guaranteed investment contracts, forward purchase agreements and olher similar
investment vehicles.
Such guaranteed investment conlracts, forward purchase
agreements and other similar investment vehicles may. to the' extent penmitted by
operative authorizing documents and by applicable Jaw. be assigned or transferred from
one bond transaction lo another or apply lo the proceeds of more than one t>ond*^
transaction on a commingled or non-commingled basis, as delermined by an Authorized
- Officer: - The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enler into any
amendments lo or restatements of existing documents or to execute new documents, to
consent to adions being taken by others or to obtain the consent of olher parties, as
may be necessary or desirable in this respect. Investment income derived from Bond
proceeds may be (w) expended for the same purposes for which Bond proceeds may be
expended, (x) used for the payment or prepayment of City debt obligations, (y) deposited
in the Corporate Fund of the City or (z) rebated to the United States of America as
provided in Sedion 16 hereof, all as determined by an Authorized-Officer or the Budget
Diredor: Any commingled investment income from guaranteed investment contracts,
forward purchase agreements and other similar investinent vehicles shall be apportioned
among bond transactions as determined by an Aulhorized Officer or as otherwise
required by operative authorizing documenls and applicable law:
(c)
From the sale proceeds of a series of the Bonds not applied as provided
in paragraphs (a) and (b). above, the amount deemed necessary by an Aulhorized
Officer shall be applied to the payment of the costs of issuance of such Bonds, induding
the premium or fee for bond insurance or other credit or liquidity enhancement, if any.
and any unexpended portion of the sale proceeds shall be paid to the City.
The costs of the Projed may be paid directly by the City oi- may be financed by the
making of grants for Ihe implementation of the Projed to (i) not-for-profit organizations,

 21738

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

educational or cultural institutions or for-profit organizations, (ii) the United States of America,
(iii) the State of Illinois or (iv) other units of local government, political subdivisions, municipal
corporations or school districts in the State of Illinois, induding any operating division thereof, all
as detennined by an Authorized Officer.
An AuUiorized Officer shall report to the City Council with resped to the expenditure of
the proceeds of each series of the Bonds issued hereunder lo pay the costs of the Projed.
Such reports shall be made no later Uian August 1 of each year, commencing August 1. 2013,
with respect to expenditures,made during the preceding calendar year. No report shall be
• required hereunder following any calendar year in which no proceeds of any series of the Bonds
are expended to jpay costs of the Project.
Secliorj 14. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby aulhorized to execute and
deliver. wiUi. respect to all or any portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness, the Borids, and any
Gerieral Obligation Indebtedness (as defined below) that may be issued in the future
(colledively. 'City Indebtedness'), from time to time one or more agreements, or options to
enter into such agreements, with counterparties selected by an Authorized Officer, the purpose
of which'is to provide to the Cily (i) an interest rale basis, cash flow basis,- or other-basis
differe'ii't from that provided in the related Cily Indebtedness for thd payment of interest or
(10 with resped to a future delivery of general obligation bonds, notes or commercial paper
(collectively.. "General Obligation Indebtedness"), one or more of a guaranteed interest rate;
interest rate basis, cash flow basis, or purchase price (such agreements or options to enter into
such agreements being collectively referred to as "Interest Rate Exchange Agreements').
Interest Rate Exchange Agreements indude without limitation - agreements or contracts
commonly knovm as" interest rate exchange, swaps, including forward starting swaps, collar,
caps; or-derivative agreements, forward payment conversbn agreernents, interest rate locks,
forward bond purchase agreements, bond warrant agreements, or bond purchase option
agreements and also Indude agreements granting to the City or a counterparty an option to
enter into any of the foregoing and agreements or conlrads providing for payments based on
levels of. or changes in interest rates, including a change in an interest rate index, to exchange
cash flows or a series of payments, or to hedge payment, rate spread, or similar exposure. The
stated. aggregate notional amount (nel of .offsetting transactions) under all Interest Rale
Exchange Agreements related lo certain City 'Indebtedness shall not exceed the prindpal
amount of such City Indebtedness to which such Interest Rate Exchange Agreements relate.
For purposes of the immediately preceding sentence, 'offsetting transactions' shall include any
transaction which is intended to hedge, modify or otherwise affect another outstanding
transaction or its economic results. The offsetting transadion need not be based on the same
index or rate option as the related City Indebtedness or the transadion being offset and need
not be with the same counterparty as the transaction being offset. Exarhples of offsetting
Iransadloris include, without limitation, a floating-to-fixed rate interest rate swap being offset by
a fixed-to-fioating rate interest rale swap, and a fixed-to-floating rate interest rate swap being
offset by a fioating-to-fixed rale interest rate swap or an interest rate cap or floor or a
floating-to-floating interest rate swap.
Any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement to the extent practicable shall be in substantially
the form of either the 2002 ISDA Master Agreement or the Local Cunency — Single Jurisdiction

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21739

version or the Multicurrency — Cross Border version of the 1992 ISDA Master Agreement
(including a Schedule and/or a Credit Support Annex to such Schedule, if applicable) published
by the International Swaps and Derivafiyes Association. Inc. {'ISDA') or any successor form to^
eiUier published by ISDA. and in the appropriate confirmations of transactions governed by the'
applicable agreement, with such insertions, completions and modifications Ihereof as shall be
approved by the officer of the City executing Uie same, his or her execution lo constitute
conclusive evidence of the City Council's approval of such insertions, completions and
modifications thereof Should any ISDA form not be the appropriate form lo acpomplish the
objedives of the City under this Section 14. then such other agreement as may be appropriate
is hereby approved, the' execution by the Mayor or an Authorized Officer being conclusive
evidence of the City Council's approval of such insertions, completions and modifications
thereof. Amounts payable by the City under any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement shall
(i) constitute a general obligation of Uie City for which is pledged its full faith and credit, (ii) be
payable from a tax unlimited as to rale or amount that riiay have heretofore or shall be hereafter
levied byUie City Coundl (including, with respect only to an Interest Rate Exchange Agreement
relating to the Bonds, the tax levy described in Sedion 7 hereof), (iii) coristitute operating
expenses of the City payable from any monies, revenues, income, assets or funds of the City
available for such purpose, or (iv) constitute any combination of (i), (ii), and (iii); all as shall be
determined by an Authorized Officer. Nothing contained in this Section 14 shall limit or reslrid
the. authority of the Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer lo enter into similar agreements pursuant to
prior br subsequent authorization of the City Council.The Mayor and an Authorized Officer are hereby authorized to take all adions necessary
lo assign, terminate, amend or modify all or a portion of any Interest Rale Exchange Agreement
upon a determination lhat such assignment, termination, amendment. or modification is in the
best financial interest of the City. Any settlement, breakage or tenmination amount payable as a
result of such assignment, temriination. amendment or modification may be paid from-proceeds
of sale.'of the Bonds or General Obligatiori Indebtedness or from any lawfully, available funds of
the Cily.
• Any amounts received by the City pursuant to any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement
(other than regularly scheduled payrnent amounts) are hereby authorized to be expended for
any purpose for which the proceeds of the related City Indebtedness are authorized lo be
expended and for the payment or prepayment of any City Indebtedness, all as detemiined by an
Authorized Officer.
In addition to the foregoing, the Mayor and an Authorized Officer are hereby authorized
to take all actions necessary lo assign, terminate, amend or modify all or a portion of any
agreement of the type described herein as an Interest Rate Exchange Agreement wilh respect
to any Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness upon a determination that such assignment,
termination, amendment or modification is in the best financial interest of the City. /\ny
settlement, breakage or termination amount payable as a result of such assignment,
termination, amendment or modification may be paid from the sources provided for the payment
of such agreements in the proceedings authorizing the Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness to
which such agreements relate or from any olher lawfully available funds of the City.

 21740

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

Section 15. The taxes levied for the years from and afler 2011 for the payment of the
Outstanding Indebtedness or amounts due under any Existing Interest Rate Exchange
Agreement, to the extent the collection of such taxes is nol necessary for the payment of all or a
portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof or for the payment of
• amounts due under an Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreement due to the termination of
such Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreement as authorized herein or pursuant to any other
authorization, may. at the diredion of an Aulhorized Officer, be applied (A) as sel forth in the
next paragraph or (B) to any olher lawful public purpose of the City designated by the Cily
Council induding (i) the purposes set forth in clauses (i). (ii). (iii) and (iv) of Uie first paragraph of.
-Section 7 of this Ordinance, (ii) the payment of the costs of any capital projects for which funds
have been lawfully appropriated or (iii) the abatement of such taxes. There shall be prepared b y '
an Authorized Officer and filed with the Couniy Clerks. a certificaie of reduction of taxes
heretofore levied for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness seleded for refunding by ah
Aulhorized Officer as provided iri Sections 12 and 13 hereof and direding the abatement of the
taxes heretofore levied to pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being refunded, including the taxes
levied for the years from and after 2012. if so determined by an Authorized Officer as provided
in the. preceding sentence.\ In addition, any proceeds of the Outstanding Indebtedness being
held for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness, to the extent such proceeds are not
necessary for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness due lo the refunding thereof as
aulhorized herein or pursuam to any other authorization, may. at the direction of an Aulhorized
Officer, be applied to any lawful public purpose of the City designated by the City Council,
induding the payment of Uie Bonds (but in the case of Bonds the interest on which is excluded
from gross income for federal income lax purposes, only upon receipt by the City of an opinion
. of Bond Counsel lo the effed lhat such will not adversely affect the tax-exempt status oil t h e '
Bonds).'
Furthermore, notwithstanding any other provision hereof, taxes levied for the years 2011
lo 2013, indusive, for the payment of Outstanding Indebtedness, to the extent the collection of
such taxes is not necessary for the payment of all or a portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness
due to the refunding thereof with the proceeds of the Bonds may. in addition to tiie other
purposes set forth above, be applied to the payment of the principal of and interest due on
general'obligation commerdal paper notes diie.on or before January 3 1 , 2016. at the diredion
of an Authorized Officer. Any directions or determinations by an Aulhorized Officer pursuant to
this' paragraph shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than the dale a levy is applied lo the
payment of commercial paper as provided herein.
Section 16. The City covenants lhat it will take no action in the investment of the
proceeds of the Bonds (olher than Bonds issued as bonds the interest on which is not
• excludable from the gross income of the ovmer thereof for federal income tax purposes) which
would result in making the interest payable on any of such Bonds subjed to federal income
taxes by reason of such Bonds being classified as "arbitrage bonds' within the meaning of
Sedion 148 of the Code.
The City further covenants that it will a d with respect to the proceeds of Bonds (olher
than Bonds issued as bonds the interest on which is not excludable from the gross income of
the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes), the earnings on the proceeds of such Bonds

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21741

and any other moneys on deposit in any fund or account maintained in respect of such Bonds,
including, if necessary, a rebate of such eamings to the United Slates of America, in a manner
which would cause the interest on such Bonds lo continue to be exempt from federal income
taxation under Section 103(a) of the Code.
Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute such certiticalions, tax returns,
covenants and agreements as shall be necessary, in the opinion of nationally recognized bond
counsel, or in the best interest of the Cily. as determined by an Authorized Officer, to evidence
the City's cbmpliance with the covenants contained in this sedion. Each Authorized Officer is
hereby authorized to execute one or more declarations of intent lo reimburse costs of the
Projed in accordance vnlh Ihe Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder.
Section 17. This Ordinance is prepared in accordance with the powers of Uie City as a
home rule unit under Article Vll of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. The appropriate officers of the
City are hereby authorized to take such actions and do such things as shall be necessary to
. perform, carry out. give effect to and consummate the transactions contemplated by this
Ordinance and the Bonds, induding. but nol limited to, the exercise following the delivery date
of any of the Bonds of any power or auUiority delegated Id sudi offidal of the Cily under this'
Ordinance with resped to the Bonds upon the initial issuance thereof, but subject to any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth, and any actions
heretofore taken by such officers of the City in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby ratified and approved,
Section 18. The Mayor and each Authorized Officer may each designate another lo act
as their respedive proxy and, as applicable, to affix their respedive-signatures lo ttie Bonds
whether in temporary or definitive form, and any other instmriient. certificate or document
required to ITO signed by the Mayor or .'ari Autiiorized Officer pursuant to this Ordinanceand any
instrument; certificate or document required thereby. In such case, each shall.send to the City
Councii'written notice ofthe person so designated by each, such notice stating the name of the
'person so seleded and identifying the instruments, certificates and documents which such
person shall be aulhorized lo sign as proxy for the Mayor and each Authorized Officer,
respectively. .A written signature of the Mayor or of an Authorized Officer, respectively,
executed by the person so designated underneath, shall tie attached to each notice. Each
notice, vnth the signatures attached, shall be recorded in the Joumal of Proceedings of the. Cily
Council for such date and filed in the office of the City Cleri<. When the signature of the Mayor
is placed on an instrument, certificaie or document at the diredion of the Mayor in the specified
manner, the same, in all respecls. shall be .as binding on the City as if signed by the Mayor in
person. When the signature of an Authorized Officer is so affixed to an instrument, certificate or
document at the diredion of such Authorized Officer, the same, in all respeds. shall be as
binding on the Cily as if signed by such Authorized Officer in person.
Section 19.
If requested by Uie Bond Registrar, the Mayor, each Authorized Officer arid
the City Clerk are each authorized to execute the standard forrh of agreement between the Cily
and the Bond Registrar with resped to the obligations and duties tiiereof

 21742

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

Section 20. If payment or provision for payment is made, lo or for the registered
owners of all or a portion of Ihe Bonds, of the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital
Appreciation Bond and the principal of and interest due and to becorfie due on any Current
Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond at the times and in the manner stipulated therein, and there
is paid or caused to be paid to the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax
Escrow Agent as provided in Sedion 9 hereof or such bank or tmst company as shall be
designated by an AuUiorized Officer (such bank or trust company hereinafter referred to as a
"Defeasance Escrow Agent), all sums of money due and lo become due according to the
provisions hereof, then Uiese presents and the estate and rights hereby granted shall cease.,
terminate and be void as to those Bonds or portions Ihereof except for purposes of registration,
transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such.payment from such moneys or obligations. Any
Bond shall be deemed lo be paid within the meaning of Uiis sedion when payment of-the
Compound-Accreted Value of any such Capital Appreciation Bdnd or Ihe principal of any such
Current Interest Bond, plus interest thereon to the due date thereof (whether such due date be
by reason of maturity or upon redemption as provided in this Ordinance or otherwise), either
(a) shall have been miade or caused to have been made iri accordance with the terms thereof,
or (b) shall'have been provided for by irrevocably depositing with the applicable Bond Registrar,
the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent as provided in Section 9 hereof or a Defeasance
Escrow Agent, in trust and exdusively for such payment, (1) moneys sufficient to make such
payment or (2)(A) dired obligations of the United States of America; (B) obligations of agencies
of the United States of America. Ihe timely payment of principal of and interest on which are
guaranteed by the United Stales of America; (C) ol)ligalions of Uie following agencies: Federal
Home Loan Mortgage" Corp. (FHLMC) debt obligations, Farm Credit System (formeriy: Federal
Land. Banks, Federal Intermediate Credit Banks, and Banks for Cooperatives) debt obligations.
Federal Home Loan Banks (FHL Banks) debt obligations. Fannie Mae debt'Obligations,
Financing Corp. (FICO) debt obligations. Resolution Funding Corp. (REFCORP) debt
obligations, and U.S. Agency for International Development (U.S. A.I.D.) Guaranteed notes;
(D) pre-refunded municipal obligations defined as follows: any bonds or other obligations of any
state' of Oie United States of America or of any agency, instrumentality or local governmental
unit of any-such stale which are nol callable at the option of the obligor prior to maturity or as lo
. which irrevocable instructions have been given by the obligor to call on the date spedfied in the
notice; or (E) instiuments evidencing an ownership interest in obligations described in the
preceding clauses (A), (B) and (C). or (3) a combination of the investments descritjed in
clauses (1) and (2) above, such amounts so deposited being available or maturing as to
principal and interest in such amounts and at Such times, without consideration of any
reinvestment thereof, as will insure the availability of suffident moneys to make such payment
(all as confirmed by a nationally recognized firm of independent public accountants). At such
times as a Bond shall be deemed lo be paid hereunder, as aforesaid, i l shall no longer be
secured by or enlitted to the benefits of this Ordinance, except for the purposes of registration,
transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations.
No such deposit under Ihis section shall be made or accepted hereunder and no use
made of any such deposit unless, in the case of Bonds (other than Bonds issued as bonds the
interest on which is nol excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal
income lax purposes), the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Agent or the applicable Defeasance Escrow Agent, as the case may be. shall have received an

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21743

opinion of nationally recognized municipal bond counsel to the effed lhat such deposit and use
would not cause any of such Bonds to be treated as 'arbitrage bonds' within the meaning of
Section 148 of the Code or any successor provision thereto.
Nothing in Ihis Ordinance shall prohibit a defeasance deposit of escrow securities as
provided in Uils section or a defeasance deposit with respect to the Outstanding Indebtedness
pursuant to any Refunding Escrow Agreement authorized by Section 13(b) hereof, from being
subjed lo a subsequent sale of such escrow securities and reinvestment of all or a portion of
the proceeds of that sale in escrow securities which, together wilh money to remain so held in
tiusl. shall be sufficient to provide for payment of principal, redemption premium. If any, and
interest on any of the defeased Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness, as appropriate. Amounts
held by the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, any
Defeasance Escrow Agent or any Refunding Escrow Agent in excess of the amounts needed so
• to'provide for payment of the defeased Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness, as. appropriate.
. rfiay be subjed to withdrawal by the City. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer iis hereby
aulhorized to execute and deliver from time to time one or more agreements (and amendments
thereto) witii'counterparties selected by an Aulhorized Officer, with respect to the investment
and use bf such excess amounts held by the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad
Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, a Defeasance Escrow Agent or a Refunding. Escrow Agent.
Section 21.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, the terms and
provisions of the trust indenture securing a series of Variable Rate Bonds as-authorized in
Sedion 2 hereof with respect lo (a) the authentication, registration, transfer and desb-uction or
loss of such Variable Rale Bonds, (b) subjed lo the limitation on redemption price set forth in
Section 3(d) hereof, the redemption of such Variable Rale Bonds, or (c) the method.of payment
or defeasance of such Variable Rate Bonds, shall apply to such Variable Rale Bonds issued
pursuant lo this Ordinance. Wilh resped to the'Direct Purchase Bonds, an-'AuUiorized Officer is
authorized to negotiate the terms and provisions of such Dired Purchase Bonds in addition, to or
as an alternative to the terms and provisions of the trust indenture securing a series'of Variable
Rate Bonds.
Section 22. Any series of the Bonds, the Outstanding Indebtedness or the Outstanding
Revenue Indebtedness may be resUudured in a riianner authorized by the Mayor or an
-Authorized Officer, including but not limited to (a) terminating credit enhancement or liquidity
facilities for. a series of Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstartding Revenue
Indebtedness, (b) replacing credit enhancemenl or liquidity facilities for a series of Bonds.
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness wilh similar credit
enhancement or liquidity from a different provider, (c) replacing credit enhancement or'liquidity
facilities for a series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness with different forms of credit enhancement or liquidity from the same or a different
provider, (d) adding additional credit enhancement or liquidity supplemental to that securing a
series ot Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness,
(e) removing or amending provisions for a series of Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness, or in financing documents related thereto, lo or for the
benefit of credit enhancers or liquidity providers or adding provisions for Ihe benefit of new or
replacement credit enhancers or liquidity providers, (f) replacing an existing remarketing agent

 21744

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

or remarketing agenls for Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness with a remariteting agent or remarketing agisnts selected by an Authorized Officer
or assigning an existing remarlteting agreement to a remarketing agent or remarketing agenls
selected by an Authorized Officer, (g) converting to or adding a different interest rate mode or
modes under the documents pursuant to which such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness were issued, (h) adding a floating rate note (FRN) mode lo
any document pursuant to which such Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding
Revenue Indebtedness.were issued or refunding such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness using an FRN slrudure. or (i) selling or remarketing
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Iridebtedness pursuant lo a dired purchase
arrangement lo one or more purchasers seleded by an Aulhorized Officer either at par or with a
discount or premium, subjed lo any limitations or restrictions with respect lo such actions being
taken contained in this Ordinance with respect to the Bonds or an ordinance pursuant to which
such Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued, but.
provided, that if determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary to achieve Uie financial
interests.of the City, such limitations or restridions contained in an ordinance pursuant to which
such Outstanding Indebtedness, or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued may be
exceeded; but not in excess of the comparable fimitations set forth in this Ordinance. The
Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into any amendments to or
restatements of existing documents or to execute new documenls, to consent to actions being
taken by others or lo obtain the consent of other parties, and to cause to be prepared such
remarketing documenls, including disclosure documents, as may be necessary or desirable to
effed any such debt restruduring and facilitate the remarketing of the Bonds, Outstanding
Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness, and to pay the fees, costs arid expenses
relating thereto, as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer executing the same delemiines is
necessary and desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or an Authorized Officer, to
evidence the City Council's approval of all such ameridments.
Section 23. Any funds heretofore or hereafter received by the City, pursuant to any
Interest Rate Exchange Agreement and in connedion with Outstanding Indebtedness, are
hereby authorized to be expended for the payment or prepayment of any City Indebtedness;
provided however, notwithstanding the foregoing, such authorization shall nol apply to any
funds the expenditure of which shall have been heretofore authorized by other applicable law.
Section 24.
For purposes of Treasury Regulation Section 1.150-2, the City Council
hereby states its intent lo finance, or to reimburse the City for the. payment of the costs
described in Exhibit A attached hereto by the issuance of tax-exempt obligations in an amount
nol to exceed $200,000,000. No funds from sources other than such obligations are. or are
expected to be. reserved or allocated, or otherwise set aside, for the payment of such costs,
except as permitted by the Code. This declaration is consistent wilh the budgetary practices of
the City.
Section 25.
read as follows:

A. Section 3 of tiie 2002 Ordinance is hereby amended in its entirety to

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF C O M M I T T E E S

21745

Section 3.. Maximum Amount and Term. Without further authorization of this City
Council, the maximum aggregate principal amount of all Authorized Debt outstanding
under this ordinance at any'time shall not exceed Five Hundred Million Dollars
($500,000,000) (exdusive of unpaid interest and fees). All Authorized Debt shall mature
on or prior to January 1, 2030.
B.

Section 18 of the 2002 Ordinance is hereby amended in its entirely lo read

as follows:
Section 18. The Line of Credit Program, (a) The Mayor or the City's Chief
Financial Officer or Uie City Comptroller (the Chief Financiat Officer and the City
Comptroller each being hereinafter referred lo as an "Authorized Officer") is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver one (1) or more line of credit agreements (each, a
"Line of Credit Agreement") with one (1) or more commercial banks qnd other finandal
institutions and in the form customarily used lo provide governmental trarrowers with a
revolving line of credit to meet their need for working, capital or interim financing for
capital projects and with such terms and provisions as an Authorized Officer shall
determine to be in the best interest of the City. The Cily Clerk is authorized lo attest the
same and affix thereto the corporate seal of Uie City or a facsimile thereof, the execution
and delivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Coundl's approval of
each such Line of Credit Agreement.
(b) To evidence bonowings under each Line of Credit Agreement, the Cily is
authorized to issue from time to time one (1) or more Line of Credit'Notes, each lo be
designated "Line of Credit Note". Each Line of Credit Note shall bear interest from its
dale al a rate or rales not in excess of eighteen percent (18%) per annum.' As
determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of issuance of each-Line of Credit Note,
the Une of Credit Notes may be issued as notes the interest on which is either indudible
or excludable from gross income for federal income tax purposes under Section 103 of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code").
(c) The Line of Credit Notes shall be executed on behalf of the City with the
manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor of the City, and shall be attested wilh the
manual or facsimile signature of the City Cleric of the City, and shall have impressed or
imprinted thereon the official seal of the Cily (or a facsimile thereoO- In case any officer
. of the City whose signature or facsimile signature shall appear on the Line of Credit
Notes shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such Line of Credit Notes,
such signature or facsimile signature thereof shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for
all purposes the same as if such officer had remained in office until delivery.
(d) Subjed to the limitations contained in this ordinance, authority is hereby
delegated to the Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer to detemiine (i) the aggregate principal
amount of each Line of Credit Note to be issued, (ii) the dale or dates thereof, (iii) the
maturities thereof, (iv) the rate or rates of interest payable thereon or the method for
detenmining such rate or rates, and (v) the one (1) or more commercial banks and other
financial institutions to provide the credit under each Line of Credit Agreement.

 21746

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(e) To evidence the exercise of the authority delegated to the Mayor or an
Authorized Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or an Authorized Officer, as the case
may be, is hereby directed to execute and file wilh the City Cleri< a copy of each Line of
Credit'Agreement, each Line of Credit Note issued in connedion vvith each bonowing
under any Line of Credit Agreement, and a certificaie setting forth the determinations
made pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate shall constitute
conclusive evidence of the proper exercise by them of such authority. Upon the filing of
such Line of Credit Agreement, Line of Credit Note and. such certificate, the City Clerk
shall direct a copy of such filing to the City Council.
Section 26.
To the extent that any ordinance, resolution, rule, order or provision of the
Municipal Code, or part thereof, is in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions
of this.Ordinance shall-be controlling. If any sedion, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such sedion. paragraph, clause or provision
shall nol affed any qf Uie olher provisions of this Ordinance. No provision of the Municipal
Code or violation of any provision of the Municipal Code shall be deemed to render voidable at
the option ofthe City any document, instrument or agreement authorized hereunder or to impair
the validity of this Ordinance or the instruments authorized by this Ordinance or to impair the
rights of the owners of the Bonds to receive payment of the principal of or interest on the Bonds
or to impair the security for the Bonds; provided further that the foiegoing shall not be deemed
. to affect the availability of any other remedy or penalty for any violation of any provision of the
Municipal Code.
Section 27. This Ordinance shall be published by Ih^ City Clerk., by causing to be
printed in'spedal pamphlet form at least five copies hereof, which copies are lo be made
available in her office for public inspection and distribution lo members of the public who may
wish to avail themselves of a copy of this Ordinance.

Section 28.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption,
approval by the Mayor and publication as provided herein.

Exhibit "A" referred to in this ordinance reads as follows:

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21747

Exhibit "A".
(To Ordinance)
Section 24 Costs.

1. Public right-of-way infrastructure improvements in City neighborhoods, including street
and alley construction and improvements, lighting improvements, sidewalk improvements and
replacement, and curb and gutter repairs and replacement.
2. Infrastructure improvements to enhance the development of economic activity, including
industrial street construction and improvements, streetscaping, median landscaping,
demolition of hazardous, vacant or dilapidated buildings lhat pose a threat to public safety
and welfare, shoreline reconstruction, riverbank stabilization, residential and commercial
infrastructure redevelopment and railroad viaduct clearance improvements.
3. Transportation improvements (to City facilities and to facilities located within the Cily
limits which are owned by other governmental entities), including street resurfacing, bridge
and freight tunnel rehabilitation, traffic signal modemization, new traffic signal installation,
intersection safety improvements and transit facility improvements.
4. Grants or loans to assist not-for-profit organizations or educational or cultural
institutions, or to assist other municipal corporations, units of local government, school
districts, the State of Illinois or the United States of America.
5. Cash flow needs of the City.
6. The acquisition of personal property, including, but not limited to, computer hardware
and software, vehicles or other capital items useful or necessary for City purposes.
7. The duly authorized acquisition of improved and unimproved real property within the City
for municipal, industrial, commercial or residential purposes, or any combination thereof, and
the improvement, demolition and/or remediation of any such property.
8. Constructing, equipping, altering and repairing various municipal facilities including fire
stations, police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and other municipal facilities.
9. The enhancement of economic development within the City by making direct grants or
loans to, or deposits to funds or accounts to secure the obligations of, not-for-profit or
for-profit organizations doing business or seeking lo do business in the City.
10. The funding of (a) judgments entered against the City, (b) certain settlements or other
payments required to be made by the City as a condition lo the resolution of litigation or
threatened litigation and (c) such escrow accounts or other reserves as shall be deemed
necessary for any of said purposes.

 11. The payment of certain contributions to the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund, the
Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund, the Municipal Employees'. Officers' and Officials'
Annuity and Benefit Fund, and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and
Benefit Fund.
12. The provision of facilities, services and equipment to protect and enhance public safely,
including, but not limited to, increased costs for police andfireprotedion services, emergency
medical services, staffing at the City's emergency call center and olher City facilities, and
enhanced security measures at airports and oUier City facilities.

   

. CORPORATION COUNSEL

STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS.
COLTNTY OF COOK )

I, SUSANA A . MENDOZA, City Clerk ofthe City of Chicago in the County of Cook and State
of Illinois, DO HERF.BY CERTIFY lhat the annexed and foregoing is a true and correct copy of lhat
certain ordinance now on file in my office Authorizing Issuance of Citv of Chicago General
Obligalion Bonds, Series 2012 and Amendments to Commercial Paper Program.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was passed by Ihe City Council of the said
Cily of Chicago on fourteenth (14"'^ dav of March. 2012.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY lhat the vote on the question of the passage of the said ordinance
by the said City Council was taken by yeas and nays and recorded in the Joumal of tiie Proceedings
ofthe said City Council, and thai the result of said vote so taken was as follows, to wit:
Yeas 42

Nays Q

I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that Ihe said ordinance was delivered to the Mayor ofthe said City
of Chicago after the passage thereofby the said City Council, without delay, by the City Clerk ofthe
said City of Chicago, and that the said Mayor did approve and sign said ordinance on the
sixteenth (16""> dav of March. 2012.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the original, of which the foregoing is a true copy, is enlrusted
to my care for safekeeping, and that 1 am Ihe lawful keeper ofthe same.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my
hand and affixed the corporate seal of the City of
Chicago aforesaid, at the said City, in ihe County and
State aforesaid, this fourth (4"') day of Febniary, 2013.

SUSANA A:'MfihlDOZA. Cityi^lfei]

.. -

•--;-V^r/.v;jyisi'.^.-;:'i:^??^S>

 SUSANA A. MENDOZA
CITY CLERK'S GF^FICE-CITY OF CHICAGO

STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS.
COUNTY OF COOK )

I, SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk ofthe City of Chicago in the County of Cook and Slate
of Illinois, DO HEREBY CERTIFY lhat the annexed and foregoing is a true and correct copy of tiiat
certain ordinance now on file in my office authorizing Issuance of General Obligation and Refunding
Bonds and Associated Amendment regarding Commercial Paper Debt and Amendment of Municipal
Code Section 2-32-031 regarding Debt Management Policies.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was passed by the City Council ofthe said
City of Chicago on fifth (5'^ day of Febnian'. 2014.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the vote on the question ofthe passage ofthe said orduiance by
the said City Council was taken by yeas and nays and recorded in the Journal ofthe Proceedings of
the said City Council, and lhat the result of said vote so taken was as follows, to wit:
Yeas 44 Nays 4
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was delivered to the Mayor of the said City of
Chicago after the passage tiiereof by the said Ciry Council, widiout delay, by the City Cleric of the sai^d
City of Chicago, and tliat the said Mayor did approve and sign said ordinance on the seventh (?"*) day
of February. 2014.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the original, of which the foregoing is a true copy, is entrusted to
my care for safekeeping, and that I am the lav«^l keeper of the same.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my
hand and affixed the corporate seal of the City of
Cliicago aforesaid, at the said City, in the County and
State aforesaid, this nineteenth (19*) day of February,
2014.
[T.P..1

^( '.SANA A. MENDOZA. CiCv c f c

^

 ORDINANCE

providing for Ihe issuance of General Obligation
Bonds of the Cily of Chicago, for the levy and collection of a direct
annual lax sufficient to pay the principal of and interest on said
Bonds, for the selection and retention of one or more Qualified
Independent Representatives in conneclion with certain Interest
Rate Exchange Agreements as described herein; authorizing the
execution and delivery of certain financial security and credit
enhancement agreements in connection with existing agreements
and transactions involving City assets; and providing for the
amendment of certain provisions of the Municipal Code and
existing ordinances and financing documents, including but not
limited to the ordinance adopted by the City Council on May 1,
2002, which proposed the establishment of a commercial paper
program, an auction rate securities program, a variable rate
securities program and a line of credit program.
A N ORDINANCE

the City of Chicago (the "City") is a body politic and corporate under the laws
of the Stale of Illinois and a home rule unit under Article VII of the Illinois Constitution of 1970;
and
WHEREAS,

WHEREAS, the City has heretofore (i) authorized the issuance of its general obligation
bonds and notes (the "Authorized General Obligation Bonds and Notes'), (ii) aulhorized the
borrowing of money pursuant lo one or more line of credit agreements lo provide funds for
working capital or interim financing for capita) projects, including the Revolving Line of Credit
Agreement dated as of March 1, 2013 between the City and Bank of America. N.A. (the 'Line of
Credit Indebtedness") and (iii) established a commercial paper program authorizing the
issuance of its general obligation commercial paper notes from time to time (the "General
Obligation Commercial Paper Notes'); and
WHEREAS, (i) the Authorized General Obligation Bonds and Notes currently outstanding,
(ii)the Line of Credit Indebtedness incurred and outstanding from time to time and (Hi) the
General Obligalion Commercial Paper Notes cun'entjy or hereafter outstanding from time to lime
(collectively, the "Outstanding Indebtedness") mature and are subject to optional and mandatory
redemption as provided in the respective proceedings authorizing the Outstanding
Indebtedness; and
WHEREAS, the City has heretofore entered into Interest Rate Exchange Agreements (as
described and defined in Section 14(a) hereoO which are in existence as of the date of adoption
of this Ordinance (Ihe "E^dsting Interest Rate Exchange Agreements'); and
WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of the inhabitants of the City and necessary for the
welfare of the government and aflairs of the City to authorize (!) refunding all or a portion of the
Outstanding Indebtedness and (ii) terminating, amending or otherwise modifying all or any
portion of the Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements and paying any settlement'.

General Obligalion BonO ordinance (final)

 breakage or termination amounts that may be due and owing in conneclion therewith, in order to
achieve debt service savings for the City, restructure debt service of the Outstanding
Indebtedness or reduce, limit or manage the City's exposure lo interest rate risk (collectively,
the 'Refunding Purposes'); and
WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of Ihe inhabitants of the Cily and necessary for the
welfare of the government and affairs of the City lo finance (i> public right-of-way infrastructure
improvements in City neighborhoods, including street and alley construction and improvemenls.
lighting improvements, sidewalk improvements and replacement, and curb and gutter repairs
and replacement; (ii) infrastnjcture impfovements to enhance the developmenl of economic
activity, including industrial street construction and improvements, streetscaping, median
landscaping, demolition of hazardous, vacant or dilapidated buildings that pose a threat to
public safety and welfare, shoreline reconstruction, riverbank stabilization, residential and
commercial infrastructure redevelopment and railroad viaduct clearance improvements;
(iii) transportation improvements to City property and facilities and lo property and facilities
located within the Cily limits which are owned by other governmental entities, including street
resurfacing, bridge and freight tunnel rehabilitation, traffic signal modernization, new traffic
signal installation, intersection safety improvements and transit facility improvements; (iv) grants
or loans to assist not-for-profit organisations or educational or cultural insfilutions, or lo assist
other municipal corporations, units of local government, school districts, the State of Illinois or
the United Stales of America; (v) cash flow needs of the City; (vi) the acquisiUon of personal
property, including, but nol limited to, computer hardware and software, vehicles or other capital
items useful or necessary for Cily purposes; (vii) the duly aulhorized acquisition of improved and
unimproved real property within the City for municipal, industrial, commercial or residential
purposes, or any combination Ihereof, and the improvement, demolition and/or remediation of
any such properly; (viii) constructing, equipping, altering and repairing various municipal
facilities including fire stations, police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and other
municipal facilities; (ix) the enhancement of economic development within the City by making
direct grants or loans to. or deposits to funds or accounts to secure the obligations of,
not-for-profit or for-profit organizations doing business or seeking to do business in the City;
(x) the funding of (A) judgments entered against the City. (B) certain settlements or other
payments required to be made by the City as a condition to the resolution of litigation or
threatened litigation or arbitration and (C) such escrow accounts or olher reserves as shall be
deemed necessary for any of said purposes; (xi) the payment of certain contributions (the
"Pension Contributions') to the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago. Ihe Firemen's
Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of
Chicago and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of
Chicago (collectively, the "Pension Funds'); (xii) the provision of facilities, services and
equipment to protect and enhance public safety, including, but not limited to, increased costs for
police and fire protection services, emergency medical services, staffing at the City's emergency
call center and other City facilities, and enhanced security measures at airports and other major
City facilities; and (xiii) acquiring motor vehicles for a lerm of years or lease period (the
purposes described in clauses (i) through (xili) above being referred to herein as the "Project");
and

General ObligaLon Bonds ordinance [f\no\)

-2-

 the cost of the Refunding Purposes and the Project is estimated to be nol
less than $900,000,000 and the City expects to pay a portion of such costs by borrowing money
and issuing its general obligation bonds in one or more series and al one or more times in the
aggregate principal amount of not to exceed $900,000,000 (plus the amount of any original
issue discount as herein provided); and
WHEREAS,

WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is advisable and necessary to authorize the
borrowing of the sum necessary at this time for any or all of the purposes of (i) paying costs of
the Refunding Purposes, (ii) paying costs of the Project, including capitalizing or funding such
interest on the bonds herein aulhorized for said purpose as may be necessary, (iii) capitalizing
or funding interest on Outstanding Indebtedness and (iv) paying the expenses of issuing the
bonds herein authorized for Ihe purposes described herein, and in evidence thereof to authorize
the issuance of its General Obligation Bonds (the "Bonds'), in one or more series and at one or
more times as herein provided, such borrowing being for a proper public purpose and in the
public interest, and the City, by virtue of its constitutional home rule powers and all laws
applicable thereto, has the power lo issue such Bonds: and
WHEREAS, the Bonds may include one or more series of bonds the interest on which is,
as designated by series, either includible or excludable from gross income for federal income
lax purposes under Section 103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. as amended (the
"Code"); and
WHEREAS, the City has authorized the issuance of certain bonds, noles and commercial
paper of the City secured by and payable from a specified revenue source, including, without
limitation, airport revenues, sales tax revenues, motor fuel tax revenues, water system revenues
and sewer system revenues (such bonds and notes being hereinafter referred to as 'Revenue
Bonds and Notes" and such commercial paper being hereinafter referred to as "Revenue
Commercial Paper'); and
WHEREAS, the City has delermined that it is necessary to provide for various
restructuring amendments (i) to the Outstanding Indebtedness, (ii) to the Revenue Bonds: and
Notes currently outstanding and the Revenue Commercial. Paper currently or hereafter
outslariding from time to time (collectively, the "Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness") and (iii) to
the extent issued and outstanding from time lo time in Ihe future, the Bonds; and
WHEREAS, Title Vll of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Refonn and Consumer Protection Act
(the 'Dodd-Frank Act") addresses the regulation of swap and other derivatives transactions
such as the Interest Rate Exchange Agreements and pursuant to which Ihe Commodity Futures
Trading Commission (the "CFTC") has promulgated regulations, including new business
conduct standards (the "CFTC Regulations"), applicable lo providers of Inlerest Rate Exchange
Agreements (the 'Swap Providers"); and
WHEREAS, for purposes of the CFTC Regulations, the City is a "Special Entity,' entitled
to certain duties from the Swap Providers with whom they conduct or propose lo conduct
business; and

General Obligalion Bonds oidinance (Hnal)

-3-

 e

./
/
WHEREAS, in order to avail itself of the services of Swap Providers and other financial
advisors under the statutory and regulatory regime contained in Ihe Dodd-Frank Act and the
CFTC Regulations, whether in connection with amendments, temninations or other modifications
of Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements, the negotiation or execution of Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements as aulhorized in Section 14 hereof, or lo provide advice with respect to
financial products and debt obligations purchased, entered into and/or issued by the City; it is
necessary for the City to, among other things, (i) rely on advice from a Qualified Independent
Representative, being an independent professional having demonstrated experience in the field
of swap and other derivative transactions executed by States. State agencies, municipalities or
olher units of local govennment or political subdivisions and meeting tfie applicable qualifications
of the Dodd-Frank Act and the CFTC Regulations (a 'QtR"), (ii) approve the retention of one or
more advisors to serve as QlRs and financial advisors in accordance wilh the applicable
provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act and the CFTC Regulations and (iii) approve and authorize the
execution of agreements with QIRs and other financial advisors, including but not limited to
certain documents and agreements published by the International Swaps and Derivatives
Association. Inc. {"ISDA") as part of its Dodd-Frank Documentation Initiative to assist swap
market participants in complying with the CFTC Regulations (the 'ISDA Protocol
Documentation") and certain bilateral agreeriienls with the City's counterparties on the Existing
Interest Rate Exchange Agreements; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is advisable and necessary in furtherance of
compliance with federal securities and tax laws to adopt written policies which shall address the
management of the City's bond, note and other debt issuances, including the entering into of
Interest Rate Exchange Agreements and hiring QIRs in connection therewith; and
WHEREAS, the Cily has detennined that it is advisable and necessary, in order lo provide
Increased financial flexibility and protedion to ihe City in conneclion with existing long-term
concession agreements for City assets and exisling sale/leaseback and lease/leaseback
transactions involving City assets (each, a 'financing Transaction'), to authorize the execution
and delivery of certain financial security and credit enhancement agreements to secure payment
of amounts due from the City in connection with each such Financing Transaction and the
incurrence of general obligation indebtedness in conneclion therewith; and
WHEREAS, the City has detenmined that it is necessary to amend Section 3 of the
ordinance adopted by the City Council of the Cily of Chicago on May 1, 2002, as heretofore
amended (the "2002 Ordinance"), which authorizes the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes
Series A and Series B in an amount nol to exceed $500,000,000 and pursuant to which the City
proposed to establish a commercial paper program, an auction rale securities program, a
variable rale securities program and a line of credit program (collectively, the "Borrowing Plan');
and
WHEREAS, the Borrowing Plan authorizes the issuance of one or more series of
Aulhorized Debt (as defined in the 2002 Ordinance) for (i) ihe payment, or reimbursement of the
City for the payment, of the cost of all or any portion of any capital project approved by City
Council, (it) cash flow needs of the City, (iii) the deposit of monies into funds and accounts as

General Obligation Bonds ordinarice (finol)

-4-

 are provided for in any indenture entered into under the Borrowing Plan, and (iv) the payment of
costs of issuance incurred in connection with each series of Aulhorized Debt; and
WHEREAS, the City desires to amend Section 3 of the 2002 Ordinance in order to (i)
increase the maximum aggregate principal amount of Authorized Debt to be outstanding under
the 2002 Ordinance from $500,000,000 to $1 billion and (ii) extend the maximum maturity of
Aulhorized Debt outslanding under the 2002 Ordinance from January 1, 2030 to January 1,
2032; now, therefore.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHICAGO:

Section 1. The CWy Council of the City (the 'City Councif), after a public meeting
heretofore held on this Ordinance by the Committee on Finance of the Cily Council, pursuant to
proper notice and in accordance with the findings and recommendations of such Committee,
fiereby finds that all of the recitals contained in the preambles to this Ordinance are full, true and
correct and does incorporate them into this Ordinance by this reference.
Section 2. There shall be borrowed on the credit of and for and on behalf of the City in
one or more series and at one or more times the sum of not to exceed $900,000,000 plus, an
amount equal to Ihe amount of any net original issue discount used in the marketing of the
Bonds (not to exceed 10 percent of the principal amount of each series Ihereof) for the
purposes aforesaid; and the Bonds shall be issued from time lo lime in said aggregate principal
amount, or such lesser amount, as may be determined by the City's Chief Financial Officer or
the Cily Comptroller (each such officer being hereinafter referred to as an "Authorized Officer').
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds payable in one payment on a
fixed date {'Capital Appreciation Bonds'). Each series of Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be
dated the date of issuance thereof and shall also bear the date of authentication, shall be in fully
registered form, shall be numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar (as
hereinafter defined), and shall be in denominations equal lo the original principal amounts of
such Capital Appreciation Bonds or any integral multiple thereof, each such original priricipal
amount representing Compound Accreted Value (as hereinafter defined) at maturity (the
"Maturity Amount^ of such minimum amounts and integral multiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Capital Appreciation Bonds (but no
single Bond shall represent Compound Accreted Value maturing on more than one dale). As
used herein, the 'Compound Accreted Value" of a Capital Appreciation Bond on any date of
delenminafion shall be an amount equal to the original principal amount (or integral multiple
Ihereof) plus an investment return accrued to the date of such determination at a semiannual
conipounding rale which is necessary to produce the yield to maturity borne by such Capital
Appreciation Bond (the "yield to Matunty').
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at fixed rates
and paying interest semiannually as descnbed below (the "Current Interest Bonds'). Each
series of Current Interest Bonds shall be daled such date as shall be agreed upon by an
Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Current Interest Bonds, shall be in fully registered

Genpral Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-5-

 form, shall be in such minimum denominations and integral multiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an Aulhorized Officer and the purchasers of such Current Interest Bonds (but no single
Current Interest Bond shall represent inslallmenls of principal maturing on more than one date),
and shall be numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar.
The Bonds may be inilially issued as Capital Appreciation Bonds containing provisions
for the conversion of the Compound Accreted Value of such Bonds into Current Interest Bonds
(the "Converiible Bonds") al such time following the initial issuance as shall be approved by an
Authorized Officer. While in the form of Capital Appreciation Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shall be subject to all of the provisions and limitations Of this Ordinance relating to Capital
Appreciation Bonds, and while in the form of Current Interest Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shall be subject to all of the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance relating to Current
Interest Bonds. In particular, when Convertible Bonds are in the forni of Capital Appreciation
Bonds prior to their conversion to Current Interest Bonds, the transfer, exchange and
replacement provisions of this Ordinance with respect lo Capital Appredalion Bonds shall apply
to such Convertible Bonds; provided thai the Convertible Bonds delivered in the fonm of Capital
Appreciation Bonds in connection with any such transfer, exchange or replacement shall have
identical provisions for conversion to Current Interest Bonds as sel forth in the Convertible
Bonds being transferred, exchanged or replaced. In connection wilh the issuance and sale of
any Convertible Bonds, the tenns and provisions relating to the conversion of the Compound
Accreted Value of such Convertible Bonds into Current Interest Bonds shall be as approved by
an Aulhorized Officer al the lime of sale of such Convertible Bonds. Notwithstanding any other
provision hereof, any series of Bonds may be issued as Capital Appreciation Bonds, Current
Interest Bonds, Convertible Bonds or any combination thereof.
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest al variable rales
established by reference to such indices or otherwise and adjustable and payable from lime to
time as shall be delermined by an Authorized Officer and as agreed upon by an Aulhorized
Officer and the purchaser of the Bonds (the "Variable Rate Bonds'). Each series of Variable
Rale Bonds shall be dated such date as shall be agreed upon by an Authorized Officer and the
purchasers of such Bonds, shall be in fully registered form, shall be in such denominations as
shall be agreed upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of the Bonds (but no single
Bond shall represent installments of principal maturing on more than one date), and shall be
numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar. Each series of Variable Rate Bonds
may be issued pursuant to, and have such tenns and provisions as are sel forth in, a trust
indenture between the Cily and a bank or trusl company selected by an Aulhorized Officer. The
Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into one or more such trust
indentures on behalf of Ihe City. Each such trust indenture shall be in substantially the form of
trusl indentures previously entered into by the Cily in connecfion with the sale of general
obligation bonds or notes bearing interest al variable rates, but with such revisions in text as the
Mayor or the Authorized Officer executing the same shall delermlne are necessary or desirable,
including such revisions as shall be necessary to incorporate provisions relating to the manner
of establishing the interest rate and the payment of inlerest from time to time on the Variable
Rate Bonds, the execution thereof, and any amendment thereto, by the Mayor or such
Authorized Officer to evidence the City Councirs approval of all such revisions.

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-6-

 All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued and sold from time to time on a retail basis
lo individual investors (the "Retail Bonds') or as a direct purchase to holders (the "Direct
Purchase Bonds'). The Retail Bonds and the Direct Purchase Bonds shall be sold as provided
in Section 12 hereof
The principal of the Bonds of each series shall become due and payable on or before
the eariier of (i) January 1, 2056, or (ii) 40 years after the date of issuance thereof. Each series
of Current Interest Bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates and each series of Capital
Appreciation Bonds shall have Yields to Maturity not to exceed 15 percent per annum. Each
series of Variable Rate Bonds shall bear interest from time to time at such rates determined by
such remarketing or other Indexing agent as shall be selected by an Authorized Officer for that
purpose or as provided in the related trust indenture referred to above not to exceed 15 percent
per annum. Any portion of the Bonds may be issued as bonds the interest on which is not
excludable from the gross income of the owner Ihereof for federal income tax purposes if
determined by an Authorized Officer to be beneficial to the City.
Each Capital Appreciation Bond shall accrue interest from its date at the rate per annum
compounded semiannually on each January 1 and July 1, commencing on such January 1 or
July 1 as delermined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Capital Appreciation
Bonds, which will produce the Yield to Maturity identified therein until the maturity date thereof.
Interest on the Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be payable only at the respective maturity dates
thereof.
Each Current Interest Bond shall bear interest from the later of its date or the most
recent inlerest payment date lo which interest has been paid or duly provided for, unlil the
principal amount of such Bond is paid, such interest (computed upon the basis of a 360-day
period of twelve 30-day months) being payable on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
commencing on such January 1 or July 1 as shall be delermined by an Aulhorized Officer at the
time of the sale of each series of Current Interest Bonds. Interest on each Current Inlerest
Bond shall be paid to the person in whose name such Bond is registered at the close of
business on the 15th day of the month next preceding the interest payment date, by check or
draft of the applicable Bond Registrar, or, at the option of any registered owner of $1,000,000 or
more in aggregate principal amount of Current Interest Bonds of a series, by wire transfer of
immediately available funds to such bank in the continental United States of America as the
registered owner of such Bonds shall request in writing to the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each series of Variable Rale Bonds shall bear interest (computed from time to time al
such rates and on such basis as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer or al the time of
sale of such series of Variable Rale Bonds) payable on such dates as shall be determined by an
Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rale Bonds. Any Variable Rale Bonds
may be made subject to optional or mandatory tender for purchase by the owners thereof at
such limes and at such prices (nol to exceed 105 percent of the principal amount thereoQ as
shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds. In
conneclion with Ihe remarketing of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series so tendered for
purchase under the terms and conditions so specified by an Authorized Officer, the Mayor and

General OtJligahori Bonds ordinance (final)

-7-

 each Authorized Officer are hereby authorized to execute on behalf of the City a remarketing
agreement, and any amendment thereto, with respect to such series of Variable Rate Bonds in
substantially the form previously used for variable rate financings of the City with appropriate
revisions to reflect Ihe terms and provisions of such Bonds sold as Variable Rate Bonds and
such other revisions in text as an Authorized Officer shall determine are necessary or desirable
in conneclion with the sale of such Bonds as Variable Rate Bonds. The annual fee paid to any
remarketing agent serving in such capacity pursuant lo any such remarketing agreement with
respect lo a series of Variable Rale Bonds shall nol exceed one-quarter of one percent (0.25%)
of the average principal amount of such Variable Rate Bonds of such series outstanding during
such annual period.
The Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appreciation Bonds, the principal of the
Current Jnterest Bonds and the Variable Rate Bonds and any redemption premium shall be
payable in lawful money of Ihe United States of America upon presentation and surrender
thereof at the designated corporate trust office of the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each of the Bonds shall be designated "General Obligation Bonds, Series
," with
such additions, modifications or revisions as shall be determined to be necessary by an
Authorized Officer at the time of the sale of such Bonds to reflect the calendar year of issuance
of the Bonds, Ihe order of sale of the Bonds, the specific series of the Bonds, whether the
Bonds are being issued on a taxable basis, whether the Bonds are Capital Appreciation Bonds,
Current Interest Bonds. Convertible Bonds. Variable Rate Bonds. Retail Bonds or Direct
Purchase Bonds, whether the Bonds are being issued and sold for the purpose of paying costs
of the Refunding Purposes, paying costs of the Project or a combination thereof and any olher
aulhorized features of the Bonds determined by an Aulhorized Officer as desirable lo be
reflected in the title of the Bonds being issued and sold.
The seal of the City or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed to or printed on each of the
Bonds, and the Bonds shall be executed by Ihe manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor and
attested by the manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk, and in case any officer whose
signature shall appear on any Bond shall cease to be such officer before Ihe delivery of such
Bond, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all proposes, the same as if
such officer had remained in office unlil delivery. As used in this Ordinance, "City Clerk" shall
mean the duly qualified and acting City Clerk of the City or any Deputy City Clerk or other
person lhat may lawfully lake a specific action or perform a specific duty prescribed for the Cily
Clerk pursuant to this Ordinance.
All Bonds shall have thereon a certificate of authentication substantially in the form
hereinafter set forth duly executed by the applicable Bond Registrar as authenlicating agent of
the City and showing the date of authentication. No Bond shall be valid or obligatory for any
purpose or be entitled to any security or benefit under this Ordinance unless and until such
certificate of authentication shall have been duly executed by the applicable Bond Registrar by
manual signature, and such certificate of authentication upon any such Bond shall be conclusive
evidence that such Bond has been authenticated and delivered under this Ordinance. The
certificate of authentication on any Bond shall be deemed to have been executed by the

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (fmjil)

 applicable Bond Registrar if signed by an authorized officer of such Bond Registrar, but il shall
not be necessary that the same officer sign the certificate of aulhenlication on all of the Bonds
issued hereunder.
Section 3.
(a) Registration and Transfer. The City shall cause books (the "Bond
Register") for the registration and for the transfer of each series of Bonds as provided in this
Ordinance to be kept at the designated corporate trust office of a bank or trust company
designated by an Authorized Officer (the 'Bond Registrar'), as the registrar for the City in
connection with such series of Bonds. The City is authorized to prepare multiple Bond blanks
executed by the City for use in Ihe transfer and exchange of Bonds,
Upon surrender for transfer of any Bond at the designated corporate trust office of the
applicable Bond Registrar, duly endorsed by, or accompanied by a written instrument or
instruments of transfer in form satisfactory lo such Bond Registrar and duly executed by the
registered owner or its attorney duly aulhorized in writing, the City shall execute and such Bond
Registrar shall authenticate, date and deliver in the name ofthe transferee or transferees (a) in
the case of any Capital Appreciation Bond, a new fully registered Capital Appreciation Bond or
Bonds of the same series, maturity and yield lo maturity of authorized denominations, for a like
aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same series,
maturity and yield to maturity of olher authorized denominations, or (b) in the case of any other
Bonds, one or more fully registered Bonds of the same series, type (Current Interest Bonds or
Variable Rate Bonds), interest rate (or in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of interest
rale determination) and maturity of authorized denominations, for a like principal amount. Any
Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds may be exchanged at said office of the applicable Bond
Registrar for a like aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of
the same series, maturity and yield lo maturity of olher authorized denominations. Any other
Bond or Bonds may be exchanged at said office of the applicable Bond Registrar for a like
aggregate principal amount of Bonds of the same series, type, interest rate and maturity of other
authorized denominations. The execution by the City of any fully registered Bond shall
constitute full and due authorization of such Bond, and the applicable Bond Registrar shall
thereby be authorized to authenticate, date and deliver such Bond; provided that (a) Ihe
aggregate original principal amount of outstanding Capital Appreciation Bonds of each series,
maturity and yield to maturity authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall not exceed
the aulhorized aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bonds of such series
and maturity less previous retirements and (b) the principal amount of Current Inlerest Bonds or
Variable Rate Bonds of each series, maturity and interest rate (or interest rate determination
method) authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall nol exceed the aulhorized
principal amount of Currenl Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds for such series, maturity and
interest rate (or interest rate determination method) less previous retirements.
The applicable Bond Registrar shall nol be required lo transfer or exchange (a) any
Bond after notice calling such Bond for redernplion has been mailed, or (b) any Bond during a
period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a nolice of redemption of such Bond; provided,
however, that provisions relating lo the transfer or exchange of Variable Rate Bonds of a series
shall be as delermined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale Ihereof and may be set

Geinvial Obligalion Bonds oulinaiiuL.- (riirjl)

-9-

 forth in the trust indenture securing such series of Variable Rate Bonds as aulhorized in
Section 2 hereof.
The person in whose name any Bond shall be registered shall be deemed and regarded
as the absolute owner thereof for all purposes, and payment of the Compound Accreted Value
of, principal of. redemption premium, if any. or interest on any Bond, as appropriate, shall be
made only to or upon the order of Ihe registered owner thereof or its legal representalive. All
such payments shall be valid and effectual lo satisfy and discharge the liability upon such Bond
to Ihe extent of the sum or sums so paid.
No service charge shall be made for any transfer or exchange of Bonds, but the City or
the applicable Bond Registrar may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other
govemmental charge that may be imposed in connection with any transfer or exchange of
Bonds, except thai no such payment may be required in the case of the issuance of a Bond or
Bonds for the unredeemed portion of a Bond sun'endered for redemption.
(b)
Book-Entry Only System. If so determined and directed by an Aulhorized Officer in
connection with the sale of any of the Bonds, such Bonds may be issued in book-entry only
form, in connection with the issuance of Bonds in book-enlry only fonn. an Aulhorized Officer is
authorized to execute and deliver to Ihe book-entry depository selected by such Authorized
Officer such depository's standard form of representation letter. If any of the Bonds are
registered in the name of a securities depository which uses a book-entry system, the standing
of the beneficial owner to enforce any of the covenants herein may be established through the
books and records of such securities depository or a participant therein.
(c)
Bonds Lost, Destroyed, etc. If any Bond, whether in temporary or definitive form, is
lost (whether by reason of theft or otherwise), destroyed (whether by mutilation, damage, in
whole or in part, or otherwise) or improperly cancelled, the applicable Bond Registrar may
authenticate a new Bond of like series, date, maturity dale, interest rate (or, in the case of
Capital Appreciation Bonds, yield lo maturity, and in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of
inlerest rate determination), denomination and original principal amount (in the case of Capital
Appreciation Bonds) or principal amount (in the case of other Bonds) and bearing a number not
contemporaneously outstanding; provided that (i) in the case of any mutilated Bond, such
mutilated Bond shall first be surrendered to the applicable Bond Registrar, and (ii) in the case of
any lost Bond or Bond destroyed in whole, Ihere shall be first furnished lo the applicable Bond
Registrar evidence of such loss or destruction, together with indemnircation of the City and
such Bond Registrar, satisfactory to such Bond Registrar. If any lost, destroyed or improperiy
cancelled Bond shall have matured or is about to mature, or has been called for redemption,
instead of issuing a duplicate Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar shall pay the same without
surrender thereof if there shall be firsl furnished to such Bond Registrar evidence of such loss,
destruction or cancellation, together wilh indemnity, satisfactory to it. Upon the issuance of any
substitute Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar may require the payment of a sum sufficieni to
cover any tax or other governmental charge that may be imposed in relation (hereto

General Obligation Bends ordinance (final)

-10-

 (d) Redemption and Repurchase. The Bonds may be made subject to redemption
prior to maturity at the option of the Cily, in whole or in part on any date, at such times and at
such redemption prices (to be expressed as a percentage of the principal amount of Current
Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds being redeemed or as a formula as described below and
expressed as a percentage of the Compound Accreted Value of Capital Appreciation Bonds to
be redeemed or as a formula as described below) not to exceed 105 percent, plus, in (he case
of Current Interest Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, accrued interest to the date of redemption,
as delermined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale thereof
Notwithstanding the foregoing, such 105 percent limitation on the redemption price of
Bonds shad nol apply where the redemption price is based upon a formula designed to
compensate the owner of the Bonds lo be redeemed based upon prevailing market conditions
on the dale fixed for redemption, commonly known as a "make-whole'' redemption price (the
"Make-Whole Redemption Price'). Al the time of sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer shall
determine the provisions of the formula to be used lo establish any Make-Whole Redemption
Price, which may vary depending on whether the Bonds are issued on a taxable or tax-exempt
basis. An Aulhorized Officer shall confirm and transmit the applicable Make-Whole Redemption
Price on such dates and lo such parties as shall be necessary to etfecluate such redemption.
If fewer than all of the outstanding Bonds of a series are lo be optionally redeemed, the
Bonds lo be called shall be called from such maturities and interest rates of such series as may
be delermined by an Authorized Officer,
Certain of the Bonds of a series may be made subject to mandatory redemption, at par
and accrued interest lo the date fixed for redemption, as delermined by an Aulhorized Officer at
the lime of the sale thereof
An Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell (al a price determined by such
Authorized Officer to be in the best interests of the City) or waive any right the City may have to
call any of the Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness for optional redemption, in whole or in part,
and is hereby further aulhorized to expend the proceeds of any such sales for any purpose for
which the proceeds of Ihe Bonds are authorized to be expended and for the payment or
prepayment of any City debt obligations whether issued before or after the date of adoption of
this Ordinance, all as determined by an Authorized Officer; provided however, to the extent that
interest on such Bonds or Outslanding Indebtedness is excluded from gross income for federal
income tax purposes, such expenditures shall not adversely affect such exclusion. If
determined lo be necessary or appropriate, an Authorized Officer is authorized to solicit the
consent of holders of outstanding Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness to any such sale or
waiver.
Retail Bonds may be made subject to repurchase by the City upon the demand of
certain holders Ihereof at a price ot nol to exceed 105 percent of par, as more fully described in
Section 12 hereof.

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)
-11-

 At the time of sale of Bonds of a series, an Aulhorized Officer is authorized to determine
the manner of redeeming such Bonds, either by lot in the manner hereinafter provided or
pro-rata in the manner detenmined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale, in the event less
than all of the Bonds of Ihe same series, maturity and interest rate are to be redeemed.
The Current Interest Bonds shall be redeemed only in amounts equal to the respective
minimum authorized denominations and integral multiples thereof and the Capital Appreciation
Bonds shall be redeemed only in amounts representing the respective minimum authorized
Maturity Amounts and integral multiples thereof In the event of the redemption of fewer than all
the Bonds of the same series, maturity and interest rate by lot, the aggregate principal amount
or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) thereof lo be redeemed shall be the minimum authorized
denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for such series or an Integral multiple thereof,
and the applicable Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of such series, maturity and
interest rate, a distinctive number for each minimum aulhorized denomination or Maturity
Amount (as appropriate) of such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as
many numbers as, al such minimum aulhorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) for each number, shall equal the principal amount or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of such Bonds to be redeemed. In such case, the Bonds lo be redeemed shall be
those to which were assigned numbers so selected; provided that only so much of Ihe principal
amount or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall equal
such minimum aulhorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for each number
assigned lo i l and so selected. In the event of tbe redemption of fewer than all Bonds of the
same series, maturity and interest rate on a pro-rata basis, if the Bonds are held in book-entry
form at Ihe time of redemption, at the lime of sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is
authorized to direct the Bond Registrar to instruct the book-entry depository to select the
specific Bonds within such maturity and interest rate for redemption pro-rata among such
Bonds. The Cily shall have no responsibility or obligation to ensure that the book-entry
depository properly selects such Bonds for redemption.
The Cily shall, at least 45 days prior to any optional redemption dale (unless a shorter
time period shall be satisfactory to the applicable Bond Registrar), notify the applicable Bond
Registrar of such redemption dale and of the principal amount or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of Bonds of such series to be redeemed.
in connection wilh any mandatory redemption of Bonds of a series as authorized above,
the principal amounts of Bonds (or the Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appreciation
Bonds) of such series to be mandatorily redeemed in each year may be reduced through the
eariier optional redemption thereof, with any partial optional redemptions of such Bonds of such
series credited against future mandatory redemption requirements in such order of the
mandatory redemption dales as an Aulhorized Officer may determine. In addition, on or prior to
the 60lh day preceding any mandatory redemption dale of Bonds of a series, the applicable
Bond Registrar may, and if directed by an Authorized Officer shall, purchase Bonds of such
series required to be retired on such mandatory redemption date at such prices as an
Authorized Officer shall detennine. Any such Bonds so purchased shall be cancelled and the
principal amount (or Compound Accreted Value, as appropriate) thereof shall be credited

General Obligalion Sonde ordinance (finji)

-12-

 against the payment required on such next mandatory redemption dale with respect to such
series of Bonds.
The applicable Bond Registrar shall promptly notify Ihe City in writing of the Bonds, or
portions thereof, selected for redemption and, in the case of any Bond selected for partial
redemption, Ihe principal amount, Compound Accreted Value or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) thereof, and the interest rale thereof to be redeemed.
Subject lo the limitation on redemption price set forth above, in the case of redemption of
any Variable Rale Bonds, the terms of such redemption shall be detennined by an Authorized
Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds and may be set forth in the trust
indenture securing such Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof
Section 4. Except as may otherwise be determined as provided below for Variable
Rate Bonds, unless waived by any owner of Bonds to be redeemed, nolice of ihe call for any
such redemption shall be given by the applicable Bond Registrar on behalf of the City by mailing
the redemption notice by first class mail al least 30 days and nol more than 60 days prior to the
date fixed for redemption to the registered owner of the Bond or Bonds to be redeemed at the
address shown on the applicable Bond Register or at such other address as is fumished in
writing by such registered owner lo such Bond Registrar, but the failure lo mail any such notice
or any defect therein as to any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the
redemption of any other Bond. Any nolice of redemption mailed as provided in this Section
shall be conclusively presumed lo have been given whether or not actually received by the
addressee. In the case of redemption of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series, the time and
manner of giving such nolice shall be delermined by an Authorized Officer al the time of sale of
such Variable Rate Bonds and may be set forth in the trust indenture securing such Variable
Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof
All notices of redemption shall stale:
(1)

the series designation of the Bonds to be redeemed.

(2)

the redemption date.

(3)
the redemption price, or in Ihe case of a redemption of Bonds al a
Make-Whole Redemption Price, a description of the formula by which the redemption
price shall be determined,
(4)
if less than all outstanding Bonds of a series are lo be redeemed, the
identification (and, in the case of partial redemption, the respective principal amounts
and interest rates. Compound Accreted Values or Maturity Amounts) of the Bonds lo be
redeemed,

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-13-

 (5)
that on the redemption date the redemption price will become due and
payable upon each such Bond or portion thereof called for redemption, and that interest
thereon shall cease lo accrue or compound from and afler said dale,
(6)
the place where such Bonds are to be sunendered for payment of the
redemption price, which place of payment shall be the designated corporate trust office
of the applicable Bond Registrar, and
(7)
such olher information as shall be deemed necessary by Ihe applicable
Bond Registrar at the time such notice is given to comply with law. regulation or industry
standard.
With respect lo an optional redemption of any series of Bonds, such nolice may stale
lhat said redemption is conditioned upon the receipt by the applicable Bond Registrar on or prior
to the date fixed for redemption of moneys sufficient lo pay the redemption price of the Bonds of
such series. If such moneys are not so received, such redemption notice shall be of no force
and effect, the City shall not redeem such Bonds and the applicable Bond Registrar shall give
notice, in the same manner in which the notice of redemption was given, that such moneys were
not so received and that such Bonds will not be redeemed. Unless the notice of redemption
shall be made conditional as provided above, on or prior to any redemption date for a series of
Bonds. Ihe City shall deposit wilh the applicable Bond Registrar an amount of money sufficient
to pay the redemption price of all the Bonds or portions thereof of such series which are lo be
redeemed on that date.
Notice of redemption having been given as aforesaid, the Bonds, or portions thereof, so
lo be redeemed shall, on the redemption dale, become due and payable at the redemption price
therein specified, and from and afler such dale (unless the City shall default in the payment of
the redemption price or unless, in the event of a conditional notice as described above, the
necessary moneys were not deposited) such Bonds, or portions thereof, shall cease to bear,
accrue or compound interest. Upon surrender of such Bonds for redemption In accordance with
said notice, such Bonds shall be paid by the applicable Bond Registrar at Ihe redemption price.
Installments of interest due on or prior to Ihe redemption date shall be payable as herein
provided for payment of interest. Upon sunrender for any partial redemption (i) of any Current
Interest Bond or Variable Rale Bond, there shall be prepared for the registered owner a new
Bond or Bonds of the same series, lype (Currenl Inlerest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds),
interest rate or, in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of interest rate determination, and
maturity in the amount of the unpaid principal or (ii) of any Capital Appreciation Bond, there shall
be prepared for the registered owner a new Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same
series. Yield to Maturity and maturity date in the amount ofthe unpaid Maturity Amount.
If any Current Interest Bond or Variable Rale Bond, or portion thereof, called for
redemption shall not be so paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the principal shall, until
paid, bear interest from the redemption date at the rate borne by such Bond, or portion thereof,
so called for redemption. If any Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof, called for
redemption shall not be so paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the Compound Accreted

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-14-

 Value at such redemption date shall continue lo accrue interest from such redemption date at
the Yield to Maturity borne by such Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof, so called for
redemption. All Bonds which have been redeemed shall be cancelled and destroyed by the
applicable Bond Registrar and shall not be reissued.
If any Bond is not presented for payment when the principal amount. Compound
Accreted Value or Maturity Amount thereof becomes due, either at maturity or ai a date fixed for
redemption thereof or otherwise, and if moneys sufficient to pay such Bond are held by the
applicable Bond Registrar for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond, such Bond
Registrar shall hold such moneys for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond without
liability to the registered owner for interest. The registered owner of such Bond thereafter shall
be restricted exclusively to such funds for satisfaclion of any claims relating to such Bond.
Section 5.
The Capital Appreciation Bonds and the Current Interest Bonds of each
series shall be prepared in substantially the following forms with such insertions and revisions
as shall be necessary to reflect the lerms and provisions of the sale of the Bonds of such series
pursuant to Section 12 hereof; provided that if the text of any Bond is to be printed in its entirety
on the front side of such Bond, then the text shown or appearing on the reverse side of such
Bond shall replace paragraph (2} and the legend, "See Reverse Side for Additional Provisions, "
shall be omitted. The Convertible Bonds shall be prepared incorporating the provisions of the
fonms of Capital Appreciation Bonds and Current Inlerest Bonds set forth below as necessary lo
reflect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Convertible Bonds pursuant to Section 12
hereof. The Variable Rale Bonds shall be prepared in substantially Ihe form of the Current
Interest Bonds set forth below, or as provided in the applicable trust indenture securing such
Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof, with such insertions and revisions as
shall be necessary lo reflect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Variable Rate Bonds
pursuant to Section 12 hereof
All Bonds may be prepared wilh such insertions and revisions as shall be necessary in
connection with the issuance of such Bonds as Retail Bonds or Direct Purchase Bonds.

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-15-

 (Form of Capital Appreciation Bond — Front Side]

REGISTERED

NO.
Compound Accreted
Value al Maturity
{"Maturity Amount')
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF ILLINOIS
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND
SERIES

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT PER

$
MATURITY

20_

000

YIELD TO

MATur?iTY

DATED

MATURrtY

AtVJOUNT:

DATE

CUSIP
20

%

Registered Owner:
The City of Chicago (the "City") hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for value
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date identified above, the Maturity Amount identified
above. The amount of interest payable on this Bond on the Maturity Date hereof is the amount
of interest accrued from the Dated Date hereof al a semiannual compounding rate necessary to
produce the Yield to Maturity set forth above, compounded semiannually on each January 1 and
July 1, commencing
1. 20 . The Maturity Amount of this Bond is payable
in lawful money of the United States of America upon presentation and surrender of this Bond at
the designated corporate trust office of
. Chicago, Illinois, or its
successor, as bond registrar and paying agent (the ""Bond Registrar"). The Compound Accreted
Value of this Bond per $
_.000 Maturity Amount on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
commencing
1, 20 , determined by the semiannual compounding described in
this paragraph shall be as set forth in the Table of Compound Accreted Value Per $
.000
of Compound Accreted Value al Maturity contained herein.

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)
-16-

 Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth at
this place.
II is hereby certified and recited thai all conditions, acts and things required by law lo
exist or to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and perfomned in regular and due form and time as required by law; thai the
indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Bonds of which (his is one, does not exceed any
limitation imposed by law; and that provision has been made for the collection of a direct annual
tax sufficient to pay the Maturity Amount hereof al maturity.
This Bond shall nol be valid or become obligatory for any purpose until the certificate of
authenticaliori hereon shall have been signed by the Bond Registrar.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by the City Council has caused ils corporate
seal to be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Bond to be signed by the duly aulhorized
facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Clerk, all as
of the Daled Date identified above.

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:
(Facsimile Siqnaturel
Cily Clerk
Cily of Chicago
[SEAL]

Date of Aulhenlication:
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Bond is one of the Bonds described in Ihe within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of the General Obligation Bonds. Series
. of the City of Chicago.

(Manual Signature)

Aulhorized Officer

General Obligalion Bonds ur\Jiiiarice (final)

-17-

 [Form of Capital Appreciation Bond — Reverse Side]
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBUGATION BOND
SERIES

For the prompt payment of Ihe Maturity Amount of this Bond as the same becomes due.
and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full faith, credit and resources of the Cily
are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the original principal amount of
$
issued pursuant to the constitutional home rule powers of the Cily for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Purposes described in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described in the Bond Ordinance, and
(iii) paying expenses incidental lo the issuance of the Bonds, and was authorized by an
Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on
, 20
(the "Bond
Ordinance').
The Bonds maturing on or after January 1,
, are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the City, in whole or in part on any date on or after
1,
, and if
less than all of the outstanding Bonds are to be redeemed, the Bonds to be called shall be
called from such maturities as shall be determined by the City, and if less than all of the Bonds
of the same maturity and yield to maturity are to be redeemed, then [by lot) (pro-ralaj for the
Bonds of the same maturity and yield to maturity in Ihe manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds
to be redeemed at the redemption prices (being expressed as a percentage of the Compound
Accreted Value of the Bonds lo be redeemed) set forth below:
DATES OF REDEMPTION

REDEMPTION PRICE

[Redemption by lot] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and yield to maturity, the aggregate Maturity Amount thereof to be redeemed shall be
$
.000 or an integral multiple thereof, and the Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of
such maturity and yield to maturity a distinctive number for each $
,000 Maturity Amount of
such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as, al
$
.000 for each number, shall equal the Maturity Amount of such Bonds to be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so selected;
provided lhat only so much of the Maturity Amount of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall
equal $
.000 for each number assigned to it and so selected.
[Redemption pro-rata] In Ihe event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and yield to maturity, the Bonds lo be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
determined pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-18-

 Notice of any such redemption shall be sent by first class mail not fewer than 30 days
nor more than 60 days pnor to the date fixed for redemption lo the Registered Owner of each
Bond to be redeemed al the address shown on the registration books of the City maintained by
the Bond Registrar or al such olher address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner
to Ihe Bond Registrar, provided that the failure lo mail any such nolice or any defect therein as
to any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Bond.
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease lo accrue interest on the specified
redemption dale; provided that funds for redemption are on deposit at the place of payment at
that lime, and shall not be deemed to be outstanding.
This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by rts attorney
duly aulhorized in writing at the designated corporate tmst office of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago, Illinois, but only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon such transfer a new Bond or Bonds of authorized denominations, of the same maturity
and yield to maturity and for the same aggregate Original Principal Amount will be issued to the
transferee in exchange therefor. The Bond Registrar shall not be required to transfer or
exchange this Bond (A) after notice calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.
The Bonds are issued in fully registered fomn in Original Principal Amounts representing
$
,000 Maturity Amount or any integral multiple thereof. This Bond may be exchanged at
the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate Original Principal
Amount of Bonds of the same series and maturity, upon the terms set forth in the Bond
Ordinance.
The City and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
Ihe absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment of or on account of the Maturity
Amount hereof and redemption premium, if any, hereon and for all other purposes and neither
the Cily nor the Bond Registrar shall be affected by any notice to the contrary.

TABLE OF COMPOUND ACCRETHD VALUE
PER $

,000 OF COMPOUND ACCRETED VALUE AT MATURITY

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-19-

 (ASSIGNMENT)
FOR VALUE RECEIVED,

the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)

the within Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Bond on the books kept for registration thereof with full power of
substitution in the premises.

Dated:
Signature guaranteed;
NOTICE;

The signature to this assignment must correspond with the name of the Registered
Owner as it appears upon the face of the within Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-20-

 [Fonm of Current Interest Bond — Front Side]
REGISTERED
NO.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

STATE OF

ILLINOIS

CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND

SERIES

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
Interest
Rate:

Maturity Dale:
%

Dated Date:

January 1 , 2 0 _

20_

CUSIP:

Registered Owner;
Principal Amount;
The Cily of Chicago (the "City) hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for value
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or i-egistered assigns as
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date identified above, the Principal Amount identified
above and lo pay interesl (computed on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months)
on such Principal Amount from Ihe later of the dale of this Bond or the most recent inlerest
payment dale to which interest has been paid al Ihe Interest Rate per annum set forth above on
January 1 and July 1 of each year commencing
1, 20 , until said Principal
Amount is paid. Principal of this Bond and redemption premium, if any, shall be payable in
lawful money of the United States of America-upon presentation and surrender al the
designated corporate trusl office of
, Chicago, Illinois, as bond
registrar and paying agent (Ihe 'Bond Registrar"). Payment of the installments of interest shall
be made to the Registered Owner hereof as shown on the registration books of the City
maintained by the Bond Registrar at the close of business on Ihe 15th day of the month next
preceding each interest payment dale and shall be paid by check or draft of Ihe Bond Registrar
mailed to the address of such Registered Owner as it appears on such registration books or at
such other address furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to the Bond Registrar or, at
the option of any Registered Owner of $1,000,000 or more in aggregate principal amount of the
Bonds, by wire transfer of immediately available funds to such bank in Ihe continental United
States of America as the Registered Owner hereof shall request in writing to Ihe Bond Registrar.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)
-21-

 Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of Ihis Bond sel forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth at
this place.
It is hereby certified and recited thai all conditions, acts and things required by law lo
exist or lo be done precedent to and in Ihe issuance of this Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and due form and time as required by law; lhat the
Indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Bonds of which this is one. does not exceed any
limitation imposed by law; and that provision has been made for the collection of a direct annual
tax sufficient lo pay the interesl hereon as il falls due and also lo pay and discharge the
principal hereof at maturity.
This Bond shall nol be valid or become obligatory for any purpose until the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been signed by (he Bond Registrar.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by the City Council has caused its corporate
seal to be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Bond to be signed by the duly authorized
facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Clery, all as
of the Dated Date identified above.

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature).
City Clerk
City of Chicago
[SEAL]

Date of Authentication:
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Bond is one of the Bonds described in the within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of the General Obligation Bonds, Series
. of the City of Chicago.

By:

(Manual Signature)

General Dbligolion Bonds ordinance (final)

-22-

  

 

Authorized Of?cer

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance 
-23-

[Form of Currenl Inlerest Bond — Reverse Side]
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND
SERIES

For the prompt payment of this Bond, both principal and interest, as aforesaid, as the
same become due. and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full faith, credit and
resources of the Cily are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the principal amount of
$
issued pursuant to the constitutional home aile powers of the City for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Purposes described in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described in the Bond Ordinance, and
(iii) paying expenses incidental to the issuance of the Bonds, and was aulhorized by an
Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on
, 20
(the '"Bond
Ordinance').
The Bonds maturing on or after January 1,
, are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the City, in whole or in part on any dale on or afler
1,
, and if less
than all of the outstanding Bonds are to be redeemed, the Bonds to be called shall be called
from such maturities and interest rales as shall be determined by the Cily and if less than all of
the Bonds of a single maturity and the same interesl rale are lo be redeemed then [by lot)
[pro-rata] within such maturity and interest rate in the manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds lo
tie redeemed at the redemption prices (being expressed as a percentage of the principal
amount) set forth below, plus accrued interest to the date of redemption:
DATES OF REDEMPTION

REDEMPTION PRICE

The Bonds maturing on January 1,
, are subject lo mandatory redemption prior to
maturity on January 1 of the years
to
inclusive, and the Bonds maturing on
January 1,
, are subject to mandatory nedemption prior to maturity on January 1 of the
years
to
, inclusive, in each case at par and accrued interest to the date fixed for
redemption.
[Redemption by tot) In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the aggregate principal amount thereof to be redeemed shall be
$
,000 or an integral multiple Ihereof, and the Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of
such maturity and inlerest rate a distinctive number for each $
,000 principal amount of
such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many nunibers as, at
$
,000 for each number, shall equal the principal amount of such Bonds to be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so selected;

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-24-

 provided that only so much of the principal amount of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall
equal $
,000 for each number assigned to it and so selected.
[Redemption pro-rata] In the evenl of Ihe redemption of less than all of the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the Bonds lo be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
detennined pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.
Nolice of any such redemption shall be sent by first class mail not less than 30 days nor
more than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption lo the Registered Owner of each Bond
lo be redeemed at the address shown on (he registration books of the City maintained by the
Bond Registrar or at such olher address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner lo
the Bond Registrar; provided that the failure to mail any such notice or any defect therein as to
any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Bond.
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease to bear interest on the specified
redemption date, provided that funds for redemption are on deposit at the place of payment al
lhat time, and shall not be deemed to be outstanding.
This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly authorized in writing at the designated corporate trusl office of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago, Illinois, bul only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon such transfer a new Bond or Bonds of authorized denominations, of the same interesl
rate., series and maturity and for the same aggregate prindpal amount will be issued to the
transferee in exchange therefor. The Bond Registrar shall not be required to transfer or
exchange Ihis Bond (A) after notice calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.
The Bonds are issued in fully registered form in the denomination of $
,000 each or
aulhorized integral multiples thereof This Bond may be exchanged al the designated corporate
trusl office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate principal amount of Bonds of the same
interest rate, series and maturity of olher authorized denominations, upon the terms set forth in
the Bond Ordinance.
The City and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment of or on account of principal
hereof and interest due hereon and redemption premium, if any, and for all other purposes and
neither Ihe Cily nor the Bond Registrar shall be affected by any notice to the contrary.

General Obligation Uonds ordinance (final)

-25-

 (ASSIGNMENT)
FOR VALUE RECEIVED,

the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)

the within Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Bond on the books kept for registration thereof wilh full power of
substitution in the premises.
Dated:
Signature guaranteed:
NOTICE;

The signature to this assignment must correspond with the name of the Registered
Owner as it appears upon the face of Ihe within Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

Section 6. Each Bond shall be a direct and general obligation of the City for the
payment of which (as to Compound Accreted Value, principal, inlerest and redemption
premium, if any, as appropriate) the City pledges its full faith and credit. Each Bond shall be
payable (as to Compound Accreted Value, principal, interest and redemption premium, if any.
as appropriate) from any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the Cily legally
available for such purpose, including bul nol limited to (he proceeds of the Pledged Taxes (as
defined in Section 7 hereof).
Section 7. For the purpose of providing the funds required to pay as the same
become due (i) the principal of and interest and redemption premium, if any, on the Bonds
(including the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds), (ii) the purchase
price of Bonds that are subject lo optional or mandatory lender for purchase by the owners
Ihereof. to Ihe extent not otherwise provided for pursuant to the lerms of a Credit Facility (as
defined in Section 12 bereoQ, (iii) such amounts as may be payable under Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements (as defined in Section 14(a) hereof) from the direct annual tax described
below, (iv) amounts (other than periodic fees and expenses) payable lo providers of Credit
Facilities as described in Section 12 hereof, (v) any Line of Credit Indebtedness, (vi) the
principal of and interesl on General Obligation Commercial Paper Notes and (vii) to the extent
determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary or desirable, periodic fees and expenses
payable to parties involved in the provision of ongoing services relating to the Bonds, the
Outstanding Indebtedness, the Exisling Interest Rate Exchange Agreements or Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements, including any QIR and parties such as those identified by an Authorized
Officer in a notification of sale as described in Section 12 hereof and parties providing similar
ongoing services, such as rating agencies and entities providing financial market information to
be used in connection with the structunng and sale of the Bonds (the "Ongoing Financing

Gene.'al Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-26-

 Sen/Zees'), there is hereby levied and there shall be collected a direct annual tax upon all
taxable property in the City for the years and in the amounts as follows:
YEAR

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033

AMOUNT

$150,000,000
150.000.000
150,000,000
150,000.000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150,000.000
150,000.000
150,000.000
150.000.000
150,000.000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150,000.000
150,000,000
150.000,000

YEAR

AMOUNT

2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
2051
2052
2053
2054

$150,000,000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150,000.000
150,000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150.000,000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150,000,000

; provided that collections of such levy for any year in an amount in excess of lhat necessary lo
make the payments described in clauses (i) through (vii), above (a) may be used for any lawful
public purpose designated by ttie Cily Council or (b) may be reduced and abated by an
Authorized Officer if such reduction is deemed desirable by an Authorized Officer in connection
with the sale or sales of the Bonds, in each case as detennined from time to lime by an
Aulhorized Officer as provided in Section 12 hereof.
The lax levy made in this Section is not subject to the "Aggregate Levy"" limitation
contained in the Chicago Property Tax Limitation Ordinance contained in Chapter 3-92 of the
Municipal Code of Chicago (the "Municipal Code'), and Section 3-92-020 of the Municipal Code
is hereby superseded lo exclude the tax levy herein from the definition of "Aggregate Levy"
contained therein.
The term "Pledged Taxes' means (i) the taxes hereinabove levied for collection for the
purpose of providing the funds necessary to make the payments described in clauses (i)
through (vii) of the first paragraph of this Section 7, and (ii) subject to the provisions of
Section 15 hereof, the proceeds of taxes levied for the years from and after 2012 in connection
With the issuance of the Outslanding Indebtedness to Ihe extent such lax collections are not

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-27-

 necessary for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein or pursuant to any olher authorization, and the term "Pledged Taxes" shall
also include any amounts deposited into the hereinafter-defined Bond Fund or deposited with
the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent (as hereinafter defined) by an Authorized Officer for the
purpose of paying principal of and interest on the Bonds and any accrued interesl received and
deposited in the Bond Fund or the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Account, if established pursuant to
Section 9 hereof.
As provided in Section 12 or otherwise, the City reserves the right lo abate all or a
portion of the Pledged Taxes required to be levied in any year if and to Ihe extent on or before
March 31 of the next succeeding calendar year (or such eariier date as may be required by law),
Ihe Cily has on hand amounts dedicated to the payments described in clauses (i), (ii). (iii) and
(iv) of the first paragraph of this Section 7 due during the one-year period commencing on
January 2 of such succeeding calendar year. The City may, bul shall nol be required to, cause
the extension and collection of the Pledged Taxes for the payment when due of any Line of
Credit Indebtedness or the principal of and interesl on General Obligation Commercial Paper
Notes or cause the levy or extension in any year of taxes for the payment of the costs of
Ongoing Financing Services.
Section 8. The City shall appropriate or otherwise provide amounts sufficient to pay
(i) principal of and interesl on the Bonds (including the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital
Appreciation Bonds), (ii) amounts (other than periodic fees and expenses) payable to providers
of Credit Facilities as described in Section 12 hereof lo the payment of which the City has
pledged its full faith and credit and (iii) Interest Rate Exchange Agreements to the payment of
which the City has pledged its full faith and credit for the years such amounts are due, and the
Cily hereby covenants to take timely aclion as required by law to carry out the provisions of this
Section, bul. if for any such year it fails lo do so, Ihis Ordinance shall constitute a continuing
approprialion ordinance of such amounts without any further aclion on the part of the City
Council.
Section 9.
Each Authorized Officer Is authorized to establish one or more special
accounts, if detennined lo be necessary in connection with the sale of any of the Bonds,
separate and segregated from all other funds and accounts of the City, which shall either be
(i) held by an Authorized Officer (each a "Bond Fund") or (ii) maintained with a bank or trust
company to be designated by an Aulhorized Officer (each an "Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Account") pursuant to an escrow agreement (each an "Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreement"),
between Ihe City and the applicable Escrow Agent named therein (each an "Ad Valorem Tax
Escrow Agent"), and one or more of the Mayor or an Authorized Officer are hereby aulhorized to
execute and deliver one or more Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreements in connection with the
sale of the Bonds in such form as the officers so executing such agreement may deem
appropriate in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
In lieu of the proceeds of such taxes being deposited with the City Treasurer, any such
Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreement may authorize the County Collectors of Cook and DuPage

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-28-

 Counties, Illinois to deposit the proceeds of such taxes directly into the applicable Ad Valorem
Tax Escrow Account, if such Account has been created.
Section 10. If (he Pledged Taxes to be applied to the payment of the Bonds are not
available in time lo make any payments of principal of or interest on the Bonds when due. then
the appropriate fiscal officers of the City are hereby directed to make such payments from any
other moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City that are legally available
for that purpose in advancement of the collection of such Pledged Taxes, and when the
proceeds Ihereof are received, such other funds shall be replenished, all to the end that the
credit of the Cily may be preserved by the prompt payment of the principal of and interesl on the
Bonds as the same become due.
Section 11. A copy of this Ordinance, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed in
the respedive offices of ihe County Clerks of Cook and DuPage Counties, Illinois (Ihe "County
Clerks"), and such filing shall constitute the authority for and it shall be the duty of said County
Clerks, in each year beginning in 2014, to and including 2055, to extend the taxes levied
pursuant to Section 7 hereof for collection in such year, such taxes to be in addition to and in
excess of all other taxes heretofore or hereafter authorized to be levied by the City on its behalf.
A copy .of this Ordinance, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall also be filed with each
applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, if any, each applicable Bond Registrar, and it the
County Collectors of Cook and DuPage Counties are authorized lo deposit the proceeds of the
taxes levied pursuant lo Section 7 hereof directly with an Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent
pursuant to Section 9 hereof, with such County Collectors.
Section 12. Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell all or any portion of the
Bonds, other than the Retail Bonds and the Direct Purchase Bonds which shall be sold as
provided in the following two paragraphs, from lime to time to or at the direction of an
underwriter or group of underwriters to be selected by such Authorized Officer (the
'Underwriters'), with the concurrence of the Chairman of the (Committee on Finance of the City
Council (the "Chairman'), on such lerms as such Authorized Officer may deem to be in Ihe best
interests of the Cily within the limitations set forth in this Ordinance.
Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell Retail Bonds from time to time on
such terms as such Authorized Officer may deem to be in the best interests of the Cily within
the limitations contained in Ihis Ordinance and, in connecfion therewith, to appoint an agent or
group of agents to be selected by such Authorized Officer (the "Selling Agents"), with the
concurrence of the Chairman, for Ihe purpose of soliciling purchases of the Retail Bonds by
individual investors, each sale of Retail Bonds solicited by the Selling Agents to be made with
the concurrence of the Chairman.
The Bonds may be sold as Direct Purchase Bonds in a manner and containing such
terms authorized by an Authorized Officer, including pursuant to a placement agent
arrangement, to a purchaser or purchasers other than the Underwriters (the "Direct
Purchasers'), such Direct Purchasers lo be selected by an Authorized Officer and such sale

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-29-

 being permitted at a price of nol less than 97 percent of the principal amount of the Direct
Purchase Bonds being sold. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized lo do all
such things and to execute and deliver such additional documenls. agreements and certificates
as shall be necessary in conneclion wilh the sale of Direct Purchase Bonds.
The principal amount of and the interest on Ihe Bonds (including the Compound
Accreled Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds and based on reasonable estimates of the
interesl to be paid on Variable Rate Bonds) sold of each series and maturity in the aggregate
(after taking into account mandatory redemptions) shall not exceed the amount levied therefor
as specified in Section 7 hereof. The Bonds may be sold from lime to time as an Authorized
Officer shall determine lhat the proceeds of such sales are needed.
Either Authorized Officer is hereby authorized and directed lo cause all necessary
notices of redemption of the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding as provided
above lo be given in accordance with the lerms of the respective ordinances or indentures, as
applicable, authorizing the Outstanding Indebtedness.
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver a
contract of purchase wilh respect to each sale of the Bonds (i) to. or al the direction of, the
Underwriters or (ii) to the Direct Purchasers, in substantially the form previously used for similar
general obligalion bonds of the City (the 'Contract of Purchase"), with appropriate revisions lo
refiect the tenns and provisions of the Bonds and such other revisions in text as the Mayor or an
Authorized Officer shall detennine are necessary or desirable in connection with the sale of Ihe
Bonds. The compensation paid to the Underwriters in connection with any sale of Bonds shall
not exceed three percent of the principal amount of the Bonds being sold. Nothing contained in
this Ordinance shall limit Ihe sale of the Bonds or any maturity or maturities thereof al a price or
prices in excess of (he principal amount thereof.
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver a
contract with Selling Agents pursuant to which the Selling Agents shall solicit purchases of the
Retail Bonds by individual investors (a "Selling Agent Agreement') substantially in the form of
the selling agent agreement previously entered into by the Cily in connection with the sale of
Retail Bonds, but with such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer execufing Ihe
same shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or such
Authorized Officer to evidence Ihe Cily Council's approval of all such revisions. The aggregate
compensation paid to the Selling Agenls pursuant to any Selling Agent Agreement shall nol
exceed three percent of the principal amount of the Retail Bonds sold pursuant to such Selling
Agent Agreement. The lerms of any Selling Agent Agreement may provide for the delegation by
an Authorized C>fficer to one or more Deputy Comptrollers of authority to approve the final terms
of sale of any Retail Bonds pursuant to such Selling Agent Agreement within parameters
established by an Aulhorized Officer consistent wilh the terms and limitations of this Ordinance.
Any Selling Agent Agreement may also contain provisions pursuant to which a person receiving
an ownership interest in any Retail Bonds through the death of a Bondholder shall have the right
to sell such Retail Bonds back to the City at a price of not lo exceed 105 percent of par and
setting forth the lerms and condilions of the exercise of such right. The Mayor or an Authorized

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-30-

 Officer (or delegate as authorized above) is hereby aulhorized to do all such things and to
execute and deliver such additional documenls. agreements and certificates as shall be
necessary in connection with the sale of Retail Bonds from time to lime pursuant lo a Selling
Agent Agreement, including any such document, agreement or certificate necessary to describe
Ihe terms of Retail Bonds (hen being sold.
In connection with any sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to
obtain one or more policies of bond insurance from recognized bond insurers selected by an
Authorized Officer, if such Authorized Officer determines such bond insurance to be desirable in
connection with such sale of the Bonds. Either Aulhorized Officer may, on behalf of the City,
make covenants with such bond insurer that are not inconsistent wilh the provisions of this
Ordinance and are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance.
in connection with any sale of the Bonds. Ihe Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer is hereby
aulhorized to obtain one or more letters of credit, lines of credit, standby bond purchase
agreements, or similar credit or liquidity facilities (a "Credit Facility') with one or more financial
insfilutions.
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into a
reimbursement agreement and/or standby bond purchase agreement and to execute and issue
a promissory note in conneclion wilh the provisions of each Credit Facility. Any Credrt Facility,
reimbursement agreement or standby bond purchase agreement shall be in substantially the
form of the credit facilities, reimbursement agreements and standby bond purchase agreements
previously entered into by the City in connection with the sale of general obligation bonds or
notes, but with such revisions in text as Ihe Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer executing the same
shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or an Authorized
Officer to evidence the Cily Council's approval of all such revisions. The annual fee paid to any
financial institution lhat provides a Credit Facility with respect lo all or a portion of a series of the
Bonds shall not exceed three percent of the average principal amount of such Bonds
outstanding during such annual period. The final form of any reimbursement agreement and/or
standby bond purchase agreement entered into by the City wilh respect to the Bonds shall be
attached to the notification of sale filed in the office of the City Clerk pursuant to this section.
Each such promissory note shall be a general obligation of the City for the payment of which,
both principal and interesl, the City pledges ils full failh. credit and resources. Each promissory
note, and any Bond owned or held as collateral by any such financial institution in its capacity as
a provider of a Credit Facility shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding 15 percent per annum
and shall mature not later than the final maturity date of the related Bonds secured by such
reimbursement agreement or standby bond purchase agreement. The Mayor or an Authorized
Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver any such reimbursement agreement or
standby bond purchase agreement, and any amendment thereto or replacement thereof, under
the seal of the City affixed and attested by the City Clerk.

In the event that Bonds are sold so as to require Ihe levy of taxes for any year specified
in Section 7 hereof for the purpose of making the payments described in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and
(IV) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof in an amount less than the amount specified for
such year in the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, then an Authorized Officer shall, on or prior
lo March 31 (or such earlier dale as may be required by law) of the calendar year next

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-31-

 succeeding such year, notify the Cily Council of the determination made pursuant to clauses (a)
and (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof regarding the application of any resulting
excess levy collections, and. in addition, in connection wilh a determination made pursuant to
clause (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, an Aulhorized Officer shall file in the
respective offices of the County Clerks certificates of tax abatement for such year. In Ihe evenl
that upon the final sale of Ihe Bonds of all series, such Bonds have been sold so as lo require
the levy of faxes in any year specified in Section 7 hereof for the purpose of making the
payments described in clauses (i). (ii). (iii) and (iv) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof in
an amount less than the amount specified for such year in Section 7 hereof, then there shall be
included, in the final nolification of sale to Ihe City Council described below in this Section 12.
the detemnination made pursuant to clauses (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7
hereof regarding ihe application of any resulting excess levy collections for such year and any
succeeding year and, in addition, in connection with a determination made pursuant to
clause (b) of the first paragraph ol Section 7 hereof, an Authorized Officer shall file in the
respective offices of the County Clerks certificates of tax abatement for such year or years. If
any of the Bonds are nol to be sold and issued as provided herein and no levy collections are to
be applied for the purposes of paying the costs of Ongoing Financing Services as determined
by an Aulhorized Officer, the corresponding taxes herein levied to pay debt service thereon
shall be abated in full. Any certificaie of abatement delivered pursuant to this paragraph shall
refer to the amount of taxes levied pursuant to Secfion 7 hereof, shall indicate the amount of
reduction in the amount of taxes levied by the Cily resulting from the sale or sales of the Bonds
or the non-issuance thereof, which reduced amount is to be abated from such taxes, and shall
further indicate the remainder of such taxes which is to be extended for collection by said
County Clerks.
The preparation, use and distribution of a preliminary official statement, an official
statement or any other disclosure document relating to each sale and issuance of the Bonds are
hereby ratified and approved. The Mayor and each Authorized Officer are each hereby
authorized to execute and deliver an official slalement or other disclosure document relating to
each sale and issuance of the Bonds on behalf of the City. The preliminary official statement,
official statement and other disclosure documents herein authorized shall be substantially
similar to those previously used for general obligation bonds of the City, and shall contain the
lerms and provisions of the Bonds, the manner in which the Bonds shall be sold, the use of
proceeds of the Bonds, financial information for the Cily. and such other information as the
Mayor or any Authorized Officer determines to be advisable under the circumstances.
Subsequent to the sale of any series of Bonds or. in the case of the Retail Bonds,
subsequent to the sale of all Bonds lhat are the subject of a Selling Agent Agreement, an
Authorized Officer shall file in the office of the City Clerk a notificalion of sale directed to the City
Council setting forth (i) the series designation, the aggregate principal amount and authorized
denominations of, maturity schedule and redemption provisions for the Bonds sold, (ii) the
principal amounts of the Bonds sold as Currenl Interest Bonds. Capital Appreciation Bonds,
Convertible Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respectively, and whether any of the Bonds are
sold as Retail Bonds, (iii) in the case of the sale of the Retail Bonds or Direct Purchase Bonds,
the principal amounts ol such Bonds sold as Current Interesl Bonds. Capitalized Appreciation

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-32-

 Bonds, Convertible Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respectively, (iv) in the case of Bonds sold
as Capital Appreciation Bonds. (A) the Original Principal Amounts of and Yields to Maturity on
the Capital Appreciation Bonds being sold and (B) a fable of Compound Accreted Values per
minimum authorized Compound Accreted Value at maturity for any Capital Appreciation Bonds
being sold, setting forth the Compound Accreted Value of each such Capital Appreciation Bond
on each semiannual compounding dale, (v) the interest rates on the Current Interest Bonds sold
or, in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, a description of the method of determining (he interesl
rate applicable to such Variable Rate Bonds from time to lime, (vi) the specific maturities, series
and amounts of the Outstanding Indebtedness to be refunded with proceeds of the Bonds,
(vii) a description of any Exisling Interest Rale Exchange Agreements to be terminated,
amended or othenwise modified in conneclion wilh the refunding of such Outstanding
Indebtedness and identifying any settlement, breakage or tennination amount to be paid in
connection with each such termination, amendment or modification, (viii) the date on and price
at which the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding shall be redeemed (if such
redemption shall occur prior to slated maturity or pursuant to mandatory sinking fund
redemption), (ix) the disposition of the taxes levied for the years from and after 2012 for the
payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness or any Existing Interesl Rale Exchange Agreements
as authorized by Section 15 hereof, (x) the identity of the insurer or insurers issuing the
insurance policy or policies, if any, referred lo below, and the identity of the provider or providers
of one or more Credit Facilities, if any. for such Bonds, (xi) the identity of the Underwriters (or, in
the case of Retail Bonds, the Selling Agenls and in the case of Direct Purchase Bonds, the
Direct Purchasers) selected for such Bonds, (xii) the identity of the applicable Bond Registrar
and any trustee or trustees selected by an Authorized Officer for such Bonds, (xiii) the identity of
any remarketing agent retained in connection with the issuance of Variable Rate Bonds, if any,
(xiv) Ihe compensation paid to the Underwriters (or, in the case of Retail Bonds, the Selling
Agenls) in conneclion with such sale, (xv) the idenfily of any Refunding Escrow Agent (as
defined in Secfion 13(b) hereof) appointed by an Aulhorized Officer in connection with the
refunding of Outstanding Indebtedness, and (xvi) any other matter authorized by this Ordinance
to be determined by an Aulhorized Officer at the time of the sale of the Bonds of each series.
In connection with any sale of Ihe Bonds, an Aulhorized Officer is hereby authorized to
execute and deliver one or more Continuing Disclosure Undertakings (each a "Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking") evidencing the City's agreement lo comply with the requirements of
Section (b)(5) of Rule 15c2-12, adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the
"SEC) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, in a form approved by the Corporation
Counsel. Upon its execution and delivery on behalf of the City as herein provided, each
Continuing Disclosure Undertaking will be binding on the City, and the officers, employees and
agenls of Ihe City are hereby aulhorized lo do all such acts and things and to execute all such
documents as may be necessary to carry out and comply wilh the provisions of each Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking as executed. Either Authorized Officer is hereby further authorized to
amend each Continuing Disclosure Undertaking in accordance with its respective terms from
lime to time following its execution and delivery as said officer shall deem necessary. In
addition, an Authorized Officer is authorized to make all future filings with the Electronic
Municipal Market Access system operated by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board or
such other municipal securities information repository as shall be designated by tbe SEC, all in

Gerieral Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-33-

 accordance with the provisions of Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 15c2-12(b)(5)
promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this Ordinance, the sole remedies for any failure by the City lo comply wilh any Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking shall be the ability of the beneficial owner of any applicable Bond to
seek mandamus or specific performance by court order to cause the City lo comply with its
obligations under such Continuing Disclosure Undertaking.
The Bonds shall be duly prepared and executed in Ihe form and manner provided herein
and delivered to the purchasers in accordance with the applicable terms of sale.
The Mayor, each Aulhorized Officer, the City Treasurer and the City Clerk are each
hereby authorized to execute and deliver such other documents and agreements (including
such contracts, such intergovernmental agreements or such grant agreements wilh not-for-profit
organizations, educational or cultural institutions or for-profit organizalions or to assist the Slate
of Illinois, the United Stales of America, or olher municipal corporations, units of local
government or school districts in the Stale of Illinois, receiving proceeds of the Bonds as an
Authorized Officer shall deem necessary and appropriate) and perform such other acts prior to
or following the issuance of the Bonds as may be necessary or desirable in connection with the
issuance of the Bonds and any transactions contemplated herein related to the application of
the proceeds of the Bonds or collections or application of taxes levied for the payment of the
Bonds or the Outstanding Indebtedness or other purposes hereunder, but subject to any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth, and any such actions
heretofore taken by the Mayor, an Authorized Officer, the City Treasurer or the City Clerk in
accordance with the provisions hereof are hereby ratified and approved. With respect lo each
grant of Bond proceeds, each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to designate in writing,
with the written concurrence of the Budget Director of the Cily (the 'Budget Director"), (i) one or
more City departments or agencies lo administer such grant, and (ii) the head of the City
department or agency who shall be aulhorized to execute a grant agreement and such olher
documenls, agreements or instruments as shall be deemed necessary or desirable by such City
department or agency head. Upon any such written designation by an Authorized Officer with
respect to a grant of Bond proceeds, such City department or agency shall be aulhorized lo
administer such grant and the head of such City department or agency shall be aulhorized lo
execute a grant agreement and such other documenls, agreements or instruments as such
official shall deem necessary or desirable.
Section 13.
follows:

The proceeds from the sale of any series of the Bonds shall l>e used as

(a)
The sum representing the accrued interesl received, if any, shall be used
to pay the first inlerest becoming due on the Bonds sold, and to thai end, shall be
deposited in (he applicable Bond Fund or the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Account, if established.
(b)
From the sale proceeds derived from any such sale of a series of the
Bonds, (i) such sum as may be determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary to

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)
-34-

 pay not more than three years of inlerest on the Bonds issued lo pay costs of the Project
may be used lo pay such Interest, and to that end, may be deposited in the applicable
Bond Fund or the applicable A d Valorem Tax Escrow Account, if established; (ii) the
sum determined by an Authorized Officer lo be necessary to pay the costs of the Project
shall be sel aside, held and invested at the direction of an Aulhorized Officer, as
separate funds of the City pending such payment, provided thai proceeds of Ihe Bonds
issued to finance the Pension Contributions shall be paid into the Pension Funds as and
when required by law; (iii) the sum determined by an Authorized Officer to capitalize or
fund interest on Outstanding Indebtedness shall be deposited into Ihe respective debt
service funds established for the Outstanding Indebtedness; (iv) the sum determined by
an Authorized Officer to be sufficient to pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being
refunded at or prior to their respective maturities, at a price of par, the applicable
redemption premium and accrued interesl thereon up to and including said redemption
or maturity dales shall be deposited inlo the respecfive debt service funds established
for the Outstanding Indebtedness or into one or more "Refunded Bonds Escrow
Accounts" to be held by one or more banks or trust companies to be designated by an
Authorized Officer (each a "Refunding Escrow A g e n f ) , each pursuant lo the lerms of an
escrow agreement (each a "Refunding Escrow Agreement'), and the Mayor, an
Authorized Officer and the City Clerk, or any of them, are hereby aulhorized to execute
and deliver each Refunding Escrow Agreement, and any amendment thereto, in such
form as the officer so executing shall deem appropriate lo effect the refunding or
refundings described in this paragraph and (v) the sum delermined by an Authorized
Officer to be sufficient to provide for the payment of any settlement, breakage or
terminafion amount payable in connection wilh the termination, amendment or
modification of an Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreement shall be paid to Ihe City's
counterparty or counterparties thereunder.
Notwithstanding any provision of the
Municipal Code, investments acquired with proceeds of the Bonds or investment income
thereon may mature beyond ten years from the date of acquisition, and may include bul
are not limited to agreements entered into between the Cily and providers of securities
under which agreements such providers agree lo purchase from or sell lo the Cily
specified securities on specific dales al predetermined prices, all as established al the
time of execution of any such agreement and as set forth in such agreement, and
guaranteed investment contracts, forward purchase agreements and other similar
investment vehicles.
Such guaranteed investment conlracts, forward purchase
agreements and other similar investment vehicles may, lo the extent pennitted by
operative authorizing documents and by applicable law, be assigned or transferred from
one bond transaction to another or apply to the proceeds of more than one bond
transaction on a commingled or non-commingled basis, as delermined by an Authorized
Officer. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized lo enter inlo any
amendments to or restatements of existing documenls or to execute new documents, to
consent to actions being taken by others or to obtain the consent of other parties, as
may be necessary or desirable in this respect. Investment income derived from Bond
pnoceeds may be (w) expended for the same purposes for which Bond proceeds may tie
expended, (x) used for the payment or prepayment of Cily debt obligations, (y) deposited
in the Corporate Fund of the City or (z) rebated to the United States of America as

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-35-

 provided in Section 16 hereof, all as determined by an Authorized Officer or the Budget
Director. Any commingled investment income from guaranteed investment contracts,
forward purchase agreements and other similar investment vehicles shall be apportioned
among bond transactions as delermined by an Authorized Officer or as otherwise
required by operative authorizing documenls and applicable law.
(c)
From the sale proceeds of a series of tbe Bonds not applied as provided
in paragraphs (a) and (b). above, the amount deemed necessary by an Aulhorized
Officer shall be applied to the payment of the costs of issuance of such Bonds, including
the premium or fee for bond insurance or other credit or liquidity enhancement, if any.
and any unexpended portion of the sale proceeds shall be paid lo the City.
The costs of the Project may be paid directly by Ihe City or may be financed by the
making of grants for the implementation of the Project to (i) not-for-profit organizations,
educational or cultural institutions or for-profit organizations, (ii) the United States of America,
(iii) the State of Illinois or (iv) other units of local government, political subdivisions, municipal
corporations or school districts in the State of Illinois, including any operating division thereof, all
as delermined by an Authorized Officer.
An Authorized Officer shall report lo the Cily Council wilh respect lo the expenditure of
the proceeds of each series of Ihe Bonds issued hereunder to pay the costs of the Project.
Such reports shall be made no later than August 1 of each year, commencing August 1, 2014,
with respect to expenditures made during the preceding calendar year. No report shall be
required hereunder following any calendar year in which no proceeds of any series of the Bonds
are expended to pay costs of the Project.
Section 14. (a) The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and
deliver, with respect to all or any portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness, the Bonds, and any
General Obligation Indebtedness (as defined below) that may be issued in the future
(collectively, "City Indebtedness), from time to fime one or more agreements, or options to
enter into such agreements, with counterparties selected by an Aulhorized Officer, the purpose
of which is to provide to the City (i) an inlerest rate basis, cash flow basis, or other basis
different from lhat provided in the related City Indebledriess for the payment of interest or
(ii) with respect to a future delivery of general obligation bonds, notes or commercial paper
(collectively, "General Obligation Indebtedness"), one or more of a guaranteed interest rate,
interest rale basis, cash flow basis, or purchase price (such agreements or options to enter into
such agreements being collectively referred to as "Interesl Rate Exchange Agreements').
Interest Rate Exchange Agreements include without limitation agreements or conlracts
commonly known as interest rate exchange, swaps, including forward starting swaps, collar,
caps, or derivative agreements, forward payment conversion agreements, interest rate locks,
forward bond purchase agreements, bond warrant agreements, or bond purchase option
agreements and also include agreements granting to the Cily or a counterparty an option to
enter into any of the foregoing and agreements or contracts providing for payments based on
levels of or changes in interest rates, including a change in an interest rale index, to exchange
cash fiows Of a series of payments, or to hedge payment, rate spread, or similar exposure. The

Gcneml Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-36-

 stated aggregate notional amount (nel of offsetting transactions) under all Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements related to certain City Indebtedness shall not exceed the principal
amount of such Cily Indebtedness to which such Interest Rale Exchange Agreements relate.
For purposes of Ihe immediately preceding sentence, "offsetting transactions" shall include any
transaction which is intended lo hedge, modify or otherwise affect another outstanding
transaction or ils economic results. The offsetting Iransaclion need not be based on the same
index or rate option as the related Cily Indebtedness or the transaction being offset and need
not be with the same counterparty as the transaction being offset. Examples of offsetting
transactions include, without limitation, a fioaling-to-fixed rate interest rate swap being offset by
a fixed-to-floating rate interest rate swap, and a fixed-to-floating rate interest rate swap being
offset by a floating-to-fixed rate interest rate swap or an interest rate cap or floor or a
floating-to-floaling interest rate swap.
Any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement to the extent practicable shall be in substantially
the form of either the 2002 ISDA Master Agreement or the Local Currency — Single Jurisdiction
version or the Multicurrency — Cross Border version of Ihe 1992 ISDA Master Agreement
(including a Schedule and/or a Credit Support Annex to such Schedule, if applicable) published
by ISDA or any successor form to either published by ISDA, and in the appropriate
confirmations of transactions governed by the applicable agreement, with such insertions,
completions and modifications thereof as shall be approved by the officer of the Cily executing
the same, his or her execution to constitute conclusive evidence of the City Council's approval
of such insertions, completions and modifications Ihereof. Should any ISDA form not be the
appropriate fonm to accomplish the objectives of the City under Ihis Section 14. then such other
agreement as may be appropriate is hereby approved, the execution by the Mayor or an
Authorized Officer being conclusive evidence of the City Council's approval of such insertions,
completions and modifications Ihereof Amounts payable by the City under any Interest Rate
Exchange Agreement shall (i) constitute a general obligation of the Cily for which is pledged its
full faith and credit, (ii) be payable from a lax unlimited as to rate or amount that may have
heretofore or shall be hereafter levied by the City Council (including, wilh respect only to an
Interest Rate Exchange Agreement relating to Ihe Bonds, the tax levy described in Section 7
hereof), (iii) constitute operating expenses of the City payable from any monies, revenues,
income, assets or funds of the City available for such purpose, or (iv) constitute any combination
of (i), (ii), arid (iii), all as shall be determined by an Aulhorized Officer. Nothing contained in this
Section 14 shall limit or restrict the authority of the Mayor or an Authorized Officer to enter into
similar agreements pursuant to prior or subsequent authorization of the City Council,
The Mayor and an Authorized Officer are hereby authorized to take all actions necessary
to assign, terminate, amend or modify all or a portion of any Interest Rale Exchange Agreement
upon a determination that such assignment, terminafion, amendment or modification is in the
best financial interest of the City. Any settlement, breakage or termination amount payable as a
result of such assignment, termination, amendment or modification may be paid from proceeds
of sale of the Bonds or General Obligation Indebtedness or from any lawfully available funds of
the Cily.

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-37-

 Any amounts received by the City pursuant to any Interest Rale Exchange Agreement
(other than regulariy scheduled payment amounts) are hereby aulhorized to be expended for
any purpose for which the proceeds of the related City Indebtedness are authorized lo be
expended and for the payment or prepayment of any City Indebtedness, all as detemnined by an
Authorized Officer.
In addition to the foregoing, the Mayor and an Authorized Officer are hereby authorized
to take ail actions necessary lo assign, terminate, amend or modify all or a portion of any
agreement of the type described herein as an Interest Rate Exchange Agreement with respect
to any Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness upon a delerminalion that such assignment,
termination, amendment or modification is in the best financial interesl of the Cily. Any
settlement, breakage or termination amount payable as a result of such assignment,
termination, amendment or modification may be paid from the sources provided for the payment
of such agreements in the proceedings authorizing the Outslanding Revenue Indebtedness (o
which such agreements relate or from any olher lawfully available funds of the Cily.
(b)
It is necessary and in the best interests of Ihe Cily lo avail itself of the services of
Swap Providers under the statutory and regulatory regime contained in the Dodd-Frank Act and
the CFTC Regulations and in connection therewith, in addition lo the amendments to the
Municipal Code contained in Section 26 hereof, the Mayor and each Aulhorized Officer are each
hereby aulhorized to execute and deliver (i) Ihe ISDA Protocol Documentation in the form al the
time prescribed by ISDA, which may include, among other documentation, the ISDA DF
Protocol Agreement, the ISDA DF Supplement, the ISDA DF Prolocol Questionnaire and related
Addenda and (ii) one or more bilateral agreements wilh one or more providers of Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements (each, a 'Bilateral Agreement"), which Bilateral Agreements shall be
responsive to the applicable provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act and the CFTC Regulations and
contain provisions similar to those in the ISDA Prolocol Documentation. The ISDA Protocol
Documentation and the Bilateral Agreements shall be executed in the forms as described
above, in each case with such revisions, insertions, complefions and modificalions therein as
shall be approved by the Mayor or Authorized Officer executing the same lhat are not
inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this Ordinance, such execution to constitute
conclusive evidence of the approval of the Mayor or Authorized Officer executing the same and
this City Council of such revisions, insertions, completions and modificalions thereof.
Section 15. The taxes levied for the years from and after 2012 for the payment of the
Outstanding Indebtedness or amounts due under any Existing Inlerest Rate Exchange
Agreement, to the extent the collection of such taxes is not necessary for the payment of all or a
portion of the Outslanding Indebtedness due lo the refunding thereof or for Ihe payment of
amounts due under an Existing Interesl Rate Exchange Agreement due to the termination of
such Existing Interest Rale Exchange Agreement as authorized herein or pursuant to any other
authorization, may, at the direction of an Authorized Officer, be applied (A) as set forth in the
next paragraph or (B) to any olher lawful public purpose of the City designated by the Cily
Council including (i) the purposes set forth in clauses (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi) of the first
paragraph of Section 7 of this Ordinance, (ti) the payment of the costs of any capital projects for
which funds have been lawfully appropnated or (iii) the abatement of such taxes. There shall be

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-38-

 prepared by an Authorized Officer and filed with the County Clerks a certificate of reduction of
taxes heretofore levied for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding
by an Authorized Officer as provided in Sections 12 and 13 hereof and directing the abatement
of the taxes heretofore levied to pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being refunded, including
the taxes levied for the years hrom and after 2012, if so detenmined by an Authorized Officer as
provided in the preceding sentence. In addition, any proceeds of the Outstanding Indebtedness
being held for Ihe payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness, to the extent such proceeds are
not necessary for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein or pursuant to any other authorization, may, al the direction of an Authorized
Officer, be applied to any lawful public purpose of the City designated by the Cily Council,
including the payment of the Bonds (but in the case of Bonds the inlerest on which is excluded
from gross income for federal income tax purposes, only upon receipt by the Cily of an opinion
of Bond Counsel to the effect lhat such will not adversely affect the tax-exempt status of the
Bonds).
Furthermore, notwithstanding any other provision hereof, taxes levied for the years 2012
lo 2014. inclusive, for the payment of Outstanding Indebtedness, to the extent the collection of
such taxes is nol necessary for the payment of all or a portion of the Outslanding Indebtedness
due to the refunding Ihereof with the proceeds of the Bonds may. in addition to the other
purposes set forth above, be applied lo the payment of the principal of and inlerest due on
General Obligation Commercial Paper Notes due on or tjefore January 31, 2017, at the direcfion
of an Authorized Officer. Any directions or determinations by an Aulhorized Officer pursuant to
this paragraph shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than the date a levy is applied to the
payment of commercial paper as provided herein.
Section 16. The Cily covenants that it will take no action in the investment of the
proceeds of the Bonds (other than Bonds issued as i^onds (he interest on which is not
excludable from the gross income of Ihe owner Ihereof for federal income tax purposes) v/hich
would result in making the interest payable on any of such Bonds subject to federal income
taxes by reason of such Bonds being classified as "arbitrage bonds" within the meaning of
Secfion 148 ofthe Code.
The City further covenants that it will acl with respect to the proceeds of Bonds (other
than Bonds issued as bonds the interest on which is not excludable from the gross income of
the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes), the earnings on the proceeds of such Bonds
and any other moneys on deposit in any fund or account maintained in respect of such Bonds,
including, if necessary, a rebale of such earnings lo the United States of America, in a manner
which would cause the interest on such Bonds to continue to be exempt from federal income
taxation under Section 103(a) of the Code.
Each Aulhorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute such certifications, tax returns,
covenants and agreements as shall be necessary, in the opinion of nationally recognized bond
counsel, or in the best interest of the City, as determined by an Authorized Officer, to evidence
the City's compliance with the covenants contained in this section. Each Authorized Officer is

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-39-

 hereby authorized to execute one or more declarations of intent lo reimburse costs of the
Project in accordance with the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder.
Section 17. This Ordinance Is prepared in accordance with the powers of the Cily as a
home rule unit under Article Vll of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. The appropriate officers of the
City are hereby authorized to take such actions and do such things as shall be necessary to
perfomi, carry out, give effect to and consummate the transactions contemplated by Ihis
Ordinance and Ihe Bonds, induding. but not limited to. the exercise following the delivery date
of any of the Bonds of any power or authority delegated to such official of the City under this
Ordinance with respect to the Bonds upon the initial issuance thereof, but subject to any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein sel forth, and any actions
heretofore taken by such officers of the City in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby ratified and approved.
Section 18. The Mayor and each Authorized Officer may each designate another to acl
as their respective proxy and. as applicable, to affix their respective signatures to the Bonds
whether in temporary or definitive fonm. and any olher instrument, certificate or document
required to be signed by the Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer pursuant to this Ordinance and any
instrument, certificate or document required thereby. In such case, each shall send to Ihe City
Council written notice of ihe person so designated by each, such notice stating Ihe name of the
person so selected and identifying the instruments, certificates and documenls which such
person shall be aulhorized lo sign as proxy for the Mayor and each Authorized Officer,
respectively. A written signature of the Mayor or of an Authorized Officer, respectively,
executed by the person so designated underneath, shall be attached to each notice. Each
nofice. with the signatures attached, shall be recorded in the Journal of Proceedings of the City
Council for such dale and filed in the office of the Cily Clerk. When the signature of the Mayor
is placed on an instrument, certificaie or document at the direction of the Mayor in the specified
manner, the same, in all respects, shall be as binding on the City as if signed by Ihe Mayor in
person. When Ihe signature of an Aulhorized Officer is so affixed to an instrument, certificate or
document at the direction of such Authorized Officer, Ihe same, in all respecls, shall be as
binding on the City as if signed by such Authorized Officer in person.
Section 19. If requested by the Bond Registrar, the Mayor, each Authorized Officer and
the City Clerk are each authorized to execute the standard form of agreement between the City
and the Bond Registrar wilh respect to the obligations and duties thereof.
Section 20. If payment or provision for payment is made, lo or for the registered
owners of all or a portion of the Bonds, of the Compound Accreled Value of any Capital
Appreciation Bond and the principal of and interest due and to become due on any Currenl
Interest Bond or Variable Rale Bond at the limes and in the manner stipulated therein, and there
is paid or caused to be paid lo the applicable Bond Registrar, Ihe applicable Ad Valorem Tax
Escrow Agent as provided in Section 9 hereof or such bank or trust company as shall be
designated by an Aulhorized Officer (such bank or trusl company hereinafter referred to as a
"Defeasance Escrow Agent"), all sums of money due and to become due according to the
provisions hereof, then these presents and the estate and nghts hereby granted shall cease.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

 terminate and be void as to Ihose Bonds or portions thereof except for purposes of registration,
transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations. Any
Bond shall be deemed to be paid within the meaning of this secfion when payment of the
Compound Accreted Value of any such Capital Appreciation Bond or the principal of any such
Current Interest Bond, plus interesl thereon to the due date thereof (whether such due date be
by reason of maturity or upon redemption as provided in this Ordinance or otherwise), either
(a) shall have been made or caused lo have been made in accordance with the terms Ihereof.
or (b) shall have been provided for by irrevocably depositing wilh the applicable Bond Registrar,
the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent as provided in Section 9 hereof or a Defeasance
Escrow Agent, in trust and exclusively for such payment. (1) moneys sufficient to make such
payment or (2)(A) direct obligations of the United States of America: (B) obligafions of agencies
of the United States of America, the timely payment of principal of and interest on which are
guaranteed by the United Stales of America; (C) obligations of Ihe following agencies: Federal
Home Loan Mortgage Corp. (FHLMC) debt obligations. Farm Credit System (formeriy: Federal
Land Banks, Federal Intermediate Credit Banks, and Banks for Cooperatives) debt obligations.
Federal Home Loan Banks (FHL Banks) debt obligafions. Fannie Mae debt obligations.
Financing Corp. (FICO) debt obligations. Resolufion Funding Corp. (REFCORP) debt
obligations, and U.S. Agency for International Development (U.S. A.I.D.) Guaranteed notes;
(D) pre-refunded municipal obligations defined as follows; any bonds or olher obligations of any
state of the United Stales of America or of any agency, instrumentality or local governmental
unit of any such stale which are not callable at the option of the obligor prior to maturity or as to
which irrevocable instructions have been given by the obligor to call on the date specified in the
notice: or (E) instruments evidencing an ownership interest in obligations described in the
preceding clauses (A). (B) and (C). or (3) a combination of the investments described in
clauses (1) and (2) above, such amounts so deposited being available or maturing as to
principal and interest in such amounts and at such times, without consideration of any
reinvestment Ihereof. as will insure the availability of sufficient moneys to make such payment
(all as confirmed by a nationally recognized firm of independent public accountants). Al such
times as a Bond shall be deemed to be paid hereunder, as aforesaid, it shall no longer be
secured by or entitled to the benefits of this Ordinance, except for the purposes of registration,
transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations.
No such deposit under this section shall be made or accepted hereunder and no use
made of any such deposit unless, in the case of Bonds (olher than Bonds issued as bonds the
interest on which is not excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal
income tax purposes), the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Agent or the applicable Defeasance Escrow Agent, as the case may be, shall have received an
opinion of nationally recognized municipal bond counsel to the effect that such deposit and use
would not cause any of such Bonds to be treated as 'arbitrage bonds" within the meaning of
Section 148 of the Code or any successor provision thereto.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit a defeasance deposit of escrow securities as
provided in (his section or a defeasance deposit with respect to the Outstanding Indebtedness
pursuant to any Refunding Escrow Agreement aulhorized by Section 13(b) hereof, from being
subject to a subsequent sale of such escrow securities and reinveslment of ail or a portion of

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-41-

 the proceeds of that sale in escrow securities which, together with money to remain so held in
trust, shall be sufficieni lo provide for payment of principal, redemption premium, if any, and
interest on any of the defeased Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness, as appropriate. Amounts
held by the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, any
Defeasance Escrow Agent or any Refunding Escrow Agent in excess of the amounts needed so
to provide for payment of the defeased Bonds or Outslanding Indebtedness, as appropriate,
may be subject to withdraviral by the City. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver fi-om time to time one or more agreements (and amendments
thereto) v;ilh counterparties selected by an Aulhorized Officer, with respect lo the investment
and use of such excess amounts held by the applicable Sond Regisfrar, the applicable Ad
Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, a Defeasance Escrow Agent or a Refunding Escrow Agent.
Section 21.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, the lerms and
provisions of the trust indenture securing a series of Variable Rale Bonds as authorized in
Section 2 hereof wilh respect lo (a) the authentication, regislration. transfer and destruction or
loss of such Variable Rate Bonds, (b) subject to the limilation on redemption price set forth in
Section 3(d) hereof, the redemption of such Variable Rate Bonds, or (c) the method of payment
or defeasance of such Variable Rale Bonds, shall apply lo such Variable Rale Bonds issued
pursuant to this Ordinance. With respect lo the Direct Purchase Bonds, an Aulhorized Officer is
aulhorized to negotiate the terms and provisions of such Direct Purchase Bonds in addition to or
as an alternative to the terms and provisions of the trust indenture securing a series of Variable
Rate Bonds.
Section 22. Any series of the Bonds, the Outstanding Indebtedness or the Outstanding
Revenue Indebtedness may be restructured in a manner authorized by the Mayor or an
Authorized Officer, including but nol limited lo (a) tenminating credit enhancement or liquidity
facilities for a series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outslanding Revenue
Indebtedness, (b) replacing credit enhancement or liquidity facilities for a series of Bonds.
Outstanding indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness with similar credit
enhancement or liquidity from a different provider, (c) replacing credit enhancement or liquidity
facilities for a series of Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness with different forms of credit enhancement or liquidity from the same or a different
provider, (d) adding additional credit enhancement or liquidity supplemental lo lhat securing a
series of Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness,
(e) removing or amending provisions for a series of Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outslanding Revenue Indebtedness, or in financing documents related thereto, to or for the
benefit of credit enhancers or liquidity providers or adding provisions for the benefit of new or
replacement credit enhancers or liquidity providers, (f) replacing an exisling remarketing agent
or remarketing agents for Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness wilh a remarketing agent or remarketing agents selected by an Authorized Officer
or assigning an existing remarketing agreement to a remarketing agent or remarketing agents
selected by an Aulhorized Officer, (g) converting lo or adding a different interest rate mode or
modes under the documents pursuant to which such Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness were issued, (h) adding a fioating rate note (FRN) mode to
any document pursuant to which such Bonds, Outslanding Indebtedness or Outstanding

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

'

-12-

 Revenue Indebtedness were issued or refunding such Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness using an FRN slrudure, or (i) selling or remarketing
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness pursuant to a direct purchase
arrangement to one or more purchasers selected by an Authorized Officer either at par or with a
discount or premium, subject lo any limitations or restrictions wilh respect to such actions being
laken contained in this Ordinance with respect to the Bonds or an ordinance pursuant to which
such Outstanding Indebtedness or Outslanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued, but
provided, lhat if delermined by an Aulhorized Officer to be necessary lo achieve the financial
interests of the City, such limitations or restrictions contained in an ordinance pursuant to which
such Outstanding Indebtedness o; Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued may be
exceeded, bul not in excess of the comparable limitations set forth in this Ordinance. The
Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer is hereby aulhorized lo enler inlo any amendments to or
restatements of existing documents or lo execute new documenls, lo consent lo actions being
laken by others or to obtain the consent of other parties, and lo cause to be prepared such
remarketing documenls. including disclosure documenls, as may be necessary or desirable to
effect any such debt restructuring and facilitate the remarketing of the Bonds, Outstanding
Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue indebtedness, and to pay the fees, costs and expenses
relating thereto, as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer executing the same determines is
necessary and desirable, the execution thereof by Ihe Mayor or an Authorized Officer to
evidence the City Council's approval of all such amendments.
Section 23. Any funds heretofore or hereafter received by the Cily, pursuant to any
Interest Rale Exchange Agreement and in connection with Outstanding Indebtedness, are
hereby authorized lo be expended for the payment or prepayment of any City Indebtedness;
provided however, notwithstanding the foregoing, such authorization shall not apply to any
funds (he expenditure of which shall have been heretofore authorized by other applicable law.
Section 24. To provide increased financial fiexibility and protection to the City in
connection with Financing Transacfions. the Mayor and each Authorized Officer are each
hereby authorized to obtain one or more letters of credit, lines of credit, loan payment
undertaking agreements or other fomns of financial security or credit enhancement to secure
payment of amounts due from the Cily in conneclion with each such Financing Transaction,
including payment of any purchase option price (each such document, instrument or form of
financial security or credit enhancement being hereinafter referred to as a "Financing Credit
Facility') wilh one or more financial institutions. The Mayor and each Authorized Officer are
each hereby aulhorized lo enter into one or more reimbursement agreements (each, a
"Financing Reimbursement Agreemenf") and to execute and issue one or more promissory
noles (each a "Financing Note") in connection with such Financing Credit Facilities. Any
Financing Credit Facility, Financing Reimbursement Agreement or Financing Note shall be in
substantially the form of the credit facilities, reimbursement agreements and promissory notes,
respectively, previously entered into by the City in conneclion wilh exisfing Financing
Transactions, exisfing lines of credit secured by the Cily or the sale of general obligation bonds
or notes by the City, but wilh such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer
executing the same shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by the
Mayor or an Authorized Officer to evidence the City Council's approval of all such revisions.

General Obligatior) Bonds ordinance (final)

-43-

 The annual fee paid lo any financial institution lhat provides a Financing Credit Facility shall not
exceed three percent of the principal amount of the Financing Credit Facility outstanding during
such annual period. The final fomn of any Financing Credit Facility. Financing Reimbursement
Agreement or Financing Note entered into by the Cily pursuant (o Ihis paragraph shall be filed in
the office of the City Clerk. The payment obligation of the Cily (each, a "Financing Payment
Obligation") in connection wilh any Financing Credit Facility. Financing Reimbursement
Agreement or Financing Note shall be a general obligalion of the City for the payment of which,
both principal and interest, the City pledges its full faith, credit and resources. Each such
Financing Payment Obligation shall bear interesl al a rate not exceeding 18 percent per annum
and shall mature not later than the fortieth anniversary of the final dale of payment by the Cily
under ihe related Financing Transaction (including the payment of any purchase option price).
The Mayor and each Authorized Officer are each hereby authorized to execute and deliver any
such Financing Credit Facility, Financing Reimbursement Agreement or Financing Note, and
any amendment thereto or replacement thereof, under the seal of the City affixed and attested
by the Cily Clerk. In connection wjth any Financing Transaction, the Mayor and each
Aulhorized Officer are each hereby authorized to retain one or more financial institutions to act
as paying agent on behalf of the City. The Cily shall appropriate or otherwise provide amounts
sufficient to pay when due all Financing Payment Obligations, and the City hereby covenants to
take timely action as required by law to carry out the provisions of this paragraph, but. if for any
such year it fails to do so, this Ordinance shall conslilute a continuing appropriation ordinance of
such amounts without any further aclion on the part of the City Council.
Section 25.
as follows:

Section 3 of the 2002 Ordinance is hereby amended in ils enfirely to read

Section 3. Maximum Amount and Term. Without further authorization of this City
Council, the maximum aggregate principal amount of all Authorized Debt outstanding
under this ordinance al any time shall not exceed One Billion Dollars ($1,000,000,000)
(exclusive of unpaid inlerest and fees). All Authorized Debt shall mature on or prior lo
January 1, 2032.
Section 26. Section 2-32-031 of the Municipal Code is hereby amended by deleting the
language stricken through and by inserting Ihe language underscored, as follows:
2-32-031 JPehtManaqcment Policies; retention of rebate calculation agents,
fLnanfilaiLadvisors and qualified lnd_ep.endent representatives.
(a) The chief financial officer and the comptroller shall each have
authority to retain, in conneclion with debt obligations issued by the City, such
rebate calculation agenls as either such officer may deem necessary or desirable
in order for such debt obligations to comply wilh appficable requirements of the
Internal Revenue Code. Ao used in Ihis Geetiofv-the-term-^hiof finansiol ofncer^'
shatl-mean tho chiof fif>an€4al-&ffi€eF-of-the City oppoiated-by

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-44-

 (b) The chieffi.aai3.CLaLQfClc_erL.shallhaveLa.ytbp_rityJ.Q retain J n ^ o n n e c t i o n
with financial products and _debt oMgat'ons purchased, entered into and/or
issued b y j h e City, such adviso.rs to provLd_e slructurinq^irning_and related advice
for such financial products and debt o b l a t i o n s , as deenoied necessary, ip
compliance with t h a ^ p p l i c a b l e requirements of J h e Dodd-Frank Wall S.fre_et
Reform and Consumer Protection A c l Public Law 111-203. and the regulations
jn connection therewith.
fc) The chief financial officer shall have authoritv lo retain, in connection
with debt obliqatioQS issued by the Cilv. such qualified independent
representatives for selecting, retaining and monitoring the .performance of the
City's interest rate exchange agreements, as deemed necessary or desirable in
order for such inlerest rate exchange agreements to comply with applicable
requirements_of Ihe Dodd-Frank Act and the regulations in connection therewith.
As used in this section, 'interest rate exchange aQreem^rjls" shall mean those
certain iat.srje.st rate e.xchangg_a9Leement5 enlere.dJjil5.pu£gjLi.g.nLtp an o.rdjnance
of the city council aulhorizingJ.b£j-S.suanc_e of a series of bonds.
(d1. The chief financial officer shall have authorily to adopt written policies
which shall address the manaLqement of the city's bond, note and other debt
issuances, including the enteriEig-tDjlP of inleresLiaLe exchange agreements and
hiring of advisors in connection theigwilh. The chief financial officer tiiaV-gmend
such written policies from lime to time. Copies of each such written oolicv and
any amendments lherelo_5hall be kept on file with tt>e comptroller.
Section 27.
To the extent that any ordinance, resolution, rule, order or provision of the
Municipal Code, or part Ihereof, is in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, Ihe provisions
of this Ordinance shall be controlling. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision
shall not affect any of the other provisions of Ihis Ordinance. No provision of the Municipal
Code or violation of any provision of Ihe Municipal Code shall be deemed to render voidable at
Ihe option of the City any document, instrument or agreement authorized hereunder or to impair
the validity of Ihis Ordinance or the instruments authorized by this Ordinance or to impair the
rights of the owners of the Bonds to receive payment of the principal "of or interest on the Bonds
or to impair the security for the Bonds; provided further that the foregoing shall not be deemed
to affect the availability of any other remedy or penalty for any violation of any provision of the
Municipal Code.
Section 28.
This Ordinance shall be published by Ihe Cily Clerk, by causing lo be
printed in special pamphlet form at least five copies hereof, which copies are (o be made
available in her office for public inspection and distribution to members of the public who may
wish to avail themselves of a copy of this Ordinance.
Section 29.
This Ordinance shall be in lull force and effect from and after ils adoption,
approval by the Mayor and publication as provided herein

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

  ZOEzern??olt
 a; 
\g

 

EXHIBIT 

REVOLVING CREDIT AGREEMENT

Execution Copy

REVOLVING CREDIT AGREEMENT

By and Between

CITY OF CHICAGO

and

BARCLAY.S BANK PLC

Dated as of May 16, 2014

DM US 50503541-3 071370 OiilS

 TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION
ARTICLE l

Section 1.01.
ARTICLE II

Section 2.01.
Section 2.02.
Section 2.03.
Section 2.04.
Section 2.05.
Section 2.06.
Section 2.07.
Section 2.08.
Section 2.09.
Section 2.10.
Section 2.11.
Section 2.12.
Section 2.13.
Section 2.14.
Section 2.15.
Section 2.16.
Section 2.17.
Section 2.18.
Section 2.19.

ARTICLE 111

Section 3.01.
Section 3.02.

ARTICLE IV

Section 4.01.
Section 4.02.
Section 4.03.
Section 4.04.
Section 4.05.
Section 4.06.
Section 4.07.

DM U.S 505035.) I -3 071370 Uii 15

HEADING

PAGE

DEEINU'IONS ....

Definitions.
THE REVOLVING CREDIT FACILITY

9

Advances
9
Amount of Advances
9
Borrowing Requests
9
Termination or Reduction of Commitment
10
Conversion to Term Loan
10
Payments; Default Interest; Method of Payment
11
Fees
Error! Bookmark not defmed.
Computation of Interest and Fees
13
Payment Due on Non-Business Day to Be Made on Next
Business Day
13
Prepayment of Loans
13
Bank Note
13
Extension of Stated Expiration Date
14
Net of Ta.xes, Etc
15
Increased Costs
16
Margin Regulations
17
Maximum Rate
17
Prepayment of Advances
18
Change in Law
18
Unavailability of Deposits or Inability to Ascertain, or
Inadequacy of, Adjusted LIBOR
18
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT

Conditions Precedent to the Effectiveness of this
Agreement
Conditions Precedent to Bank's Obligation to Advance
Funds for Loans
REPRESEN TATIONS AND WARRANTIES

Due Authorization
Enforceability
Ordinance
Consents
No Violation
Litigation
Security

19

19
20
21

21
21
21
21
21
22
22

 Section 4.09.
Section 4.10.
Section 4.11.
Section 4.12.
Section 4.14.
Section 4.15.
Section 4.14.
Section 4.15.
Section 4.16.
Section 4.17.
Section 4.18.
ARTICLE V

COVENANTS

Section 5.01.
Section 5.02.
Section 5.03.
ARTICLE VI

Affirmative Covenants of the City
Negative Covenants of the City
Compliance with other Covenants
DEFAULTS

Section 6.01.
Section 6.02.
ARTICLE Vll

Events of Default and Remedies
Remedies
MISCELLANEOUS

Section 7.01.
Section 7.02.
Section 7.03.
Section 7.04.
Section 7.05.
Section 7.06.
Section 7.07.
Section 7.08.
Section 7.09.
Section 7.10.
Section 7.11.
Section 7.12.
Section 7.13.
Section 7.14.
Section 7.15.
Section 7.16.
Section 7.17.

APPENDIX 1

Lien
Organization
Financial Statements
Absence of Default
Environmental Laws
No Proposed Legal Changes
Disclosure
Margin Stock
Reserved
Usury
OFAC Sanctions

Amendments, Waivers, Etc
Notices
Survival of Covenants; Successors and Assigns
Unconditional Obligations
No Liability of the Bank; Indemnification
E.xpenses and Ta.xes
No Waiver; Conflict
Modification, Amendment, Waiver, Etc
Severability
Counterparts
Table of Contents; Headings
Entire Agreement
Governing Law; Sovereign Immunity; Waiver of Jury
Trial
Disclosure of Information
Compliance with OFAC Sanctions Programs
Electronic Transmissions
No Advisory or Fiduciary Responsibility

— FORM OF BANK NOTE

DM US 505035-11-3 071 370 0615

22
22
22
22
22
23
23
23
23
23
23
24

24
26
26
26

26
29
29

29
29
30
31
32
33
33
33
33
34
34
34
34
34
35
35
35

 REVOLVING CREDIT AGREEMENT
THIS REVOLVING CREDI T AGREEMENT dated as of May 16, 2014 (together with any
amendments or supplements hereto, this "Agreement''), is made by and between the CiTY OF
CHICAGO (the "City"), a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local government duly
organized and existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois, and BARCLAYS
BANK PLC (the "Bank'').
W I T N E S S E T II:
WHEREAS, the City has authorized the execution of line of credit agreements pursuant lo
the ordinance duly adopted by the City Council of the City on May 1, 2002, as amended by
ordinances adopted by the City Council on March 14, 2012 and February 5, 2014 (collectively,
the "Ordinance "); and
WHEREAS, the City has requested that the Bank extend credit to the City and enter into
this Agreement; and
WHEREAS,

the Bank is willing to enter into this Agreement upon the terms and conditions

provided herein.
Now THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and the mutual agreements herein
contained, the City and the Bank agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS

Section 1.01.

Defmitions. As used in this Agreement:

"AdjustedLIBOR" means a per annum interest rate detennined pursuant to the following
formula:
Adjusted LIBORs

LIBOR
1 - Reserve Percentage

"Adyance.s" means the advances made by the Bank pursuant to Section 2.03 hereof
"Advance Rate" means, as of any time, the Advance Rate per annum indicated opposite
the Level in the table below containing the appropriate Rating (as defmed below).
Level
Level 1

Moody's Rating
Al or above

DM U.S 50503541-3 071370 061 5

S&P Rating
A-l- or above

Fitch Ratinu
A+ or above

Advance Rate

 Level 2

A2

A

A

Level 3

A3

A-

A-

Level 4

Baal

BBB4-

BBB-t-

Level 5

Baa2

BBB

BBB

Level 6

Baa3 or below or
not rated

BBB- or below or
not rated

BBB-or below
or not rated

For purposes hereof, "Rating" as used above shall mean the long-term rating assigned to the
Secured General Obligation Debt of the City by any of Moody's, S&P or Fitch. In the evenl of a
split rating (i.e., one or more of the Rating Agencies' ratings is at a different level from the rating
of one or more of the other Rating Agencies), the Advance Rate shall be based upon the Level in
which the middle Rating appears (it being understood that, in the event that two such Ratings are
in the same Level, the Advance Rate shall be based upon such Level). Any change in the
Advance Rate resulting from a change in a Rating shall be and become effective as of and on the
date of the announcement of the change in such Rating. Upon the occurrence and during the
continuance of an Event of Default, the Advance Rate shall be the Advance Rate for the Level in
effect p l u s j j i m per annum. References to Rarings above are references to rating categories as
presently determined by the Rating Agencies and in the event of adoption of any new or changed
rating system by any such Rating Agency, each of the Ratings from the Rating Agency in
question referred to above shall be deemed to refer to the rating category under the new rating
system which most closely approximates the applicable rating category as currently in effect.
"Affdiaie " means, with respect to a Person, any Person (whether for-profit or not-forprofit), which "controls," is "controlled" by, or is under common "control" with such Person.
For purposes of this definition, a Person "controls" another Person when the first Person
possesses or exercises directly, or indirectly through one or more other affiliates or related
entities, the power to direct the management and policies of the other Person, whether through
the ownership of voting rights, membership, the power to appoint menibers, trustees or directors,
by contract, or otherwise.
"Agreement" means this Revolving Credit Agreement, as amended and supplemented.
"Authorized Officer" means (a) the Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer, the City
Comptroller or any other officer ofthe City authorized to act on their behalf, and (b) such other
officer of the City, if any, authorized by an amendment to the Ordinance after the Closing Date
to act on the City's behalf with respect to the Related Documents.
"'Availability Period' means the period from and including the Closing Date to and
including the Commitment Tennination Date.
"Available Revolving Commitment" means, at any time, the Commitment then in effect
minus the Loan Exposure.

DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 "Bank" has the meaning set forth in the introductory paragraph hereof
"Bank Agreement" means any credit agreement, letter of credit, reimbursement
agreement, bond purchase agreement, liquidity agreement, line of credit agreement, revolving
credit agreement or other agreement or instrument (or any amendment, supplement or
modification thereto) entered into by the City with any Person, directly or indirectly, under
which any Person or Persons undertakes to make loans, extend credit or liquidity to the City or to
purchase securities pursuant to such agreement in connection with any General Obligation Debt.
"Bank Note " has the meaning set forth in Section 2.11 hereof
"Bank Rate " means the rate of interest per annum with respect to a Term Loan (i) for any
day commencing on the Conversion Date up to and including the one hundred eightieth (180th)
day after such Conversion Date, equal to the Base Rate from time to time in effect, and (ii) for
any day commencing on the one hundred eighty-first (181st) day next succeeding the Conversion
Date and thereafter, equal to the sum of the Base Rate from time to time in effect plus        
m                 [ m ; provided, that immediately and automatically upon the occurrence of an Event of
Default (and without any notice given with respect thereto) and during the continuance of such
Event of Default, "Bank Rate" shall mean the Default Rate; provided, further, that the Bank Rate
payable by the City shall be subject to Section 2.16.
"Base Rate" means the highest of

''Borrowing Date" means the date on which an Advance is funded by the Bank pursuant
to Section 2.03.
"Borrowing Request" means a request by the City for an Advance in accordance with
Section 2.03.
"Business Day" means any day other than (a) a day on which banks located in the city in
which the principal office of the Bank is located is required or authorized by law to close, or (b)
a day on which the New York Stock Exchange is closed. For purposes of this definition, the
Bank's principal office shall be that office at which a Borrowing Request is to be presented
hereunder.
"Change of Law" shall mean the adoption, after the Closing Date, of or change in any
law, rule, regulation, statute, treaty, guideline or directive of any Governmental Authority or the
occurrence of the effective dale of any of the foregoing if adopted prior to the Closing Date or
any change after the Closing Date in the application, interpretation or enforcement, of any of the
foregoing.
"City" has the meaning set forth in the recitals hereof
"Closing Dale " means May 16, 2014

DM US 50503541-3 0713700615

 "Commitment'' means the commitment of the Bank to make Advances and Term Loans
in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding $100,000,000, as such commitinent may be
reduced pursuant to Section 2.04.
"Commitment Termination Date" means the earlier of (i) the Stated Expiration Date,
(ii) the date on which the Commitment is reduced to zero pursuant to Section 6.02 or such earlier
date on vvhich the Bank's obligation to make Loans hereunder is terminated in accordance with
the terms hereof, and (iii) the date on which this Agreement is terminated pursuant to Section
2.04.
"Compulation Date" means the second London Business Day preceding each applicable
Rate Reset Date for any Advance.
'Conversion Date" has the meaning set forth in Section 2.05(a).
"Debt" of any Person means at any date, without duplication, (i) all obligations of such
Person for borrowed money, (ii) all obligations of such Person evidenced by bonds, debentures,
notes or other similar instruments, (iii) all obligations of such Person to pay the deferred
purchase price of property or services, except trade accounts payable in the ordinary course of
business, (iv) all obligations of such Person as le.ssee under capital leases, (v) all Debts of others
secured by a lien on any asset of such Person, whether or not such Debts are assumed by such
Person, (vi) all guaranties by such Person of Debt of other Persons, (vii) all obligations of such
Person under any Bank Agreement and (viii) all obligations of such Person under any Swap
Contract.
"Default" means any condition or event which with the giving of notice or lapse of time
or both would, unless cured or waived, become an Event of Default.
"Default Rale" means a fluctuating interest rate per annum equal to the sum of the Base
Rate from time to time in effect plus
provided that the Default Rate
payable by the City shall be subject to Section 2.16.
"Dodd-Frank" shall mean the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
Act of 2010, as enacted by the United States Congress, and signed into law on July 21, 2010, and
all rules, guidelines or directives promulgated thereunder.
"Dollars" or "S" refers to lawful money ofthe United States of America.
'Event of Default" has the meaning set forth in Section 6.01 hereof
"Extended Availability Periocf shall have the meaning assigned to such term in Section
2.12.
"Facility Fee Rate" means, as of any time, the Facility Fee Rate per annum indicated
opposite the Level in the table below containing the appropriate Rating (as defined below).
-4DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 Level

Moody's Ratine

S&P Ratine

Fitch Rating

Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 6

A1 or above
A2
A3
Baal
Baa2
Baa3 or below or not
rated

A+ or above
A
ABBB+
BBB
BBB- or below or
not rated

A+ or above
A
ABBB+
BBB
BBB-or
below or not
rated

•

Facility Fee
Rate

For purposes hereof, "Rating" as used above shall mean the long-term rating assigned to the
Secured General Obligation Debt ofthe City by any of Moody's, S&P or Fitch. In the event of a
split rating (i.e., one or more of the Rating Agencies' ratings is al a different level from the rating
of one or more ofthe other Rating Agencies), the Facility Fee Rate shall be based upon the Level
in which the middle Rating appears (it being understood that, in the event that two such Ratings
are in the same Level, the Facility Fee Rate shall be based upon such Level). Any change in the
Facility Fee Rate resulting from a change in a Rating shall be and become effective as of and on
the date of the announcement ofthe change in such Rating. Upon the occurrence and during the
continuance of an Event of Default, the Facility Fee Rate shall be the Facility Fee Rate for the
Level in effect plus
per annum. References to Ratings above are references to rating
categories as presently determined by the Rating Agencies and in the event of adoption of any
new or changed rating system by any such Rating Agency, each of the Ratings from the Rating
Agency in question referred to above shall be deemed to refer to the rating category under the
new rating system which most closely approximates the applicable rating category as currently in
effect. The Bank and the City acknowledge that, as of the Closing Date, the Facility Fee Rate is
that specified for Level 3 above.
"Facility Fees" means the fees payable to the Bank pursuant to Section 2.07(a) hereof

"Federal Funds Rate " means for any day the rate of interest per annum as determined by
the Bank at which overnight Federal Funds are offered to the Bank for such day by major banks
in the interbank market, with any change in such rate to become effective as to the City on the
date of any change in such rate. Each determination of the Federal Funds Rate by the Bank shall
be deemed conclusive and binding on the City absent manifest error.
"Fiscal Year" means the period of twelve consecutive calendar months ending on
December 31, or such other period of twelve consecutive calendar months selected by the City as
itsfiscalyear.
"Filch" means Fitch Ratings, Inc., and its successors and assigns.

"GA.4P" means generally accepted accounring principles in the United States as in effect
from time to time, applied by the City on a basis consistent with the City's most recent financial
statements furnished to the Bank pursuant to Section 5.01(b) hereof

DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 "General Obligation Debt" means Debt which is a direct and general obligation of the
City payable from any funds of the City legally available for such purposes, whether or not
subject to appropriation.
"Governmental Authority" means any national, state or local government (whether
domestic or foreign), any political subdivision thereof or any other governmental, quasigovernmental, judicial, public or statutory instrumentality, authority, body, agency, bureau or
entity (including any zoning authority, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Federal
Reserve Board, any central bank or any comparable authority), or any arbitrator whh authority to
bind a party at law.
"Interest Payment Dale" shall mean (i) the first Business Day of each calendar month,
(ii) the Conversion Date, (iii) the day of payment of each installment of a Term Loan and (iv) the
date on which any Loan is paid in full.
"Interesl Period" shall mean, as to any Advance, the period from (and including) the
date such Advance is made to (but excluding) the next succeeding Rate Reset Date, and
thereafter shall mean the period from (and including) such Rate Reset Date to (but excluding) the
next succeeding Rate Reset Date (or, if sooner, to and including the Stated Expiration Date, as
applicable).
"LIBOR" means, for any Rate Reset Date, the London interbank offered rate for deposits
in United States dollars for a period of one month, which rate appears on the Reuters Screen
LlBOROl Page (or such other page as may replace LIBOROl on that service or such other
service as may be nominated by the British Bankers' Association (or any entity that assumes
responsibility for detemiining such rate) as an information vendor for the purpose of displaying
British Bankers' Association Interest Settlement Rates for U.S. Dollar deposits) as of 11:00 a.m.,
London, England time, on the Computation Date immediately preceding such Rate Reset Date,
or if such rate is not available, another comparable rate determined by the Bank in its reasonable
judgment upon notice thereof provided by the Bank to the City. LIBOR, as defined in this
Agreement, is a reference rate which will be employed solely to determine the Advance Rate for
purposes of this Agreement. It does not represent a cost to the Bank of funding its Advances
hereunder, and the City understands that the Bank will not fund any such Advances in the
London interbank market.
"Loan" means each Advance or each Term Loan, or both, as the context may require.
"Loan Exposure" means, as of any date of determination, the sum of (i) the total
outstanding principal amount of the Advances and (ii) the total outstanding principal amount of
the Term Loans on such date.
"London Business Day" means any day on which commercial banks are open for
general business (including dealings in foreign exchange and foreign currency deposits) in
London, England.

-6DM_U1. 50503541-3 071370 0615

 "Material Adverse Effect" means, as to the City, any material adverse change in or effect
on (i) the operations, assets, liabilities, condition (financial or otherwise) or results of operations
ofthe City, (ii) the ability of the City to consummate the transactions contemplated by the
Related Documents, or (iii) the ability ofthe City to perform any of its obligations under the
Related Documents.
"Maximum Rate" means the lesser of (i) 18% or (ii) the maximum non-usurious lawful
rate of interest permitted by applicable law.
"Moody's" means Moody's Investors Service and ils successors and assigns.
"Obligations" means the Reimbursement Obligations (which includes amounts owing to
the Bank evidenced by the Bank Note), the Facility Fees and all other obligations of the City to
the Bank arising under or in relation to this Agreement.
"OFAC" means the United States Department of Treasury Office of Foreign Assets
Control.
"OFAC Sanctions Programs" means all laws, regulations, and executive orders
administered by OFAC, including without limitation, the Bank Secrecy Act, anti-money
laundering laws (including, without limitation, the Patriot Act), and all economic and trade
sanction programs administered by OFAC, any and all similar United States federal laws,
regulations or executive orders, and any similar laws, regulations or orders adopted by any State
whhin the United States.
"OFAC SDN List" means the list of the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked
Persons maintained by OFAC.
"Ordinance " has the meaning set forth in the recitals hereof
"Olher Taxes" has the meaning set forth in Section 2.13(a) hereof
"Patriot Acl" means the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate
Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001, Title III of Pub. L. 107-56
(signed into law October 26, 2001).
"Per.son" means an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an association, a limited
liability company, a trust or any other entity or organization, including a government or political
subdivision or any agency or instrumentality thereof
"Prime Rale" means for any day the per annum rate of interest as determined by the
Bank from time to time at its New York office as its "prime rate" (or equivalent), with any
change in such rate to be automatically and immediately effective on the date of any change in
such rate, it being understood that such rate may not be the Bank's best or lowest rate.

DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 "Rate Reset Date " means, with respect to any Advance, the last Business Day of each
calendar month.
"Rating Agencies" means Fitch, Moody's and S&P.
"Reduction Fee" has the meaning set forth in Section 2.07(e).
"Reimbursement Obligations ' means any and all obligations of the City to repay the
Bank for any Advance or Term Loan, including in each instance all interest accrued thereon,
which obligations are evidenced and secured by the Bank Note.
"Related Documents " means this Agreement, the Ordinance and the Bank Note.
"Reserve Percentage" means for any day, that percentage (expressed as a decimal)
which is in effect from time to time under regulations issued from time to time by the Board of
Governors ofthe Federal Reserve System of the United States for determining the maximum
reserve requirement (including, without limitation, any basic, supplemental, emergency, special,
marginal or other reserves) applicable with respect to Eurocurrency funding (or against any other
category of funding liabilities that includes deposits by reference to which the interest rate of
Advances is determined), whether or not the Bank has any Eurocurrency liabilities subject to
such reserve requirement at that time. Advances shall be deemed to constitute Eurocurrency
liabilities and as such shall be deemed subject to reserve requirements without benefit of credit
for any prorations, exceptions or offsets that may be available from time to time to the Bank.
The Adjusted LIBOR shall be adjusted automatically on and as of the effective date of any
change in the Reserve Percentage.
"S&P" means Standard & Poor's Ratings Group, a Standard & Poor's Financial Services
LLC business and its successors and assigns.
"Secured General Obligalion Debt" means General Obligation Debt supported or
secured by the City's full faith and credit and backed by the ad valorem taxing power of the City.
"StaledExpiration Date" means November 30, 2015 as such date may be extended from
time to time by the Bank by delivery of a written Notice of Extension to the City in the form of
Exhibit C; provided that if any such date is not a Business Day, the Stated Expiration Date shall
be the next preceding Business Day.
"Swap Contract" means (a) any and all rate swap transactions, basis swaps, credit
derivative transactions, forward rate transactions, commodity swaps, commodity options,
forward commodity contracts, equity or equity index swaps or options, bond or bond price or
bond index swaps or options or forward bond or forward bond price or forward bond index
transactions, interest rate options, forward foreign exchange transactions, cap transactions, floor
transactions, collar transactions, currency swap transactions, cross-currency rate swap
transactions, currency options, spot contracts, or any other similar transactions or any
combination of any ofthe foregoing (including any options to enter into any of the foregoing),
whether or not any such transaction is governed by or subject to any master agreement, and
-8DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 (b) any and all transactions of any kind, and the related confirmations, which are subject lo the
terms and conditions of, or governed by, any form of master agreement published by the
International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc.. any International Foreign Exchange
Master Agreement, or any other master agreement (any such master agreement, together with
any related schedules, a "Ma.ster Agreement"), including any such obligations or liabilities under
any Master Agreement, in each case, which is a general obligation of the City payable from any
funds legally available for such purposes.
"Taxes" has the meaning set forth in Section 2.13(a) hereof
"Termination Fee " has the meaning set forth Section 2.07(c).
"Term Loans" means the term loans made by the Bank to the City pursuant to Section
2.05 hereof
"written" or "in writing" means any form of written communication or a
communication by means of facsimile device or electronic mail.
The foregoing definitions shall be equally applicable to both the singular and plural forms
ofthe defined terms. All references in this Agreement to limes of day shall be references lo
Chicago time unless otherwise expressly provided herein. Unless otherwise inconsistent with the
terms of this Agreement, all accounting terms shall be interpreted and all accounting
determinations hereunder shall be made in accordance with GAAP.
ARTICLE II
T H E REVOLVING CREDIT FACILITY

Section 2.01. Advances. Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, the Bank
agrees to make Advances from time to time during the Availability Period in an aggregate
principal amount that will not result in the Bank's Loan Exposure exceeding the Commitment.
Each Advance shall be made solely for the purpose of providing funds to fund working capital
expenses or capital expenditures, subject to the provisions of Section 5.02(c) of this Agreement.
Within the foregoing limits and subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, the City may
borrow, repay and reborrow Advances at any time during the Availability Period. The City
agrees to reimburse the Bank for the full amount of any Advances and Term Loans in accordance
with this Agreement.
Section 2.02.
Amount of Advances. At the time that each Advance is made, such Advance
shall be in an aggregate amount that is an integral multiple of $1,000 and not less than the lesser
of $500,000 or the entire unused balance of the Available Revolving Commitment.
Section 2.03. Borrowing Requests. If, on any Business Day during the Availability
Period, the Bank receives at the location specified for the delivery of a Borrowing Request
-9DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 specified pursuant to Section 7.02, a request in the forni of Exhibit A from an Authorized Officer
of the City, and the City telephonically confirms the Bank's receipt of such Borrowing Request,
not later than 12:00 noon New York City time, the Bank shall, subject to satisfaction ofthe
requirements of Section 2.01 and Section 3.02, transfer to the City not later than 2:30 p.m. New
York City time on the third (3"*) Business Day following the Bank's receipt of the Borrowing
Request if such Business Day falls during the Availability Period, or such later day during the
Availability Period as specified in such Borrowing Request, in immediately available funds, an
amount equal to the Advance thereby requested; provided that the City may not deliver a
Borrowing Request less than three Business Days prior to the Commitment Termination Date.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, a Borrowing Request may be delivered by
electronic mail. A Borrowing Request shall be irrevocable after receipt thereof by the Bank.
Each written Borrowing Request shall specify the following information:
(i)

the aggregate amount of the requested Advance; and

(ii)
the requested Borrowing Date, which shall be a Business Day within the
Availability Period at least three (3) Business Days following the Bank's receipt of such
Borrowing Request, and the requested time of funding.
Section 2.04.
Termination or Reduction of Commitment, (a) Unless previously
terminated, the Commitinent shall terminate at 12:00 noon, New York time, on the Stated
Expiration Date.
(b) Subject to the payment of the Termination Fee or Reduction Fee, if any, and any
payment required under Section 2.17 hereof, the City may at any time permanently reduce the
Commitment or terminate this Agreement for any reason upon (i) the payment in full of all
outstanding Advances (or in the case of a partial reduction of the Commitment, the payment in
full of all outstanding Advances such that the Loan Exposure does not exceed the Commitment
after giving effect to such reduction), together with accrued and unpaid interest thereon, (ii) the
payment in full of accrued and unpaid fees, and (iii) the payment in full of all reimbursable
expenses and other obligations together with accrued and unpaid interest thereon.
The City shall notify the Bank of any election to reduce the Commitment or
terminate this Agreement under paragraph (b) of this Section 2.04 at least three (3) Business
Days prior to the effective date of such termination or reduction, specifying such election and the
effective date thereof Any reduction of the Commitinent shall be irrevocable and permanent.
Section 2.05. Conversion to Term Loan, (a) If any Advance shall remain outstanding on
the Stated Expiration Date, and on such date (i) no Event of Default has occurred and is
continuing, (ii) the representations and warranties set forth in Article IV and Section 7.13(b)
hereof are true and correct as if made on such date and (iii) a continuing appropriation providing
for the payment ofthe principal of all Loans and interest thereon shall remain in effect, the
principal amount of such Advance shall be automatically converted on that day (the ''Conversion
Date") to a term loan that shall bear interest in accordance with Section 2.06 and be repaid as
provided in paragraph (b) of this Section 2.05.

-10DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 (b) The principal amount of each Term Loan shall be amortized in equal semiannual principal installments, the first such installment being payable on the next January 1 or
July 1, as applicable, occurring at least one hundred twenty (120) days following the Stated
Expiration Date and on each such semi-annual date thereafter so that such Term Loans are paid
in full on the last such semi-annual date to occur on or prior to the fourth (4th) year anniversary
of the Commitment Termination Date; provided, however, that if such date is not a Business
Day, then such installment shall be paid in full no later than the next succeeding Business Day;
provided, further, however that if an Event of Default shall occur hereunder, the Bank may
declare all Term Loans to be immediately due and payable.
(c)
In the event that any Advances outstanding on the Commitment
Termination Date are not converted to a Term Loan on the Stated Expiration Date, all Advances
shall be due and payable on the Stated Expiration Date.
Section 2.06.
Payments; Default Interest: Method of Payment, (a) Each Advance shall
bear interest on the principal amount outstanding from time to time from the Borrowing Date to
the eariier of (i) date of payment in full or (ii) the Conversion Date, at the Advance Rate in effect
from time to time. The Bank shall determine the applicable Advance Rate as of each applicable
Computation Date, and such rate shall become effective on the Rate Reset Date ne.xt succeeding
such Computation Date and interest at such rate shall accrue each day during the applicable
Interest Period, commencing on and including the first day of such Interest Period to but
excluding the last day of such Interest Period; provided lhat, the initial Advance Rate for a new
Advance shall be determined by the Bank two London Business Days prior to the date such Loan
is advanced hereunder; provided further, that, the ne.xt immediately succeeding Advance Rate
for such Advance shall be determined by the Bank on the Rate Reset Date immediately
succeeding the date such Loan is advanced.
(b)
Each Term Loan shall bear interest on the principal amount outstanding
from lime to time from the Conversion Date to the date of payment in full at the Bank Rate in
effect from time to time. The Bank shall determine the applicable Bank Rate for each day that a
Term Loan is outstanding, and interest at such rate shall accrue each day that such Term Loan is
outstanding.
(c) Accrued interest on each Loan shall be payable in arrears on each Interest
Payment Date; provided, that (i) interest accrued pursuant to paragraph (d) of this Section 2.06
shall be payable on demand, and (ii) in the event of any prepayment of a Loan in part, accrued
interest on the principal amount prepaid shall be payable on the day of such prepayment.
(d) All payments to be made by the City to the Bank hereunder shall be made in
lawful currency of the United States in freely transferable and immediately available funds. On
each date on which any amount is due to the Bank pursuant to this Agreement, the City shall pay
or cause to be paid the same to the Bank by delivering to the Bank wire transfer confirmation
number evidencing the wire transfer of such amount to the Bank at  
(or at such other account number or address as the Bank may from time to
time designate) by 2:00 p.m., Chicago time, on such date.
-1 1DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 (e) The City agrees to pay the Bank, upon demand, interest on any and all
amounts owed by the City under this Agreement from the earlier ofthe date such amounts are
due and payable but not paid and the occurrence of an Event of Default until payment thereof in
full, at a fluctuating interest rate per annum equal to the Default Rate. The obligations of the
City under this Section 2.06(e) shall survive the termination of this Agreement.
Section 2.07.

Fees.

(a) Facility Fee. The City agrees to pay to the Bank a non-refundable Facility
Fee payable quarterly in arrears on the first Business Day of each January, April, July and
October (commencing on July I, 2014 for the period from and including the Closing Date to and
including June 30, 2014) occurring prior to the Termination Date, and on the Termination Date,
in an amount equal to the Facility Fee Rate on the weighted average Available Revolving
Commitment (the "Facility Fees") during each related period.
(b) Drawing Fee. The City agrees to pay to the Bank semi-annually in arrears
on the first Business Day of each January and July to occur immediately following a Borrowing
Request, a non-refundable fee (each, a "Draw Fee") of
for each Borrowing Request;
provided that the aggregate amount of such Draw Fees shall not exceed
in any calendar
year.
(c) Amendment Fee. The City agrees to pay to the Bank for any amendment,
modification or transfer of this Agreement, a non-refundable fee c f U m H plus the reasonable
fees and expenses of outside counsel to the Bank.
(d) Waiver Fee. The City agrees to pay to the Bank on the date of any waiver
relating to this Agreement, a non-refundable fee in an amount to be mutually agreed upon
between the City and the Bank plus the reasonable fees and expenses of outside counsel to the
Bank.
(e) Termination and Reduction Fee. (i) The City agrees not to terminate or
replace this Agreement prior to the first anniversary of the Closing Date (or, if the Stated
E.xpiration Date shall be extended in accordance with this Agreement, the first anniversary of the
Stated Expiration Date prior to such extension), except upon the payment by the City to the Bank
of a termination fee (the "Termination Fee") in an amount equal to the Facility Fees payable
hereunder (based upon the Available Revolving Commitment in effect on the date of such
termination) for a term beginning on the date this Agreement is terminated or replaced and
ending on and including the first anniversary of the Closing Date (or, if the Stated Expiration
Date shall be extended in accordance with this Agreement, the first anniversary of the Stated
Expiration Date prior to such extension) at the Facility Fee Rate in effect as of the date of such
termination or replacement, payable on the date this Agreement is terminated or replaced.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such Termination Fee shall be payable if the City requests in
writing to the Bank that this Agreement be terminated as the result of the reduction of any of the
Bank's short-term or long-term debt ratings below "P-1" or "A2'" by Moody's, "A-T" or "A" by
S&P or "FI" or "A" by Fitch or if this Agreement is terminated in accordance with Section
5.01(i).

DM US 50503541-3 0713700615

 (ii) The City agrees not to permanently reduce the Commitment prior to the first
anniversary of the Closing Date (or, if the Stated Expiration Date shall be extended in
accordance with this Agreement, the first anniversary of the Stated Expiration Date prior to such
extension), except upon the payment by the City to the Bank in connection with each and every
permanent reduction of a reduction fee equal to the Facility Fees that would have been payable to
the Bank on the amount by which the Commitment is reduced for the period beginning on the
date of reduction and ending on the first anniversary of the Closing Date (or, if the Stated
Expiration Date shall be extended in accordance with this Agreement, the first anniversary ofthe
Stated Expiration Date prior to such extension) based upon the Facility Fee Rate in effect as of
the date of such permanent reduction (the "Reduction Fee"). Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
such Reduction Fee shall be payable if the City requests in writing to the Bank that the
Commitment be reduced as the result of the reduction of any of the Bank's short-term or longterm debt ratings below "P-1" or "A2" by Moody's, " A - l " or "A" by S&P or " F I " or "A'" by
Fitch.
Section 2.08. Computation of Inlerest and Fees. Except as otherwise provided herein, all
computations of fees and interest payable by the City under this Agreement shall be made on the
basis of a year of 365 or 366 days, as applicable, and actual number of days elapsed. Interest
shall accrue during each period during which interest is computed from and including the first
day thereof to but excluding the last day thereof
Section 2.09. Payment Due on Non-Business Day lo Be Made on Next Business Day. 1 f
any sum becomes payable pursuant to this Agreement on a day vvhich is not a Business Day, the
date for payment thereof shall be extended, without penalty, to the next succeeding Business
Day, and such extended time shall be included in the computation of interest and fees.
Section 2.10. Prepayment of Loans, (a) Subject to the payment by the City of any
amounts due under Section 2.17 hereof the City shall have the right at any time and from time to
time to prepay any Advance and any Term Loan in whole at any time or in part from time to
time, subject to prior written notice in accordance with paragraph (c) of this Section 2.10;
provided, that each prepayment shall be in an aggregate amount that is an integral multiple of
$1,000 and not less than $500,000. Partial prepayments of Advances and Term Loans shall be
applied to installments of principal in inverse order of maturity.
(b) In the event that the total Loan Exposure exceeds the Commitinent (the
parties hereby acknowledging that such event shall be in violation of Section 2.01 hereoO, the
City shall promptly prepay the Loans in an aggregate amount equal to such excess.
(c) The City shall notify the Bank by telephone (confirmed by facsimile) of any
prepayment hereunder not later than 11:00 a.m., New York time, one Business Day before the
day of prepayment. Each such notice shall be irrevocable and shall specify the prepayment date
and the principal amount of each Loan or portion thereof to be prepaid. Prepayments shall be
accompanied by accrued interest to the extent required by Section 2.06 hereof
Section 2.11. Bank Note, (a) The Loans shall be evidenced by a Bank Note of the City in
substantially the form of Appendix 1 hereto (such Bank Note and any Bank Note issued as a
-13DM. US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 replacement or in substitution therefore, the "Bank Note'") which Bank Note shall be a "Line of
Credit Note" and "Authorized Debt" for purposes of the Ordinance. The Bank Note shall be
duly executed and delivered, shall be dated the date hereof and shall be payable to the Bank in
the principal amount of $100,000,000 (or such lesser amount as shall be outstanding thereunder)
and interest thereon. The Bank Note shall be subject to prepayment as provided in Section 2.10
hereof
(b) The City authorizes the Bank to endorse on a Schedule attached to the Bank
Note a notation vvith respect to each Loan made hereunder of: (i) the date and principal amount
of each Loan, and (ii) the date and amount of each repayment or prepayment of principal thereof
Each endorsement shall, in the absence of manifest error, be conclusive as to the outstanding
balance of the Loans made by the Bank; provided, however, that the failure to make such
notation with respect to any Loan or any payment of a Loan shall not limit or otherwise affect the
obligations of the City under this Agreement or the Bank Note to repay the Loans in accordance
with the terms set forth herein. The City shall pay principal and interest on the Bank Note on the
dates and at the rates provided for in Article II hereof with respect to Advances and Term Loans.
Section 2.12. Extension of Staled Expiration Date. The Stated Expiration Date may be
extended from time to time by agreement in writing between the Bank and the City (the period
from the preceding Stated Expiration Date to such new Stated Expiration Date being herein
sometimes called the "Extended Availability Period"). The Extended Availability Period may
itself be extended in a like manner for additional periods. If no Event of Default has occurred and
is continuing, the City may request in writing to the Bank, in the form of Exhibit B to this
Agreement not earlier than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the Stated Expiration Date
that the Bank extend the Stated Expiration Date. The City has no obligation to request an
Extended Availability Period and the Bank has no obligation to agree to any Extended
Availability Period, and all terms of the extension (including the term, commitinent and other
fees, interest rates and other provisions) shall be mutually acceptable to the Bank and the City.
The Bank agrees to respond to a written extension request by the City within thirty (30) days of
receipt of such request by the Bank. If the Bank fails to respond to the City within thirty (30)
days of receipt of the City's request or the Stated Expiration Date shall have occurred, the Bank
shall be deemed to have denied such request; provided that, in connection with any extension of
the initial Stated Expiration Date (November 30, 2015), the Bank shall have until September 15,
2015 to respond to such extension request before such failure to respond shall be deemed to be a
denial of such request. If the Bank and the City agree to an Extended Availability Period, the
Bank shall give written notice, in the form of a Notice of Extension substantially in the form of
E.xhibit C hereto (a "Notice of E.xtension") of its determination to extend the Stated Expiration
Date, to the City. If the Stated Expiration Date is extended, the City shall, except as otherwise
agreed to in writing by the Bank, be deemed to have made the representations and warranties
contained herein on and as ofthe date on which the Stated Expiration Date is so extended and
shall be deemed to have acknowledged that (i) the obligation of the City to pay the Termination
Fee and Reduction Fee shall apply to such extended Stated Expiration Date and (ii) a continuing
appropriation providing for the payment of the principal of all Loans and interest thereon
remains in effect.

-14DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 Section 2.13. Net of Taxes, Etc. (a) Taxes. Any and all payments to the Bank by the City
hereunder shall be made free and clear of and without deduction for any and all taxes, levies,
imposts, deductions, charges, withholdings or liabilities imposed as a result of a Change of Law,
excluding, however, taxes imposed on or measured by the net income or capital of the Bank by
any jurisdiction or any political subdivision or taxing authority thereof or therein solely as a
result of a connection between the Bank and such jurisdiction or political subdivision (all such
non-excluded taxes, levies, imposts, deductions, charges, withholdings and liabilities being
hereinafter referred to as "Taxes"). If as a result of a Change of Law, the City shall be required
by law to withhold or deduct any Taxes imposed by the United States or any political subdivision
thereof or any other taxing authority from or in respect of any sum payable hereunder or under
the Bank Note to the Bank, (i) the sum payable shall be increased as may be necessary so that
after making all required deductions (including deductions applicable to additional sums payable
under this Section 2.13), the Bank receives an amount equal to the sum it would have received
had no such deductions been made, (ii)thc City shall make such deductions and (iii) the City
shall pay the full amount deducted to the relevant taxation authority or other authority in
accordance with applicable law. If the City shall make any payment under this Section 2.13 to or
for the benefit ofthe Bank with respect to Taxes and the Bank (in its discretion as to the extent,
order and means in which it does so) shall claim (and receive and retain) any credit or deduction
for such Ta.xes against any other ta.xes payable by the Bank to any taxing jurisdiction in the
United States then the Bank shall pay to the City an amount equal to the amount by which such
other taxes are actually reduced; provided that the aggregate amount payable by the Bank
pursuant to this sentence shall not exceed the aggregate amount previously paid by the City with
respect lo such Taxes. In addition, the City agrees to pay any present or future stamp, recording
or documentary taxes and, if as a result of a Change of Lavv, any other excise or property taxes,
charges or similar levies that arise under the laws of the United States of America, the Stale of
New York or the State of Illinois or any other political subdivision or taxing authority from any
payment made hereunder or from the execution or delivery or otherwise with respect to this
Agreement, excluding, however, taxes imposed on or measured by the net income or capital of
the Bank by any jurisdiction or any political subdivision or taxing authority thereof or therein
solely as a result of a connection between the Bank and such jurisdiction or political subdivision
(hereinafter referred to as "Other Taxes"). The Bank shall provide to the City within a
reasonable time a copy of any written notification it receives with respect to Other Taxes owing
by the City to the Bank hereunder provided thai the Bank's failure to send such notice shall not
relieve the City of its obligation to pay such amounts hereunder in accordance with clause (b) of
this Section.
(b) Payment of Taxes. The City shall, to the fullest extent permitted by law, pay the
Bank for the full amount of Taxes and Other Ta.xes including any Ta.xes or Other Ta.xes imposed
by any jurisdiction on amounts payable under this Section 2.13 paid by the Bank or any liability
(including penalties, interest and expenses) arising therefrom or with respect thereto, whether or
not such Taxes or Other Taxes were correctly or legally asserted; provided \.ha\ the City shall not
be obligated to pay the Bank for any penalties, interest or expenses relating to Taxes or Other
Taxes arising from the Bank's gross negligence or willful misconduct. The Bank agrees to give
notice to the City ofthe assertion of any claim against the Bank relating to such Taxes or Other
Taxes as promptly as is practicable after being notified of such assertion; provided that the
Bank's failure to notify the City promptly of such assertion shall not relieve the City of its
-15DM US 5050354 1-3 071370 0615

 obligation under this Section 2.13. Payments by the City pursuant to this Section shall be made
within thirty (30) days from the date the Bank makes written demand therefor, which demand
shall be accompanied by a certificate describing in reasonable detail the basis thereof The Bank
agrees to repay to the City any refund (including that portion of any interest that was included as
part of such refund) vvith respect to Taxes or Other Taxes paid by the City pursuant to this
Section 2.13 received by the Bank for Taxes or Other Taxes that were paid by the City pursuant
to this Section 2.13 and to contest, with the cooperation and at the expense of the City, any such
Taxes or Other Ta,xes which the Bank or the City reasonably believes not to have been properly
assessed.
(c) Notice. Within thirty (30) days after the date of any payment of Taxes by the City,
the City shall furnish to the Bank the original or a certified copy of a receipt evidencing payment
thereof
Section 2.14. Increased Costs, (a) If the Bank shall have determined that the adoption or
implementation of, or any change in, any lavv, rule, treaty or regulation, or any policy, guideline
or directive of, or any change in the interpretation or administration thereofby any court, central
bank or other administrative or Governmental Authority (in each case, whether or not having the
force of law), or compliance by the Bank with any request or directive of any such court, central
bank or other administrative or Governmental Authority (whether or not having the force of
law), shall (i) change the basis of ta.xation of payments to the Bank of any amounts payable
hereunder (except for ta.xes on the overall net income of the Bank), (ii) impose, modify or deem
applicable any reserve, special deposit or similar requirement against making or maintaining its
obligations under this Agreement or assets held by, or deposit vvith or for the account of, the
Bank or (iii) impose on the Bank any other condition regarding this Agreement, and the result of
any event referred to in clause (i), (ii) or (iii) above shall be to increase the cost to the Bank of
making or maintaining its obligations hereunder, or to reduce the amount of any sum received or
receivable by the Bank hereunder or under the Bank Note, then the City shall pay to the Bank at
such time and in such amount as is set forth in paragraph (c) of this Section 2.14, such additional
amount or amounts as will compensate the Bank for such increased costs or reductions in
amount.
(b) If the Bank shall have determined that the adoption or implementation of, or any
change in, any law, rule or regulation, or any policy, guideline or directive of or any change in
the interpretation or administration thereof by, any court, central bank or other administrative or
Governmental Authority (in each case, whether or not having the force of law), or compliance by
the Bank or the Bank's holding company vvith any directive of or guidance from any central bank
or other authority (in each case, whether or not having the force of law), shall impose, modify or
deem applicable any capital adequacy or similar requirement (including, without limitation, a
request or requirement that affects the manner in which the Bank or the Bank's holding company
allocates capital resources to its commitments, including its obligations under lines of credit) that
either (i) affects or would affect the amount of capital to be maintained by the Bank or the
Bank's holding company or (ii) reduces or would reduce the rate of return on the Bank's or the
Bank's holding company's capital to a level below that vvhich the Bank or the Bank's holding
company could have achieved but for such circumstances (taking into consideration the Bank's
or the Bank's holding company's policies with respect to capital adequacy) then, the City shall

DM US 50503541-3 0713700615

 pay to the Bank, as applicable, at such time and in such amount as is set forth in paragraph (c) of
this Section, such additional amount or amounts as will compensate the Bank or the Bank's
holding company for such cost of maintaining such increased capital or such reduction in the rate
of return on the Bank's or the Bank's holding company's capital.
(c) All payments of amounts referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Section shall
be due thirty (30) days following the City's receipt of written notice thereof and shall be payable,
in full, on the next succeeding quarterly payment date that the Facility Fee is due and payable.
Interest on the sums due as described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Section, and in the
preceding sentence, shall begin to accrue at a rate per annum equal to the Base Rate from the
date which is thirty (30) days following the City's receipt of notice thereof and shall otherwise be
payable in accordance vvith Section 2.06 hereof; provided that from and after the required date of
payment, interest shall begin to accrue on such obligations at a rate per annum equal to the
Default Rate until such delinquent payments have been paid in full. A certificate as to such
increased cost, increased capital or reduction in return incurred by the Bank as a result of any
event mentioned in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this Section setting forth, in reasonable detail, the
basis for such calculation and the amount of such calculation shall be submitted by the Bank to
the City and shall be deemed conclusive if reasonably determined. In making the determinations
contemplated by the above referenced certificate, the Bank may make such reasonable estimates,
assumptions, allocations and the like that the Bank in good faith determines to be appropriate;
provided that the Bank shall provide to the City such additional information in connection wilh
such certificate as the City may reasonably request in writing.
(d)
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Agreement to the contrary, for purposes
of this Agreement (i) all regulations, requests, rules, guidelines or directives enacted, adopted,
issued or promulgated following the date hereof in connection with the Dodd-Frank Act shall be
deemed to be a change in law, and (ii) all requests, rules, guidelines or directives enacted,
adopted, issued or promulgated by the Bank for International Settlements, the Basel Committee
on Banking Regulations and Supervisory Practices (or any successor or similar authority) or any
Governmental Authority following the date hereof shall be deemed a change in law.
Section 2.15. Margin Regulations. No portion of the proceeds of any Loans shall be used
by the City (or any other Person on behalf of the City) for the purpose of "purchasing" or
"carrying" any margin stock or used in any manner which might cause the borrowing or the
application of such proceeds to violate Regulation G, Regulation U, Regulation T, or
Regulation X ofthe Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or any other regulation
of the City or to violate the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, in each case as in
effect on the date or dates of such Advances or Term Loans and such use of proceeds.
Section 2.16. Maximum Rate. If the rate of interest payable hereunder shall exceed the
Maximum Rate for any period for vvhich interest is payable, then (a) interest at the Maximum
Rate shall be due and payable vvith respect to such interest period, and (b) interest at the rate
equal to the difference between (i) the rate of interest calculated in accordance with the terms
hereof and (ii)the Maximum Rate (the "Excess Interest""), shall be deferred until such date as
the rate of interest calculated in accordance with the terms hereof ceases to exceed the Maximum
Rate, at vvhich time the City .shall pay to the Bank, vvith respect to amounts then payable to the
-17DM u s 50503541-3 071370 0615

 Bank that are required to accrue interest hereunder, such portion of the deferred Excess Interest
as will cause the rate of interest then paid to the Bank to equal the Maximum Rate, vvhich
payments of deferred Excess Interest shall continue to apply to such unpaid amounts hereunder
until the earlier of (i) the date of payment in full of all Obligations (other than Excess Interest
which has not been recaptured) and on which this Agreement is no longer in effect, and (ii) the
date on which all deferred Excess Interest is fully paid to the Bank.
Section 2.17. Prepayments of Ad\'ances. If (i) any payment of principal of any Advance is
made by the City to or for the account of the Bank earlier than on the last day of the Interest
Period for such Advance, as a result of a conversion pursuant to Section 2.05, acceleration of the
maturity of Advances pursuant to Section 6.02 or for any other reason, or (ii) the City shall fail to
borrow an Advance following submission of a Borrowing Request therefor, then the City shall,
upon demand by the Bank, pay to the Bank any amounts required to compensate the Bank for
any additional losses, costs or expenses that it may reasonably incur as a result of such payment,
conversion or failure to borrow, in the amount of any loss (excluding specifically loss of
anticipated profits or any spread over the cost of funds), cost or expense incurred by reason of
the liquidation or reemployment of deposits or other funds acquired by the Bank to fund or
maintain such Advance. Any demand by the Bank for any such amounts shall be in writing and
shall set forth in reasonable detail the calculation of such amounts.
Section 2.18. Change in Law. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Agreement or
the Bank Note, if at any time the Bank shall determine that any change in applicable laws,
treaties, or regulations, or in the interpretation or administration thereof, makes it unlawful for
the Bank to create or continue to maintain any Advance, it shall promptly so notify the City and
the obligation of the Bank to create, continue, or maintain any such Advance under this
Agreement shall be suspended until it is no longer unlawful for the Bank to create, continue, or
maintain such Advance. Ifthe continued maintenance of any such Advance is unlawful, the City
shall repay on demand to the Bank the outstanding principal amount of the affected Advance
together with all interest accrued thereon and all other amounts payable to the Bank with respect
thereto under this Agreement, including, without limitation, Section 2.17 hereof
Section 2.19. Unavailability of Deposits or Inability to Ascertain, or Inadequacy of.
Adjusted LIBOR. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement or the Bank Note, if
the Bank shall detennine in good faith at any time:
(a) that deposits in the amount of any Advance scheduled to be outstanding
during the applicable Inlerest Period are not readily available to the Bank in the relevant
market, or
(b)
by reason of circumstances affecting the relevant market, adequate and
reasonable means do not exist for ascertaining the Adjusted LIBOR, or
(c)
that the Adjusted LIBOR as determined hereby will not adequately and
fairly reflect the cost to the Bank of funding any Advance for the applicable Interest
Period, or

DM US 50503541-3 0713700615

 (d)

that the making or funding of Advances has become impracticable,

then the Bank shall forthwith give notice thereof to the City and the obligations of the Bank to
create or continue any such Advance in such amount and for such Interest Period shall be
suspended until the circumstances giving rise to such suspension no longer exist and deposits in
such amount shall again be readily available in the relevant market and adequate and reasonable
means exist for ascertaining the Adjusted LIBOR.
ARTICLE I I I
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT

Section 3.01. Condilions Precedent to Ihe EJfectiveness of this Agreement. This
Agreement shall not become effective until the date on which each of the following conditions
are satisfied or waived by the Bank:
(a) Approvals. The Bank shall have received copies of all action taken by the
City approving the e.xecution and delivery by the City of this Agreement, the Bank Note
and the other Related Documents, certified by an Authorized Officer as complete and
correct as of the Closing Date.
(b) Incumbency of City Officials. The Bank shall have received an
incumbency certificate of the City with respect to each of the officials who are authorized
to (A) sign this Agreement and the Bank Note on behalf of the City, and (B) take actions
for the City under this Agreement.
(c)
Opinion of Corporation Counsel of the City. The Bank shall have
received a written opinion of the Corporation Counsel ofthe City, addressed to the Bank,
dated the Closing Date in the form and substance agreed to by the Corporation Counsel
of the City and the Bank.
(d) Related Documents. The Bank shall have received an executed original of
this Agreement and the Bank Note.
(e) A^o Default, Etc. (i) No Default or Event of Default shall have occurred
and be continuing as of the date hereof or will result from the e.xecution and delivery by
the City of this Agreement; (ii) the representations and warranties and covenants made by
the City in Article IV hereof or incorporated herein by reference shall be true and correct
in all material respects on and as ofthe Closing Date, as if made on and as of such date;
(iii) all conditions precedent to the effectiveness of this Agreement set forth in this
Section 3.01 have been satisfied and (iv) the Bank shall have received a certificate, given
and made as of the Closing Date, from an Aulhorized Officer to the foregoing effect.

-19DM US 5050354 I-3 071370 0615

 (f) Legality; Material Adverse Change. The Bank shall have received a
certificate from the City executed by an Authorized Officer and dated the Closing Date to
the effect that:
(i)
neither the making of any Loans nor the consummation of any of
the transactions contemplated by this Agreement will violate any law, rule or
regulation applicable to the City or this Agreement; and
(ii)
no material adverse change in the financial condition, operations or
prospects of the City or laws, rules or regulations (or their interpretation or
administration) that, in any case, may adversely affect the transactions
contemplated by this Agreement and the repayment by the City ofthe Loans, as
determined in the sole discretion of the Bank, shall have occurred since December
31, 2012 which would be reasonably likely to result in a Material Adverse Effect,
except as disclosed in writing to the Bank prior to the Closing Date.
(g) Ratings. The Bank shall have received recent evidence that the
unenhanced long-term Secured General Obligation Debt of the City has been assigned
long-term ratings of at least "Baal" by Moody's, "A+" by S&P and "A-" by Fitch,
respectively.
(h)
Certificate of the City. The Bank shall have received evidence of the
filing of this Agreement, the Bank Note and the certificate required by Section 18(e) of
the Ordinance, all in accordance with Section 18 of the Ordinance.
(i)
Other Documents. The Bank shall have received such other documents,
certificates and opinions as the Bank or its counsel shall have reasonably requested.
Section 3.02. Conditions Precedent lo Bank's Obligalion to Advance Funds for Loans.
The obligation of the Bank to advance funds for Loans hereunder on any Borrowing Date is
subject to the satisfaction of all of the following conditions, unless specifically waived in writing
by the Bank with respect to a Borrowing Date:
(a)

The Commitment shall not have expired or terminated;

(b)
After giving effect to such borrowing, the Available Revolving
Commitment would not be less than zero;
(c)
No Rating Agency shall have downgraded the unenhanced rating of the
City's Secured General Obligation Debt below Baa2 or BBB, respectively;
(d)
A continuing appropriation providing for the payment of the principal of
all Loans and interest thereon and of the principal of and interest on all other lines of
credit or similar agreements remains in effect;
(e)

No Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing; and
-20-

DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 (f)
The Bank shall have received a Borrowing Request during the Availability
Period in the manner described in Section 2.03.
Each Borrowing Request hereunder shall be deemed to be a representation and warranty by the
City on the date of such request as to the facts specified in clauses (b), (c), (d) and (e) of this
Section 3.02.

ARTICLE I V
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES

In order to induce the Bank to enter into this Agreement, the City represents and warrants
to the Bank as follows:
Section 4.01.
Due Authorization. The City has full legal right, power and authority to
(i) adopt the Ordinance and (ii) enter into, to execute and deliver this Agreement and the Bank
Note as provided herein and in the Ordinance. The City has duly authorized and approved the
execution and delivery of this Agreement and the Related Documents.
Section 4.02. Enforceability. No further authorization or approval is required for the
City's execution and delivery of this Agreement or the other Related Documents and this
Agreement and the other Related Documents constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of
the City, enforceable in accordance vvith their respective terms, except as such enforcement may
be limited by bankruptcy, reorganization, insolvency, moratorium or other laws relating to or
affecting the enforcement of creditors' rights generally or by general principles of equity; and no
further authorization or approval is required with respect to the enforceability of the City's
obligations hereunder or thereunder.
Section 4.03. Ordinance. The City Council has duly adopted the Ordinance, which is in
full force and effect.
Section 4.04. Consents. All approvals, consents, registrations, declarations and filings
with or by, any federal, state or other governmental body or instrumentality having jurisdiction
which would constitute a condition precedent to the performance by the City of its obligations
hereunder, under the Ordinance or under the other Related Documents have been obtained or
made.
Section 4.05. No Violation. The adoption of the Ordinance and compliance with the
provisions thereof do not, and the execution and delivery of this Agreement and the other
Related Documents and the performance of its obligations hereunder and thereunder do not and
will not violate any exisling law, rule, order, writ, injunction, decree award or administrative
regulation of the State of Illinois or of any department, division, agency or instrumentality
thereof or ofthe United States, or any court or administrative regulation, judgment, decree or
order to vvhich the City is subject, or conflict with in a material manner or constitute on the part
-21DM US 50503511-3 071370 0615

 of the City a material breach of or a material default under, any material provision of any
agreement, indenture, mortgage, lease, note, ordinance, resolution, agreement or other instrument
to which the City is subject or by vvhich it is bound.
Section 4.06. Litigation. Except as disclosed in writing to the Bank prior to the e.xecution
of this Agreement, no action, suit or proceeding, at law or in equity, or before any court, public
board or body is pending (or lo the knowledge of the City threatened) against the City or any
officers of the City in their respective capacities as such (i) questioning the authority ofthe City
to adopt the Ordinance, to execute this Agreement or the Related Documents or to issue, or the
issuance or validity of any other General Obligation Debt of the City or any Secured General
Obligation Debt or (ii) questioning the constitutionality of any statute or the validity of any
proceedings authorizing the issuance ofthe Related Documents, or (iii) questioning the validity
or enforceability of the Ordinance, or (iv) questioning in any manner the City's general
obligation pledge or the continuing appropriation provided for in the Ordinance, or (v) vvhich
could materially adversely affect the business,financialcondition or results of operations of the
City.
Section 4.07. Security. The Ordinance provides a continuing appropriation from legally
available funds ofthe City to provide for the punctual payment ofthe principal of and interest on
all Loans under this Agreement. The Obligations are direct and general obligations ofthe City
payable from any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City legally
available for such purpose.
Section 4.08. Lien. The Obligations rank at least equally in right of payment by the City
with all other General Obligation Debt of the City, except Secured General Obligation Debt.
Section 4.09. Organization. The City is a municipal corporation and "home rule unit'' as
that term is defined in Section 6 of Article VII of the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois.
Section 4.10. Financial Statements. The most recent audited financial statements of the
City delivered to the Bank fairly present thefinancialposition and results of operation of the City
as of December 31, 2012, and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance vvith
GAAP as consistently applied to governmental units, except as otherwise noted therein. To the
best knowledge of the City's Chief Financial Officer, except for the downgrade of the City's
Secured General Obligation Debt rating prior to the Closing Date, no material adverse change in
the financial position of the City as shown on such financial statements has occurred since
December 31, 2012.
Section 4.11. Absence of Default. No Default or Event of Default has occurred and is
continuing and the City is not in default under any material provision ofthe Ordinance or any
other Related Document. The City is not in defauh under any material agreements or
instruments to the extent such default would have a material adverse effect on the security for the
Obligations or the City's ability to make payment with respect thereto.
Section 4.12. Environmental Laws. The City has not received notice to the effect that any
of the operations ofthe City are not in compliance with any ofthe requirements of applicable
-22DM US 50503541-3 0713700615

 federal, state or local environmental, health and safety statutes and regulations or are the subject
of any governmental investigation evaluating whether any remedial action is needed to respond
to a release of any toxic or hazardous waste or substance into the environment, which
non-compliance or remedial action would have a material adverse effect on the City's ability to
pay its obligations under this Agreement or the Bank Note.
Section 4.13. No Proposed Legal Changes. There is no amendment, or to the knowledge
of the City, proposed amendment certified for placement on a statewide ballot, to the
Constitution of the State of Illinois or any published administrative interpretation of the
Constitution ofthe State of Illinois or any State of Illinois law, or any legislation that has passed
either house of the Illinois legislature, or any published judicial decision interpreting any ofthe
foregoing, the effect of which is to materially adversely affect the ability of the City to pay the
Obligations or any right, interest, security or remedy ofthe Bank under this Agreement.
Section 4.14. Disclosure. All information heretofore furnished by the City to the Bank
for purposes of or in connection vvith this Agreement or any transaction contemplated hereby is,
and all such information hereafter furnished by the City to the Bank will be, true, accurate and
complete in all material respects or based on reasonable estimates on the date as of vvhich such
information is stated or certified and such information does not omit to state a material fact
necessary to make such statements and information, in light of the circumstances under vvhich
they were made, not misleading in any material respect. The City has disclosed to the Bank in
writing any and all facts which materially and adversely affect or may affect (to the extent the
City can now reasonably foresee), the business, operations, prospects or condition,financialor
otherwise, of the City, or the ability of the City to perform its obligations under this Agreement
or any of the Related Documents.
Section 4.15. Margin Stock. The City is not engaged, and will not engage, principally or
as one of its important activities, in the business of purchasing or carrying margin stock (within
the meaning of Regulation U issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System),
or extending credit for the purpose of purchasing or carrying margin stock.
Section 4.16.

Resen>ed.

Section 4.17 Usury. The terms of this Agreement and the other Related Documents
regarding the calculation and payment of interest and fees do not violate any applicable usury
laws. The obligations of the City hereunder and under the Bank Note are not subject to any
limitation as to maximum rate of interest payable to regulatedfinancialinstitutions.
Section 4.18 OFAC Sanctions. To the actual knowledge ofthe Chief Financial Officer,
(i) the City is in compliance with the requirements of all OFAC Sanctions Programs to the extent
applicable to the City, and (ii) the City is not, as ofthe date hereof, named on the current OFAC
SDN List.

-23DM US 50503541-3 0713700615

 ARTICLE V
COVENANTS

Section 5.01.
Affirmative Covenants of the Cily. The City will do the following so long as
any amounts may be requested hereunder or any Obligations remain outstanding under this
Agreement, unless the Bank shall otherwise consent in writing:
(a) Further Assurances.
The City shall execute, acknowledge where
appropriate, and deliver, and cause to be executed, acknowledged where appropriate, and
delivered, from time to time promptly at the request of the Bank, all such instruments and
documents as in the reasonable judgment ofthe Bank are necessary to comply with this
Agreement, the Ordinance and the other Related Documents.
(b)
Information. The City will furnish, or cause to be furnished to the Bank
(electronically or in hard copy), as soon as available, the following documents:
(i)
within two hundred forty (240) days after the close of each of its
Fiscal Years, the auditedfinancialstatements ofthe City certified by independent
certified public accountants covering the operations of the City for such Fiscal
Year and containing balance sheets, statements of revenues, expenses and changes
in retained earnings and statements of cash flows of the City for such Fiscal Year,
all prepared in accordance with GAAP, which the City shall deliver to the Bank
or ensure that they have been posted electronically on a website that the Bank has
access to;
(ii)
in addition, if specifically requested by the Bank in writing on or
after the date on which thefinancialstatements referred to in clause (i) have been
posted, the City shall deliver, within ten (10) Business Days of such request, a
certificate stating that no Default or Event of Default has occurred which was
continuing at the end of such period and on the date of such certificate, or, if a
Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, a certificaie indicating
the nature of such event and the action vvhich the City proposed to take with
respect hereunder or thereto; and
(iii)
from time to time, vvith reasonable promptness, such additional
information regarding the financial condition of the City as the Bank may
reasonably request in writing.
(c)
Books and Records; Inspection of Records. The City shall keep adequate
records and books of account, in which complete entries will be made, reflecting all
materialfinancialtransactions of the City. Upon the reasonable request of the Bank and
during normal business hours, the City will give the Bank, or any attorney-in-fact or
counsel therefor, access to and permission to examine, copy or make excerpts from, any
and all books, records and documents under control of the Comptroller relating to the
financial condition of the City, and to the extent permitted by applicable lavv, visit the
-24DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 properties of the City to discuss the affairs,financesand accounts ofthe City vvith any of
the City's officers, trustees and independent auditors (and by this provision the City
authorizes said auditors to discuss vvith the Bank and its agents and representatives the
affairs,financesand accounts of the City).
(d)
Compliance With Laws. The City shall comply in all material respects
with all laws, ordinances, investment policies, orders, rules and regulations that may be
applicable to it if the failure to comply would have a material adverse effect on the City's
ability to repay when due its obligations under this Agreement, the Bank Note or any
other Related Document.
(e) Notices. The City will promptly furnish, or cause to be furnished, to the
Bank (i) notice of the occurrence of any Event of Default or Default as defined herein,
(ii) notice of any litigation or administrative proceeding which, if adversely determined,
would materially adversely affect the ability of the City to pay its Obligations or its
obligations under any ofthe other Related Documents, and (iii) such furtherfinancialand
other information with respect to the City and its affairs as the Bank may reasonably
request from time lo time.
(f)
Alternate Revolving Credit Agreement. The City shall use its best efforts
to obtain an alternate revolving credit agreement, line of credit or similar agreement (an
"Alternate Credit Agreement") to replace this Agreement in the event the Bank shall
decide not to extend the Stated Expiration Date pursuant to Section 2.12 hereof The City
agrees that, as a condition to the effectiveness of the Alternate Credit Agreement, the
City, whether from its own funds or an Alternate Credit Agreement, shall provide funds
to the extent necessary, in addifion to other funds available, on the date of such
substitution, to pay all Obligations owing the Bank on the date of such substitution. On
the date of such substitution, any and all Obligations due hereunder and all principal and
interest due on the Bank Note shall be payable in full to the Bank.
(g)
Maintenance of Approvals: Filings, Etc. The City shall at all times
maintain in effect, renew and comply with all the terms and conditions of all consents,
licenses, approvals and authorizations as may be necessary under any applicable lavv or
regulation for its execution and delivery of (i) this Agreement and (ii) vvith respect to the
other Related Documents to the extent that failure to do so would have a material adverse
effect on the City's ability to pay when due its Obligations under this Agreement or the
Bank Note or to perform its obligations under the Related Documents.
(h)
Secured General Obligalion Debt Ratings. At all times, the City shall
cause to be maintained a long-term unenhanced rating on the Secured General Obligation
Debt of the City by at least one Rating Agency.
(i)
Issuance of Debt. In the event that the City shall (i) issue any Debt or debt
instrument or (ii) draw on any lines of credit or other Bank Agreements, in each case, to
fund contributions to any of its pension plans or other retirement benefit plans or funds,
-25DM US 50503541-3 0713700615

 the City shall immediately terminate this Agreement and all Obligations due under this
Agreement shall be immediately due and payable.
Section 5.02. Negative Covenants of the Cily. So long as any amounts may be requested
hereunder or any Obligations remain outstanding under this Agreement:
(a) Amendments to Related Documenls. The City shall not amend or modify
or permit to be amended or modified any of the Related Documents in a manner relating
in any way to this Agreement or the Bank or having a material adverse effect on the
City's ability to perform its obligations under the Related Documents, the City's ability to
pay the Obligations, or the rights, interests, security or remedies of the Bank, without the
prior written consent of the Bank.
(b) References to the Bank. The City shall not refer to the Bank in relation to
this Agreement in any official statement or any similar offering document or make any
changes in reference to the Bank in any official statement or any similar offering
document without the prior written consent of the Bank.
(c)
Draws. The City shall not apply amounts available under this Agreement
to fund contributions to any of its pension plans or other retirement benefit plans or
funds.
Section 5.03. Compliance with olher Covenants. From and after the date hereof and so
long as this Agreement is in effect, except to the extent compliance in any case or cases is
waived in writing by the Bank, the City agrees that it will, for the benefit of the Bank, comply
with in all material respects and abide by all material agreements, covenants, obligations and
undertakings contained in each ofthe Related Documents, to the extent that failure to comply
would materially adversely affect the City's ability to pay its Obligations or perform its
obligations under the Related Documents, it being understood that no amendment or waiver with
respect to the foregoing provisions shall be effective as lo this Agreement unless and until
specifically agreed to in writing by the Bank with reference to this Agreement.
ARTICLE V I
DEFAULTS

Section 6.01. Events of Default and Remedies. If any ofthe following events shall occur,
each such event shall be an "Event of Default":
(a) the City fails to pay, or cause to be paid, when due: (i) any Reimbursement
Obligation; or (ii) any other Obligation owing to the Bank hereunder and, vvith respect to
this clause (ii) only, such failure continues for a period offifteen(15) Business Days;
(b) any "event of default" shall have occurred under any of the Related
Documents (as defined respectively therein);
-26DM US 50503541-3 071.370 0615

 (c) any representation, warranty or statement made by or on behalf of the City
herein or in any Related Document or in any certificate delivered pursuant hereto or
thereto shall prove to be untrue in any material respect on the date as of which made or
deemed made; or the documents, certificates or statements of the City furnished to the
Bank by or on behalf of the City in connection with the transactions contemplated
hereby, when taken as a whole, are materially inaccurate in light of the circumstances
under which they were made and as of the date on which they were made;
(d)
(i) the City fails to perform or observe any term, covenant or agreement
contained in Sections 5.01(e)(i), 5.01(0, 5.01(g), 5.01(h), 5.01(i), 5.02 or 5.03 hereof;
(ii) the City fails to perform or observe any other term, covenant or agreement contained
in this Agreement (other than those referred to in Sections 6.01(a) and (d)(i)) and any
such failure cannot be cured or, if curable, remains uncured after the earlier of (A) thirty
(30) days after written notice thereof to the City, or (B) knowledge by responsible
officers of the City of the occurrence thereof; or (iii) the City fails to perforin or observe
any material term, covenant or agreement contained in any other Related Document;
(e) the City shall default in any payment on any of its General Obligation
Debt or Secured General Obligation Debt and such default shall continue beyond the
expiration of the applicable grace period, if any, or the City shall fail to perforin any other
agreement, term or condition contained in any agreement, including, but not limited to,
any Bank Agreement, under which any such General Obligation Debt or Secured General
Obligation Debt is created or secured, which shall permit or result in the declaring due
and payable of such obligation prior to the date on which it would otherwise have
become due and payable (or, with respect to any Swap Contract, which results in such
Swap Contract being terminated early or being capable of being terminated early);
(0
(i) any material provision of this Agreement or any Related Document
shall at any time for any reason cease to be valid and binding on the City or any other
party thereto or shall be declared to be null and void, or (ii) the validity or enforceability
thereof shall be contested by an Authorized Officer ofthe City or such other party thereto
or by any Governmental Authority having jurisdiction, or (iii) an Authorized Officer of
the City or any party or entity with the ability to bind the City shall repudiate or deny that
it has any or further liability to pay the Obligations;
(g) any provision of the Ordinance relating to the City's ability to pay the
Obligations or perform its obligations hereunder or the rights and remedies ofthe Bank,
or any Related Document or any material provision thereof shall cease to be in full force
or effect, or any Authorized Officer ofthe City or any Governmental Authority having
jurisdiction shall deny or disaffirm the City's obligations under any Related Document;
(h) one or more final, unappealable judgments against the Cily, or attachments
against the property of the City, the operation or result of vvhich, individually or in the
aggregate, equal or exceed $25,000,000 shall remain unpaid, undischarged, unbonded or
undismi.ssed for a period of sixty (60) days;
-27DM US 50503541-3 0713700615

 (i)
(i) a debt moratorium, debt restructuring, debt adjustment or comparable
restriction is imposed on the repayment when due and payable of the principal of or
interest on any debts of the City; (ii) under any existing or future lavv of any jurisdiction
relating to bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization or relief of debtors, the City seeks to
have an order for relief entered with respect to it or seeking to adjudicate it insolvent or
bankrupt or seeking reorganization, arrangement, adjustment, winding-up, liquidation,
dissolufion, composhion or other relief with respect to it or its debts; (iii) the City seeks
appointment of a receiver, trustee, custodian or other similar official for itself or for any
substantial part of the City's property, or the City shall make a general assignment for the
benefit of its creditors; (iv) there shall be commenced against the City any case,
proceeding or other action of a nature referred to in clause (ii) above vvhich (A) results in
an order for such relief or in the appointment of a receiver or similar official or (B)
remains undismissed, undischarged or unbonded for a period of sixty (60) days; (v) there
shall be commenced against the City any case, proceeding or other action seeking
issuance of a warrant of attachment, execution, distraint or similar process against all or
any substantial part of its property which results in the entry of an order for any such
relief which shall not have been vacated, discharged, or stayed or bonded pending appeal,
within sixty (60) days from the entry thereof; (vi) the City takes action in furtherance of,
or indicating its consent to, approval of, or acquiescence in, any of the acts set forth in
clause (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) or (v) above; or (vii) the City shall generally not, or shall be
unable to, or shall admit in writing its inability to, pay its debts or its legally mandated
obligations to make payments or contributions to any of the City's pension plans or other
retirement benefit plans or funds, as they become due;
(j)
any Rating Agency shall have downgraded its rating of any long-term
unenhanced Secured General Obligation Debt or General Obligation Debt of the City to
or below "Baa3" (or its equivalenO or "BBB-" (or its equivalent), respectively, or
suspended or withdrawn its rating of the same;
(k)
the City or any governmental agency or authority with jurisdiction over
the City shall initiate any legal proceedings to seek an adjudication that this Agreement,
the Bank Note or any of the other Related Documents or the City's obligation to pay or
repay any Debt or Bank Agreements is not valid or not binding on the City;
(1) any court of competent jurisdiction shall issue a judgment that this
Agreement, the Bank Note or any other Related Document is not valid or not binding on
the City;
(m)
the Maximum Rate applicable to Advances or Term Loans shall be
reduced, or otherwise determined to be, below eighteen (18%) percent; or
(n) any legislation is enacted, repealed, reenacted, amended or otherwise
modified which has a material adverse effect on the ability of the City to pay any
Obligations hereunder.

-28DM_US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 Section 6.02. Remedies. Upon the occurrence of any Event of Default the Bank may
exercise any one or more ofthe following rights and remedies in addition to any other remedies
herein or by law provided:
(a) by written notice to the City, immediately terminate (i) the Availability
Period, (ii) the Commitment and (iii) the obligation of the Bank to advance funds for any
Loan hereunder and to convert any Advances to Term Loans, and. thereafter, the Bank
shall be under no obligafion to advance funds for any Loan hereunder; provided that upon
the occurrence of an Event of Default under Section 6.0 l(i) hereof such terinination shall
automatically occur (unless such automatic terinination is waived by the Bank in
writing);
(b)
by written notice to the City, declare all Obligations to be, and such
amounts shall thereupon become, immediately due and payable without presentment,
demand, protest or other notice of any kind, all of which are hereby waived by the City;
provided lhat upon the occurrence of an Event of Default under Section 6.01 (i) hereof
such acceleration shall automatically occur (unless such automatic acceleration is waived
by the Bank in writing);
(c)

pursue any rights and remedies it may have under the Related Documents;

(d)

pursue any other action available at law or in equity.

and/or

ARTICLE V I I
MISCELLANEOUS

Section 7.01. Amendments, Waivers, Etc. No amendment or waiver of any provision of
this Agreement, or consent to any departure by the City therefrom, shall in any event be effective
unless the same shall be in writing and signed by the Bank, and then such waiver or consent shall
be effective only in the specific instance and for the specific purpose for which given; provided,
however, that no amendment, waiver or consent shall, unless in writing and signed by the Bank,
affect the rights or duties ofthe Bank under this Agreement or any other Related Document.
Section 7.02. Notices. Unless otherwise specified herein, all notices, requests, demands
or other communications to or upon the respective parties hereto or referred to herein shall be
deemed to have been given (i) in the case of notice by letter, when delivered by hand or
otherwise received and (ii) in the case of notice by telecopier, when sent, receipt confirmed,
addressed to them as follows or at such other address as any ofthe parties hereto may designate
by written notice to the other parties hereto:

-29DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 City:

With a copy to:

Bank, vvith respect to Borrowing Requests hereunder:

Bank, with respect to all other matters:

Section 7.03. Sui-vival of Covenants; Successors and Assigns. (a) All covenants,
agreements, representations and warranties made herein and in the certificates delivered pursuant
hereto shall survive the making of any Advance or Term Loan hereunder and shall continue in
full force and effect until all ofthe Obligations hereunder shall have been paid in full. Whenever
in this Agreement any of the parties hereto is referred to, such reference shall be deemed to
include the successors and assigns of such party, and all covenants, promises and agreements by
or on behalf of the City which are contained in this Agreement shall inure to the benefit ofthe
successors and assigns ofthe Bank; provided, however, that the City may not transfer its rights
or obligations under this Agreement without the prior written consent of the Bank and any
assignment in contravention hereof shall be void. The Bank may transfer some or all of its rights
-30DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 and obligations under this Agreement. This Agreement is made solely for the benefit ofthe City
and the Bank, and no other Person shall have any right, benefit or interest under or because ofthe
existence of this Agreement.
(b) The Bank shall be permitted to grant to one or more financial institutions (each a
"Participant") a participation or participations in all or any part of the Bank's rights and benefits
under this Agreement on a participating basis but not as a party to this Agreement (a
"Participation"), including, without limitation, Sections 2.13, 2.14 and 7.05 hereof without the
prior written consent of the City. In the event of any such grant by the Bank of a Participation to
a Participant, the Bank shall remain responsible for the performance of its obligations hereunder,
and the City shall continue to deal solely and directly with the Bank in connection vvith the
Bank's rights and obligations under this Agreement. The City agrees that each Participant shall,
to the extent of its Participation, be entitled to the benefits of this Agreement as if such
Participant were the Bank; provided that no Participant shall have the right to declare, or to take
actions in response to, an Event of Default under Section 6.01 hereof; provided further that the
City's liability to any Participant shall not in any event exceed that liability which the City would
owe to the Bank but for such participation.
Section 7.04. Unconditional Obligations. The obligations of the City under this
Agreement shall be absolute, unconditional, irrevocable and payable and performed strictly in
accordance with the terms of the Ordinance and this Agreement, under all circumstances
whatsoever, including, without limitation, the following:
(a)
to the extent

any lack of validity or enforceability of this Agreement, the Bank Note or,
permitted by law, the Ordinance;

(b) any amendment or waiver of or any consent to departure from the terms of
all or any of the Related Documents to which the Bank has not consented in writing;
(c)
the existence of any claim, counterclaim, setoff recoupment, defense or
other right which any Per.son may have at any time against the Bank, the City or any
other Person, whether in connection with this Agreement, the Ordinance, the Related
Documents, or any other transaction related thereto;
(d) any statement or any other document presented pursuant hereto which the
Bank in good faith determines to be valid, sufficient or genuine and which subsequently
proves to be forged, fraudulent, invalid or insufficient in any respect or any statement
therein being untrue or inaccurate in any respect whatsoever;
(e) payment by the Bank of a Borrowing Request against presentation of a
request vvhich the Bank in good faith determines to be valid, sufficient or genuine and
which subsequently is found not to comply with the terms of this Agreement; and
(0
any other circumstances or happening whatsoever whether or not similar
to any of the foregoing.
-31DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 Section 7.05. No Liability of the Bank; Indemnification, (a) With respect to the Bank, the
City assumes all risks of its acts or omissions and the acts or omissions of each of its agents in
respect of their use of any amounts made available by the Bank hereunder. Neither the Bank nor
any of its officers, directors, employees or agents shall be liable or responsible for: (i) the use
which may be made of any amounts made available by the Bank hereunder or for any acts or
omissions of any party (other than the Bank) in connection therewith; (ii) the validity,
sufficiency or genuineness of documents, or of any endorsement(s) thereon, even if such
documents should in fact prove to be in any or all respects invalid, insufficient, fraudulent or
forged: or (iii) any other circumstances whatsoever in making or failing to make payment
hereunder; except only that the City shall have a claim against the Bank, and the Bank shall be
liable to the City to the extent, but only to the extent, of any direct, as opposed to special,
consequential or punitive, damages (the right to receive special, consequential or punitive
damages being hereby waived) suffered by the City which the City proves were caused by (i) the
Bank's willful misconduct or gross negligence in determining whether documents presented
hereunder comply with the terms of this Agreement or (ii) the Bank's willful or grossly negligent
failure to make lawful payment hereunder after the presentafion to the Bank by the City of a
certificate strictly complying vvith the terms and conditions of this Agreement (it being
understood that the Bank assumes no liability or responsibility for the genuineness, falsification
or effect of any document which appears on such examination to be regular on its face). In
furtherance and not in limitation ofthe foregoing. Bank may accept documents that the Bank in
good faith determines appear on their face to be in order, without responsibility for further
investigation, regardless of any notice or information to the contrary.
(b) The City assumes all risks associated with the acceptance by the Bank of documents
received by telecommunication, it being agreed that the use of telecommunication devices is for
the benefit of the City and that the Bank assumes no liabilities or risks with respect thereto.
(c) The City agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Bank, its officers, directors,
employees and agents (each an "Indemnified Party") from and against any and all claims,
damages, losses, liabilities, reasonable costs or expenses (including reasonable fees and
disbursements of counsel to the Bank, approved by the City, provided that McDermott Will &
Emery LLP is hereby approved by the City) whatsoever which an Indemnified Party may incur
(or which may be claimed against an Indemnified Party by any Person) by reason of or in
connection with the execution and delivery of and consummation of the transactions
contemplated under this Agreement and the Related Documents, including, without limitation,
the e.xecution and delivery of, or payment or failure to pay by any Person under, this Agreement;
provided, however, that the City shall not be required to indemnify the Bank for any claims,
damages, losses, liabilities, costs or expenses to the extent, but only to the extent, caused by the
willful misconduct or gross negligence of the Bank in performing its obligations under this
Agreement or in making payment against a drawing presented under this Agreement which docs
not comply vvith the terms thereof (it being understood and agreed by the parties hereto that in
making such payment the Bank's exclusive reliance on the documents presented to the Bank in
accordance with the terms of this Agreement as to any and all matters set forth therein, whether
or not any such statement or any such document presented to the Bank pursuant to this
Agreement proves to be forged, fraudulent, invalid or insufficient in any respect or any statement
therein proves to be untrue or inaccurate in any respect whatsoever shall not be deemed willful
-32DM US 50503541-3 07:3700615

 misconduct or gross negligence of the Bank). Nothing in this Section 7.05 is intended to limit
the obligations ofthe City to pay its obligations hereunder and under the Related Documents.
(d) The provisions of this Section 7.05 and Sections 2.13 and 2.14 hereof shall survive
the termination of this Agreement and the payment in full of the Obligations of the City
hereunder. Each Indemnified Party shall nofify the City of any amounts which are owed to such
Indemnified Party pursuant to this Section 7.05.
Section 7.06. Expenses and Taxes. The City will, promptly upon receipt of an invoice, in
immediately available funds, pay (a) the reasonable fees and expenses of counsel to the Bank
incurred in connection with the preparation, execution and delivery of this Agreement (in an
amount not to e.xceed H H ) : (b) the reasonable costs and expenses of the Bank in the
preparation, execution and delivery of this Agreement; (c) the reasonable fees and disbursements
of counsel to the Bank with respect to advising the Bank as to the rights and responsibilifies
under this Agreement after the occurrence of an Event of Default; and (d) all reasonable costs
and expenses, if any, in connection with the enforcement of this Agreement and any other
documents vvhich may be delivered in connection herewith or therewith, including in each case
the reasonable fees and disbursements of counsel to the Bank. In addifion, the City shall pay any
and all stamp and other ta.xes and fees payable or determined to be payable in connection with
the execution, delivery, filing and recording of this Agreement and the security contemplated by
any Related Document and agrees to hold the Bank harmless from and against any and all
liabilities with respect to or resulting from any delay in paying or omission to pay such taxes and
fees. In addition, the City agrees to pay, after the occurrence of an Event of Default, all costs
and expenses (including attorneys' fees and costs of settlement) incurred by the Bank in
enforcing any obligations or in collecting any payments due from the City hereunder by reason
of such Event of Default or in connection with any refinancing or restructuring of the credit
arrangements provided under this Agreement in the nature of a "workout'' or of any insolvency
or bankruptcy proceedings.
Section 7.07. No Waiver; Conflict. Neither any failure nor any delay on the part of the
Bank in exercising any right, power or privilege hereunder, nor any course of dealing wilh
respect to any of the same, shall operate as a waiver thereof or preclude any other or further
exercise thereof nor shall a single or partial exercise thereof preclude any other or further
exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right, power or privilege. The remedies herein
provided are cumulative, and not exclusive of any remedies provided by lavv.
Section 7.08. Modification, Amendment, Waiver, Etc. No modification, amendment or
waiver of any provision of this Agreement shall be effective unless the same shall be in writing
and signed by the parties hereto.
Section 7.09. Severability. Any provision of this Agreement which is prohibited or
unenforceable in any jurisdicfion shall, as to such jurisdiction, be ineffective to the extent of such
prohibition or unenforceability without invalidating the remaining provisions hereof or affecting
the validity or enforceability of such provision in any other jurisdiction, and all other remaining
provisions hereof will be construed to render them enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by
lavv. The parties shall endeavor in good faith negotiations to replace the illegal, invalid or
-33DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 unenforceable provisions with valid provisions the economic effect of vvhich comes as close as
possible to that ofthe illegal, invalid or unenforceable provisions.
Section 7.10. Counterparts.
This Agreement may be executed in two or more
counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original, but when taken together shall constitute
but one agreement and any of the parties hereto may execute this Agreement by signing any such
counterpart.
Section 7.11. Table of Contents; tieadings. The table of contents and the section and
subsection headings used herein have been inserted for convenience of reference only and do not
constitute matters to be considered in interpreting this Agreement.
Section 7.12. Entire Agreement. This Agreement represents the final agreement between
the parties hereto and may not be contradicted by evidence of prior, contemporaneous, or
subsequent oral agreements of the parties hereto.
Section 7.13.

Governing Law; Sovereign Immunity: Waiver of Jury Trial.

(a)Tl-llS

AGREEMENT SHALL BE DEEMED TO BE A CONTRACT UNDER, AND FOR ALL PURPOSES SHALL BE
GOVERNED BY, AND CONSTRUED AND INTERPRETED IN ACCORDANCE WITH, THE LAWS OF THE
STATE OF ILLINOIS; PROVIDED THAT THE BANK'S RIGHTS, REMEDIES AND OBLIGATIONS
HEREUNDER SHALL BE GOVERNED BY AND CONSTRUED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE
S TATE OF NEW YORK.

(b) To the fullest extent permitted by law, the City represents that it is subject to suit
with respect to its Obligations under this Agreement and that no sovereign immunity exists under
Illinois law, as of the date that this Agreement is executed and delivered by the City, with respect
to the City's contractual obligations under this Agreement. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this Agreement, (i) in accordance vvith the laws of the State of Illinois, the City shall not waive
any sovereign immunities from time to time available under the laws of the State of Illinois as to
jurisdiction, procedures and remedies, (ii) subject to clause (i) above, this Agreement shall
otherwise be fully enforceable as a valid and binding contract as and to the extent provided by
applicable law and, the City may not claim sovereign immunity vvith respect to any Obligations
under this Agreement; and (iii) nothing in this Agreement shall be deemed to create any rights of
action for persons or entities not a party to this Agreement or to circumvent any of the
immunities contained in the Local Government and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity
Act, 745 ILCS 10/1-101 et seq., as amended.
(c) The City and the Bank each hereby irrevocably waives any and all right lo trial by
jury in any legal proceeding arising out of or relating to this Agreement and any Related
Document or the transactions contemplated thereby.
Section 7.14. Disclosure of Information. The Bank may disclose to any of its affiliates
and any permitted (actual or potential) assignee, transferee or participant any information about
the City as the Bank considers necessary and appropriate.

-34DM US 505035-11-3 071370 0615

 Section 7.15. Compliance with OFAC Sanctions Programs, (a) Upon the request ofthe
Bank, the City shall use reasonable efforts to provide the Bank with any information regarding
the City which any Governmental Authority requires the Bank to obtain from the City in order
for the Bank to comply with all applicable OFAC Sanctions Programs.
(b) Ifthe City obtains actual knowledge or receives any written notice that the City is
named on the then current OFAC SDN List (such occurrence, an "OFAC Event"), the City shall
promptly give written notice to the Bank of such OFAC Event. Failure to comply vvith this
Section 7.15 shall not constitute an Event of Default hereunder.
Section 7.16. Electronic Transmissions. The Bank is authorized to accept and process
any amendments, transfers, assignments of proceeds. Borrowing Requests, consents, waivers and
all documents relating hereto which are sent to Bank by electronic transmission, including the
SWIFT, electronic mail, telex, telecopy, telefax, courier, mail or other computer generated
telecommunications and such electronic communication shall have the same legal effect as if
written and shall be binding upon and enforceable against the City. The Bank may, but shall not
be obligated to, require authentication of such electronic transmission or that the Bank receives
original documents prior to acting on such electronic transmission.
Section 7.17. No Advisory or Fiduciary Responsibility . The City represents and warrants
that it has independently evaluated the business transaction contemplated by this Agreement and
has not relied upon, nor will it rely upon, the expertise, advise or other comments or statements
ofthe Bank (including agents ofthe Bank), if any, in deciding to pursue such undertaking. In no
event shall the Bank owe any fiduciary or similar obligations to it in connection vvith this
Agreement.

-35DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 IN WITNESS WIIEREOF,

the City and the Bank have duly executed this Agreement as of

the datefirstabove written.
(SEAL)

CiTYOF CHICAGO

Attest:

BARCLAYS BANK PLC

By
Authorized Signatory for and on
behalf of Barclays Bank PLC

OM_US 50503541-3 071.170 0615

 IN Wi'iNHSs WHEREOF, the City and the Bank have duly executed this Agreement as of
the dale first above written.
(SI;AL)

CTTY OF CHICAGO

Attest:

City Clerk

BARCLAYS BANK PLC

DM U5 50503541-3 0713700615

 APPENDIX I
FORM OF BANK NOTE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Cn v OF CHICAGO
CITY OF CHICAGO
BANK NOTE

$100,000,000 Principal Amount
Chicago, Illinois
May 16, 2014
The City of Chicago (the "City") hereby promises to pay to the order of Barclays Bank
PLC (the "Bank") in the manner and on the dates provided in the hereinafter defined Agreement
in lawful money of the United States of America and in immediately available funds the
aggregate amount of all Obligations of the City owing to the Bank pursuant to the terms of the
Agreement (as defined below), plus accrued interest thereon. Terms used herein and not
otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings assigned to them in the Revolving Credit
Agreement dated as of May 16, 2014 (the "Agreement"), by and between the City of Chicago
and the Bank.
This Bank Note is the Bank Note referred to in the Agreement. This Bank Note is issued
pursuant to and in accordance vvith the Consfitution and laws of the State of Illinois, and
pursuant to and in accordance vvith an the ordinance duly adopted by the City Council of the City
on May 1, 2002, as amended by ordinances adopted by the City Council on March 14, 2012 and
February 5, 2014 (the "Ordinance ") to evidence the Obligations of the City.
This Bank Note constitutes a direct and general obligation of the City payable from any
funds legally available for such purpose. This Bank Note constitutes a "Line of Credit Note" and
"Authorized Debf' for purposes ofthe Ordinance
Reference is hereby made to the Revolving Credit Agreement and the Ordinance for the
provisions, among other things, with respect to the nature and extent of the security for this Bank
Note, the manner and enforcement of such security, the custody and application of the proceeds
of this Bank Note and the rights, duties and obligations of the City and the Bank.
It is hereby certified, recited and declared that all acts, conditions and things required to
exist, happen and to be performed, precedent to and in the issuance of this Bank Note, do exist,
have happened and have been performed in due time, form and manner as required by the
Constitution and statutes of the State of Illinois, and that the total indebtedness of the City,
including indebtedness evidenced by this Bank Note, does not exceed any Constitutional or
statutory limitation. This Bank Note shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the
internal laws of the State of Illinois.

DM US 50503541-3 0713700615

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City, by authority of its City Council, has caused this note to
be signed for and on its behalf and in its name by the Chief Financial Officer, and the official
seal ofthe City of Chicago to be affixed hereto, all as of this 16th day of May, 2014.
CI TY OF CHICAGO

(Seal)

By:
Name:
Title:

Attest:

City Clerk

DM US 50503541-3 0713700615

Rahm Emanuel
Mayor

 EXHIBIT A

FORM OF BORROWING REQUEST

 

 

 

 
 

 

1 

50503541-3 071370 

 

505035414 071370 OGIS A-2

EXHIBIT B
FORM OF REQUEST FOR EXTENSION
REQUEST FOR EXTENSION
Barclays Bank PLC
[ADDRESS]
Attention:
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Reference is hereby made to that certain Revolving Credit Agreement, dated as of May 16, 2014
(the "Agreement"), between City of Chicago and Barclays Bank PLC. All capitalized terms
contained herein which are not specifically defined shall be deemed to have the definition set
forth in the Agreement. The City hereby requests, pursuant to Section 2.12 ofthe Agreement,
that the Stated Expiration Date for the Agreement be extended by [IDENTIFY APPROPRIATE
PERIOD]. Pursuant to Section 2.12 of the Agreement, we have enclosed along with this request
the following information:
1.

The nature of any and all Defaults and Events of Default;

2.
Confirmation that all representations and warranties of the City set forth in the
Agreement are true and correct as though made on the date hereof and that no Event of Default
has occurred and is continuing on the date hereof except as referenced in paragraph I above; and
3.

Any other pertinent information previously requested by the Bank.

The Bank is requested to notify the City of its decision with respect to this request for extension
within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt hereof (or as otherwise provided in the Agreement).
If the Bank fails to notify the City of its decision within such thirty (30) day period (or as
otherwise provided in the Agreement), the Bank shall be deemed to have rejected such request.
Very truly yours,
CITY OF CHICAGO
By
Name_
Title '

DM US 50503541-3 071370 0615

 EXHIBIT C
NOTICE OF EXTENSION
[DATE]
City of Chicago
[ADDRESS]
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Reference is hereby made to that certain Revolving Credit Agreement, dated as of May 16, 2014
(the "Agreement"), between City of Chicago and Barclays Bank PLC (the "Bank").
The undersigned, a duly authorized officer of the Bank hereby advises you, with reference to the
Agreement (any capitalized term used herein and not defined shall have its respective meaning as
set forth in the Agreement), that [Complete as Appropriate]:
1.
On [date], the City delivered to the Bank, pursuant to Section 2.12 of the Agreement, a
Request For Extension requesting that the date referenced in the definition of "Stated Expiration
Date" in the Agreement (as such dale may have been extended previously from time to time) be
extended to
.
2.
At the request and for the account of the City, we hereby extend the date referenced in the
definition of "Stated E.xpiration Date" in the Agreement (as such date may have been extended
previously from time to time) to
.
3.
Except as specifically provided in paragraph (1) above, all of the terms and conditions of
the Agreement remain unchanged and in full force and effect.
4.

This Notice of Extension is an integral part of the Agreement.]

DM US 50503541-3 0713700615

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, on behalf of the Bank, has executed and delivered
this Notice of Extension as of the
day of
.
BARCLAYS BANK PLC

By

Name_
Title

DM US 50503541-3.071370 0615

C-2

 EXHIBIT 

THE NOTE

CITY OF CHICAGO
BANK NOTE

$100,000,000 Principal Amount
Chicago, Illinois
May 16, 2014.
The City of Chicago (the "City") hereby promises to pay lo the order of Barclays Bank
PLC (the "Bank") in the manner and on,the dates provided in the hereinafter defined Agreement
in lawful money of the United States of America and in immediately available funds the
aggregate amount of all Obligations of the City owing to the Bank pursuant to the terms of the
Agreement (as defined below), plus accrued interest thereon. Terms used herein and not
otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings assigned to thern in the Revolving, Credit
Agreement dated as of May 16, 2014 (the "Agreement"), by and between the City of Chicago
and the Bank.
This Bank Note is the Bank Note referred to in the Agreement. This Bank Note is issued
pursuant to and in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois, and
pursuant to and in accordance with an the ordinance duly adopted by the-City Council of^the City
on May 1, 2002, as amended by ordinances adopted by the .City.Counci]'on March 14, 2012 and'
February 5, 2014 (the "Ordinance ") to evidence the .Obligations of the City.
This Bank Note constitutes a direct and general obligation bf the City payable from any
funds legally available for such purpose. This.Bank Note constitutes a ."Line of Credit Note" and
"Authorized Debt" for purposes of the Ordinance :
Reference is hereby made to the Revolving Credit Agreement and the Ordinance for the
provisions, among other things, with respect to the nature and extent of the security for this Bank
Note, the manner and enforcement of such security, the custody and application of the proceeds
of this Bank Note and the rights, duties and obligations of the City and the Bank.
It is hereby certified, recited and declared that all acts, conditions and things required to
exist, happen and to be performed, precedent to and in the is.suance of this Bank Note, do exist,
have happened and have been performed in due time, form and manner as required by the
Constitution and statutes of the State of Illinois, and lhat the total indebtedness of the City,
including indebtedness evidenced by this Bank Note, does not exceed any Constitutional or
statutory limitation. This Bank Note shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the
internal laws ofthe State of Illinois.

DM 1 IS 50"^01.'^.l 1-3 071 370 On 1".

 I N WiTN'ESS WHEREOF, the City, by authority of its City Council, has caused this note to
be signed for and on its behalf and in its name by the Chief Financial Officer, and the official
seal ofthe City of Chicago lo be affixed hereto, all as of this / Vrhay of May, 2014.
CITY OF CHICAGO

(SeaO
Mayor

Attest:

City Clerk

 i

 ?Vii-Va?)


 

EXHIBIT 

RATING AGENCIES REPORTS

:5 r.

it



^= ^ STANDARD & POOR'S
RATINGS SERVICES
McGRAW HILL FINANCIAL

iMingsPirgci
Summary:

Chicago; General Obligation; Joint
Criteria
Primary Credit Analyst:
Helen Samuelson, Chicago (I) 312-233-7011: helen.sain'uelson@standardandpoor^.com
Secondary Contact:
John A Kenward, Chicago (1) 312-233-7003; john.kenward@standardandpoors.com

Table Of Contents
Rationale
Outlook
Related Criteria And Research

WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS.COM/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

1

 Summary:

Chicago; General Obligation; Joint Criteria
US$i27.0 mil GO bnds taxablerfdgse"r20l4D due 01/01/2044
Long Term Haling

,

^

A+/Negative >.,';',-._;

US$I09.0 mil GO'bnils project ser2014A-due 01/01/2039

.

New

y-'New

US$108.0'mi'lGO;Snds/rdgser2014ff'due01/01/2033
Long Term Rating Z,;^^

'>', A+/Negative

US$44.0 mil GO bnds taxable proj ser 2014C due 01/01/-2044
-Long Term Rating
r-fc :
~A+/Ne'gaUve

Chicago CO

.^S^^JE:

Long Term Rating

•

New
ir

New^

'..'VA'I"

"
A+/Negative

• Arfirme'd

Rationale
Standard & Poor's Ratings Services assigned its 'A+' rating to Chicago's series 20I4A, 2014B, 2014C, and 2014D
general obligation (GO) bonds and affirmed its 'A+' rating on Chicago's (GO) bonds outstanding under our local GO
criteria, released Sept. 12, 2013. The negative outlook reflects our view oftherisksinvolved in how the city will
address its upcoming, large pension payments.
A pledge ofthe city's full faith credit and resources, as well as ad valorem property taxes v«thout limitation as to rate
or amount, secures its GO bonds.
The rating reflects our assessment of the following factors for the city, specifically its:
• Strong, broad, and diverse economy given its status as a major regional economic center;
• Adequate budgetary flexibility, which indicates that, although the city has home rule status, which provides
increased taxing and borrowing capacity, its flexibility is limited by the city's historical reluctance to adjust property
tcixes;
• Very weak budgetary performance, reflecting recent deficits and reliance on reserves to balance operations and an
outlook of continued budget challenges: however, we note that the city has no plans to utilize its long-term reserves
in the service concession reserve fund;
• Very strong liquidity providing very strong cash levels to cover both debt service and expenditures;
• Strong management conditions with good financial practices and policies in place;
• Very weak debt and contingent liabilities position, driven mostly by the city's high net direct debt; and
• Weak Institutional Framework score.
Strong economy
We consider Chicago'.s economy to be strong, broad, and diverse, with employment opportunities spanning all the
major industries. Furthermore, the city is home to the headquarters of several large corporations, has a large tourism

WWW.STANDARDANDFOORS.COIVI/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

2

 Sinnmnry: Chicago; General Obli'gatiuii; joint Criteria

base, and is a transportation hub. Cook County's unemployment rate historically tracks higher than the state and
peaked at 10.8% in 2010, but has since fallen to 9.3% in 2012. Chicago's per capita effective buying income (EBI) was
96% of the national average in 2012, which we consider adequate. The city's per capita EB! as a percent of the U.S. is
projected to remain the same, at 96% by 2017. Per capita market value for the city was adequate at $82,088 in fiscal
2013. Equalized assessed value peaked at $84.7 billion in levy year 2009, and has fallen since then to $65 billion for
levy year 2012, reflecting a decline in city home prices and the impact of a recent revaluation. However, the trend in
equalized assessed value does not affect the city's year-over-year property tax revenues since the city extends taxes
based on amount, rather than on rate.

Adequate budget flexibility
In our opinion, the city's budgetary flexibility is helped by its reserves in the service concessions and reserve fiinds. At
the close of fiscal 2012 (Dec. 31), the general fund unassigned balance was thin at $33.4 million, or 1.1% of
expenditures. With respect to revenues, fiscal 2013 ended on a positive note due to an estimated $75 million positive
revenue variance although we expect the overall total general fund balance will likely decline due to the planned use of
the $177 million assigned fund balance. The fiscal 2014 general fund budget calls for a $53.4 million use of reserves,
reflecting the appropriation of $30 million of the unassigned fiscal 2012 general fund balance and $20 million of 2013
positive revenue budget variance. The long-term Skyway and parking meter reserves stood at $624.8 million, or 20%
of expenditures. The city has adopted ordinances that discourage spending dovm the reserves in the service
concessions and reserve funds, indicating to us that those reserves, specifically, will not be drawn dawn going forward.
The city budgeted to add $ 15 million to the service concession and reserve funds in budget year 2013 and $5 million in
2014; this would follow $20 million deposited duringfiscal2012.
Although the city has tcuting flexibility owing to its home-rule status, it has not historically availed itself of that
flexibility. Hindering budget flexibility is a political unwillingness historically to raise property taxes to meet budgetary
challenges, particularly with respect to looming pension payment increases. In our view, the city also has a limited
capacity to cut spending given that nearly two-thirds of 2012 general fund expenses were in the area of public safety.
Very vi^eak budgetary performance
The city's budgetary performance, in our view, has been very weak overall for the past fourfiscalyears and it
continues to faces significant challenges. Infiscalyears 2009 through 2011, the general fund ended with surpluses but
relied heavily on one-shot budget balancing maneuvers, including large transfers in from the service concession
reserve fund. The service concession reserve fund had been pumped up with cash from the sale of leased assets,
including the Skyway and parking meters. The service concession reserve fund now holds $625 million, and city
ordinances only allow interest generated in the fund to be transferred out. In fiscal 2012, the city balanced its budget
with minimal transfers in from other funds but ended the year with a $101 million general fund shortfall. The city's $2.9
billion of general fund revenue consists of a diverse array of revenues, the largest being sales taxes ($572 million, or
20%). Although the general fund revenue stream is diverse, expenditures are strongly concentrated in public safety,
which accounted for 63% of expenses in 2012. TTie city is taking steps to manage these costs, and year-over-year they
rose only 1.3% in 2012. In 2013, the city budgeted to use its $ 177 million assigned general fund balance, which
represents carryover of unbudgeted revenue growth from fiscal 2012. Fiscal 2013 positive budget variances in
property, sales, and income taxes contnbuted to actual but unaudited overall revenues exceeding budgeted revenues

WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS.COM/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

3

pr,'j;.tl!l I iliCOO 'Tl/

 Summary: Chicago; General Obligation; joint Criteria

by $75 million (about 2.5% ofthe budget). Fiscal 2013 actual expenditures were on track with the $3 billion budget.
The $3.2 billion 2014 budget was balanced with the use of $53 million of general fund reserves. The budget increases
4% year-over-year, assumes tax revenue growth, and relies upon $97.1 million in nonrecurring revenue sources. The
economic recovery suggests that revenues could improve in the near term. However, the city faces significant
challenges with respect to managing its costs, most notably with respect to its pensions. Should the city fail to obtain
state legislative relief to phase in the contributions or to reduce the liabilities, it wrill face more than a $600 milfion
increase in annual pension contributions to its police and fire plans in fiscal 2016. However, decisions about how to
fund the increased contributions must be made in late calendar 2014 ifthe revenues are to be realized in time to make
the payments in 2016. At this time, the city's position is that it will continue to seek legislative support and labor
concessions. Even ifthe city is able to smooth out the contributions, the increased costs will likely be an impediment
to significant future budget surpluses.
Very strong liquidity
Supporting the city'sfinancesis liquidity we consider to be very strong, vvith total government available cash of more
than 100% of debt service. We believe the city has exceptional access to external liquidity. The city has issued bonds
frequently during the past 15 years, including GO bonds, enterprise fund revenue bonds, and sales tax bonds.

Strong management
We view the city's management conditions as strong, supported by "good"financialmanagement practices under our
financial management assessment (FMA). The city produces long-term financial and capital plans, which officials
update annually. The city has a formal debt management policy and has adopted ordinances that limit the use of
nongencral ftjnd reserves for budget-balancing purposes.
Very weak debt and contingent liability profile
In our opinion, the city's debt and contingent liabilities profile is very weak, with pension funding levels and upcoming
pension payments posing a significant challenge. The city has a combination offixed-rateand variable-rate debt, and
swaps are utilized to hedge risk. We do not view the city's debt portfolio as being vulnerable to interest rate risk or
speculative contingent liabilities. Direct debt is manageable in our view, with total govemmental fund debt service at
13% of total governmental fund expenditures in 2012. The city has a roughly $3 bilfion,five-yearbond program, most
of it focused on water and sewer projects. We do not expect debt issuance v«thin the next two years to lead to
significant increases in the GO debt burden. The city has used bonds to improve and modernize its infrastructure.
The city's debt profile is challenged by its pension obligations. The city contributes to four different pension plans. The
city's budgets include pension payments for the four defined benefit plans that fully meet the statutorily required
amounts. However, current state statutes in effect base contributions on a multiple of payroll and do not address
unfunded liabilities. The budgeted pension payment amount for 2013 is $479.5 million, based on the statutory formula.
This stops short of the $1 47 billion actuarially required contribution (ARC) determined in the Dec. 31. 2012 actuarial
report. If it was included in the 2013 corporate fund budget, the ARC payment of $1.5 billion would represent roughly
35% ofthe corporate fund budget, an amount we consider very high.
The overall unfunded liability ofthe four plans is $19.5 billion as of 2012, up from $11.9 billion in 2009, and the plans
altogether are 35% funded Funding levels for each of the plans are as follows.

WVW.STANDARDANDPOORS.COM/RATINCSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014 4
i^fij • i i j c i n i j / j v

 .Summary: Chica.i>o; General Obligation; joint

•
•
•
•

Criteria

The municipal employees plan: 38% funded, virith an $8.4 billion unfunded liability;
The laborers' plan: 56% funded, with a $1.02 billion unfunded liability;
The police officers' plan: 31% funded, with a $6.9 billion unfunded liability; and
The fire fighters' plan: 25% funded, with a $3.03 billion unfunded liability.

Legislation was enacted by the state in 2010 to reduce benefits in the four defined-benefit pension plans, which in the
long-term could ease budgetary pressure. However, the city's budget faces the more immediate pressure from
legislation that changed the statutory formula guiding the police and fire pension contributions, bringing those more in
line with an actuarial funding methodology and a 90% funding goal by 2040. The effect of the legislation causes
contributions to rise from the current $480 million to roughly $1.1 billion in 2016. We feel the legislation has positive
implications for the future health ofthe police and fire plans, but in the meantime it has the potential to become a
source of budget stress given that the city has indicated an unwillingness to rely on property tax increases to fund this
cost. The city's home rule status provides the city with the ability to raise virtually any tax without voter approval, but
if the city is to go this route, it will have to make a decision to adopt a tax increase in enough time to then set the rale
and begin collecting the revenue for the 2016 payment. Ifthe city were to raise its property tax rate to fund the
pension payments, it would have to set the rate by the end of calendar 2014 in order for the tax to be on the fall 2015
tax bills. A sales tax increase would need a similar implementation date in order to ensure timely collections. These
examples serve to illustrate that the pension payment in 2016 is a more immediate priority than the payment date
suggests. The statutory formula guiding the city's other two pension systems ~ municipal employees and laborers —
has not changed, and those contributions are based on a multiple of payroll. So while those contributions are not
expected to materially increase in the future, and thus are not a source of budget stress, the city does estimate that the
assets in those plans could be depleted at some point afler 2020.
Thus, in our opinion, the status of the city's pension plans has significant rating implications both from a near-term and
long-term perspective. In our view, the city's lack of progress in making structural changes in pension funding is a
negative credit factor
The city is currently party to an other postemployment benefit (OPEB) settlement agreement that capped its liability
until the agreement expired June 30, 2013. The city has obligated itself to provide OPEB benefits through the end of its
fiscal year, Dec. 31, 2013. As of Jan. 1, 2014, the city continues to contribute 55% of the cost to eligible employees
who retired prior to Aug. 23, 1989. For all other employees, the plan will be phased out entirely by Jan. 1, 2017, when
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act will take its place. Under the current plan, the city's OPEB benefits
extend to police, municipal, fire, and laborer's pension fund retirees and eligible dependents. The city's net OPEB
expenses under the plan were $97.5 million in 2012. The cily reported a-$415.8 million unfunded actuarial accrued
liability (U/VAL) o;i its police, municipal, fire, and laborer's plans as ofthe Dec. 31, 2012 valuation. The VAAL on other
cily employees not covered under the aforementioned plans was $471 million as of the most recent valuation (Dec. 31,
2011)
Weak institutional framework
The institutional framework score for Chicago is weak, reflecting the lack ofrigorousstatutory requirements for
financial reporting and a large unfunded mandate with respect to pension contributions. See the Institutional
Framework score for Illinois.

WWW.STANDARDANDFOORS.COM/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

5

 Summary:

Chicago: General Obligation;

Joint

Criteria

Outlook
The negative outlook reflects our view of the city's upcoming spike in pension costs, which could potentially become a
source of budget stress. We could lower the rating by the end of 2015 if the city substantially draws down its reserves
in an effort to increase its pension payments in line with state mandates, regardless of whatever relief the state
legislature may provide. In order for us to affirm the rating and retum the outlook to stable, we would need to see the
city successfully absorb its higher pension costs while maintaining balanced budgetary performance and reserves at or
near their current level.

Related Criteria And Research
Related Criteria
USPF Criteria: Local Government GO Ratings Methodology And Assumptions, Sept. 12, 2013
Related Research
• S&P Public Finance Local GO Criteria: How We Adjust Data For Analytic Consistency, Sept. 12. 2013
• Institutional Framework Overview: Illinois Local Governments
iRaHngs^Betail^tvj^fe^br
Chicago-GObndsproj
',S*'-*

'^^^^
jB

•

" t'V^',>

A+/Negative Vi^V-.T-^^'

r Long Term Ralihgf ' . ' - i f
ChicagOiGO'ibnds'varrate'deniand bnds rfdg ser 2007G-.
Long Term•Ratingj^'-W'
.n-v.-- • .•
Unenhanced Ratin'gj.y

:

•.•i^;

-J'-S^'^.^

^

^

^

^

'.-Affirmed j . —

'iifr'"
•.'^Mffirmed

AAA/A-1 /.
• • Ajf{SPUR)/:Negative\;'

^'Affirmed,

•

A>(SPUR)/Negative'A ! •

;

—• •••••Si':.'

..Chicago GO prerrtdiser 2007C (wrap of insured) (MBIA & National) (AGM) (SEC MKT)
)^'yncnyioncerf/fo7i^-S-*^''^"- -''-.

v '

':Js% , !.i^Afrirmcd;'-!=..

I Chicago GO va'iiable rate dem bnds rfdg scr 2007F
••• Long Term Rating .

..AAA/A-t

•:• •

V;lf7(+]f PUR)7Negative'

Unenhanced Rating

. .. •
.-• '

""7^ffirmed^\J^.^,
Affirmed
•'^k't-

f Chicago GO VRDBs (Neighborhoods Alive 21 Prog) ser 2002B- 5
..'.Long Term Rating

' , .• ,

' ='AAAM-r+"?-

t-; Unenhanced Ratmg

••^

•Is"- • • -

Affirmed " '

A+(SPUR)/Negative

.

Affirmed

•Chicago CO VRDBs (Neighbdrhoods'Alive 21.Prog) ser 20028,-3 r ,„
''•Hong T e r m ' R a l i n g ^ - . ' ' '
?;Unenh'anced Rating. '

'•'

Affirmed. ^ .,

. . AA;A>A-I +
" '

A+(SPUR)/Negative

'•'Ghicago CO VRDBs (Neighborhoods Alive 21 Prog) ser 2002 B';?
Long Term Rating

AAA/A-1 +

v--,.

Unenhanced Rating

A+(SPUR)/NeRaiive

Chicago GO VRDO'ser 20050-1

'

.

Long Term Rating
- Unenhanced Rating

, AAA/A-1
A-^(SPUR)/Negative

• . ••-•',•:. .

•.

"Affirmed •,
("Affirmed'
Affirme'd'

.S*^' -

r.'Affirmed 7"' ..
'Affirmed'
WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS.COM/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

6

 Summary: Chicago; General Obligation; Joint Criteria

.Chicago GO VRDO ser 2005D-2
Long Term Rating
Unenhanced Rating
'' '

, AA^A/A-I +
A+(SPu'R).^Negative

Chicago GO (wrap of insured) (AMBAC & AGM)
''Unenhanced Rating
i^:^
...

.

A+(SPUR)/Negative

Chicago G6'(wrap of insured) (/iMBAC &'V\GM)'(SEC MKT)^^^,
•^Unenhanced Rating

^J.

'•

';

A-f(SPUR)/Negative

Chicago GO (wrap of insured):(AMBAC & BHAC) (SEC MKT)• Unenhanced Rating ',. '
A+(SPURj7Negatiye
Chicago'GC),(OTapofMns^^^^^

:'
-j:,,A+.(SPUR)/Negative

Unenhanced Rating •. • '•

•i-

Chicago'cfO (AGM) •'•f-^^^ \
Ltnenhanced-Rating ^ i : , ^ : ; ^ - ' ,:
.Chicago GO (AGM) (SEC MKT)
.Unenhanced Rating .
.'
Chicago GO jASSURED-GTIY)
Unenhanced Rating
'chicago GO (BAM) '
.UhenliancedRating

'.

!•

Affirmed?/'

-Si*,!-

\i •
.;A+(SPUR)/Neg'atiye.

\'.'.Kr •

Affirmed

A+(SPUR)/NegaUve
••••
:.4t • . • -i^if

Affirmed

A+.(SPIJR)/Negatjye', • .

Affirmed'

v4

r- '

V, rS 1.
i - .-.v.>» .

Chicago GO (FGIC)

• .-.>.LX'

.Unenhanced Rating

A+'(SPUR)/Negative

Chicago GO (FGlC) (MBIA) (National)
Unehhanced'Rating^}-;-..! -'
' "V-t

.AITirmed'

A+(SPUR)/Negativ"e

Affirmed

:??'^'

• AV(*SPUR)'/Megative';^"

Affirrneti .

•.-•:'••. • . ' •.
A-t;{SPUR)/Negatiye

Affirmed
•V

A+.(SKllR)yNegatiW''^^^^
''
' *- .
' i

• •^><-

W'!^-"''

• :'•'= • - V.<A+/A-1/Negatiye
•V ,>K,

Chicago GO (MBIA) (IJJational)
'' Un'enhanced Rating '•••.•• -

Affirmea.'.

' '•"

>

-1=:

Affirmed

. -i -

• <•
•
A+(SPUR)/Negative
AAA/A-1 .. - - ,

V,

Affirmed ,
- 'Affirmed - •

'Ciiicago GO
• • . ^.
Chicago 5 0 (CIFG)
Unenhanced-Rating
Chicago
GO Rating
VRDB scr 2003B-1
Unenhanced
Affiriried
A+(SPUR)/Negativi;
Long-Term Rating
^
'..•• ^Many
issues
ore
enhanced
by
bond
insurance
Chicago GO VRDB ser 20q7EFG
Uneniiimced'Rating
< Long-Term Rating
Complete ratings information is available to subscribers of RatingsDirect at www.globaIcreditportal.com. All ratings

WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS.COM/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

7

' i ' . iVI^'l I -.101 O^t'.''

 Summary: Chicago; General Obligation; Joint Criteria

affected by this rating action can be found on Standard & Poor's public Web site al www.standardandpoors.com. Use
the Ratings search box located in the left column.

WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS.COm/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

8

 Copyright © 2014 Standard & Poor's Financial Services LLC, a pan of McGraw Hill Financial All rights reserved.
No content (including ratings, credit-related analyses and data, valuations, model, sollwan: or other application or output thereftom) or any part
thereof (Content) may be modilied, reverse engineered, reproduced or distributed in any form by any means, or stored in a datobase or retrieval
system, without the prior written permission of Standard & Poor's Financial Services LLC or its aTiliates (collectively, S&P). The Content shall not t>e
used for any unlawful or unauthorized purposes. S&P and any third-patty provider, as well as their directors, oOicers, shareholders, employees or
agents (collectively S&P Patties) do not guarantee the accuracy, completeness, timeUnessoravailability of tbe Content. S&P Parties are not
responsible for any errorrs or omissions (negligent or otherwise), regardless of the cause. Tor the results obtained rrom Ihe use ofthe Content, or tor
the security or maintenance of any data input by the user. The Content is provided on an 'as is' basis. S&P PARTIES DISCL.AIM ANY AND ALL
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO. ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR
A PARTICUIJIVR PURPOSE OR USE, FREEDOM FROM BUGS. SOFTWARE ERRORS OR DEFECTS, THAT THE CONTENTS FUNCTIONING
WILL BE UNINTERRUPTED, OR THAT THE CONTENT WILL OPERATE WITH ANY SOFTWARE OR HARDWARE CONFIGURATION. In no
event shall S&P Parties be liable to any party for any direct, indirect, incidental, exemplary, compensatory, punitive, special or conscquendal
damages, costs, expenses, legal fees, or losses (including, without limitation, lost income or lost proiits and opportunity costs or losses caused by
negligence) in connection with any use of the Content even if advised of the possibility of such damages.
Credit-related and other analyses, inchidini; ratings, and statements in the Content are statements of opinion as of the date they are expressed and
not statements of fact. S&Ps opinions, analyses, and rating acknowledgment decisions (described below) are not recommendations to purchase,
hold, or sell any securities or lo make any investment decisions, and do not address the suitability of any security. S&P assumes no obligation to
update the Content following publication In any fonn or format. The Content should not be relied on and is not a substitute for the skill, judgment
and experience ofthe user, its management, employees, advisois and/or clients when making investment and olher business decisions. S&P does
not act as a fiduciary or an investment advisor except where registered as such. While S&P has obtained information from sources it believes to be
reliable, S&P does not perform on audit and undertakes no duty of due diligence or independent verification of any information it receives.
To the extent that regulatory authorities allow a rating agency to acknowledge in one jurisdiction a.raling i.ssucd in another jurisdiction for certain
regulatory purposes, S&P reserves the right to assign, withdraw, or suspend such acknowledgement at any lime and in its sole discretion. S&P
Parties disclaim any duty whatsoever arising out of the assignment, virithdrnwol, or suspension of an acknowledgment as well as any liability for any
damage alleged to have been suffered on account thereof
S&P keeps cenain activities of its business units separate from each other in order to preserve the independence and objectivity of their respective
activities. As a result, certain bu.'iiness units of S&P moy have infomiation that is not available to other S&P business units. S&P has established
policies and procedures to maintain the confidentiality of certain nonpublic information received in connection with each analytical process.
S&P may receive compensation for its ratings and certain analyses, normally from issuers or underwriters of securities or fjom obligors. S&P
reserves the right to disseminate its opinion.'! and analyses. S&P's public ratings and analyses are made available on its Web sites,
www.slandardandpoors com (free of charge), and www raiingsdirect com and www.globalcreditportal com (subscription) and vww.sp>capitaliq com
(subscription) and may be distnbuied throui^h olher means, including via S&P publications ond third-party redistributors. Additional infonmation
about our ratings fees is available al ww-w.standardandpoors.com/usralingsfecs.

WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS.COM/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

9

 MOODY'S
INVESTORS SERVICE

New Issue: Moody's downgrades Chicago, IL to Baa1 from A3, affecting $8.3
billion of GO and sales tax debt
Qobaj Credit Research - 04 IVbr 2014
yUso downgrades vuater and sewer sernor lien reverue bonds to AZfram A l a n d second lien revenue
bonds to A3 from K2, affecting $3.3 billion of debt; outlook negative for all ratings
CHICAGO (CITYOF) IL
Cities (including Towns, Villages and ToMTships)
IL
Moody's luting
ISSUE
General Obligation Bonds, Project Series 2014A
Sale Amount
$109,000,000
Expected Sale Date
03/06/14
Rating Description
General Obligation

RAUNG
Baa1

General Obligation Bonds, Refunding Sefies 2014B
SaleAmount
$108,000,000
Expected Sale Date
02/06/14
Rating Description
General Obligaticn

Baal

General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project Series 2014C
SaleAmount
$44,000,000
Expected Sale Date
03/06/14
Rating Description
General Obligation

Baa1

General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Refunding Series 2014D
SaleAmount
$127,000,000
Expected Sale Date
uyQel^A
Rating Description
General Obligation

Baal

Mood/sOuUook NEG
C^nion
NEWYORK IVIarch 04, 2014 -Moody's Investors Sen/ice has downgraded the City of Chicago's (IL) general
obligation (GO) and sales tax ratings to Baal from A3; water and sewer senior lien revenue ratings to A2 from A l ;
and water and sewer second lien revenue ratings to A3 from A2. The outlook cm all ratings is negative.
Concurrently, Moody's has assigned a Baa1 rating to the folloMng new issuances: $109 million GO Bonds,
Project Series 2014A which will fund vanous capital projects; $108 mllion GO Bonds, Refunding Series 2014B,
which will refund certain outstanding debt maturities for expected interest savings; $44 million GO Bonds, Taxable
Project Series 2014C, which will fund the payment of legal judgments; arxi $127 mllion GO Bonds, Taxable
Refunding Series 2014D, which will restructure certain outstanding detjt rralurities for near-term budget relief. The
rating actions affect $7.8 bllion of GO debt, including the current tiords; $556 mllion of sales tax debt; $1.9 billion
of water revenue debt; and $1.3 bllion of sewer revenue debt.

 SUMMARY RATING RATIONALE
The Baa1 rating on Chicago's GO debt reflects the city's massive and growing unfunded pension liabilities, which
threaten the city's fiscal solvency absent major revenue and other budgetary adjustrrents adopted in the near term
and sustained for years to come. The size of Chicago's unfunded pension liablities makes it an extreme outlier, as
indicated by the city's fiscal 2012 adjusted net pension liablity (ANPL) of 8.0 times operating revenue, which is the
highest of any rated US local government While the Illinois General Assembly's recent passage of pension
reforms for the State of Illinois (A3 negative) and the Chicago Park District (CPD) (A1 negative) suggests that
reforms may soon be forthcoming for CNcago, we expect that any cost savings of such reforms will not alleviate
the need for sutDstantial new revenue and fiscal adjustments in order to meet the city's long-deferred pension
funding needs. V\fe expect that the city's pension contributions will continue to fall belcw those based on actuarial
standards. The city's slowly-amortizing debt levels are also large and growing. The Baa1 rating also incorporates
credit strengths including Chicago's large tax base that sits at the center of one of the nation's nnst diverse
regional economies and the city's broad legal authority to raise revenue.
The Baal rating on Chicago's sales tax revenue bonds reflects the lack of legal segregation df pledged sales tax
revenue from general operations, which caps the rating at the city's GO rating despte strong coverage of
nnaxinum annual debt service (MADS). The A2 and A3 ratings on the water and sewer senior and second lien
revenue debt reflect the interccnnectedness of the two enterprises with the city's general operations. Both
systems are departments of the city, governed by the mayor and city council. Ratings on the water and sewer
bonds remain atxwe those of the city's GO and sales tax debt due to healthy credit fundamentals arxJ the
expectation that any potential increase in the utilities' share of annual pension paynnents wxild have a mcxlest
irrpact on the systems' overall financial operations. The difference in the ratings of the senior and second lien
revenue debt reflects the stronger legal security and debt service coverage of both systems' senior liens.
The negative outlook reflects our expectation that, absent a conrritment to significantly increase revenue and/or
materially restructure accrued pension liabilities to reduce costs, the city's credit quality will likely weaken The
farridable legal and plitical barriers to these actions are incorpiDrated in the outlook. TTie State of lllinois's
constituticinal protection of pension benefits raises the possibility that any atterrpt to redice accrued benefits will
be litigated by plan merrbers. Ongoing unwillingness to sufficiently increase revenue ensures that annual pension
payments will remain a considerable operating stress while ctrrtinuing to fall well belcw actuarially sound
contributions. As such, the city'sfinancialoperations will remain staicturally imbalanced and the long-term
solvency of the city's pension funds will be exposed to a significant (jegree of asset retum risk.
LEGAL SECURITY
Debt service on Chicago's GO bonds, including the current offerings, is secured by the city's pledge to levy a tax
unlimted as to rate or amount Det>t service on the sales tax revenue bonds is secured by the city's pledge of its
home rule sales tax revenue and its allocation of state sales tax revenue. Debt service on the water revenue
bonds is secured by net revenues of the city's water enterprise. Debt service on the city's sewer revenue borxis
is secured by net revenues of the city's sewer enterprise.
STRENGTHS
- Chicago's revenue-generating capacity is substantial as evidenced by a very large property tax base and a
sound socio-economic profile that reflects the city's role as the center of one of the nation's largest and most
diverse econorries
- Broad legal authiority to increase property and sales taxes as an Illinois home rule unit of govemrrent
- Recent pension reform legislation passed by the State of Illinois for pension plans of the state and CPD suggests
that pension reform legislation is forthcomng for the city
CHALLENGES
- Substanticjily underfunded pension plans carried a Mocxiy's ANPL of $32 billion (net of enterprise support),
equivalent to 8.0 times operating revenue (revenue in the General Fund, Debt Service Funds, and Pension Funds)
in fiscal 2012; altfxxjgh actuanal valuations for the city's four pension plans are not yet available for fiscals 2013
and 2014, the city's continued underfunding in the past two years suggests that the plans' unfijnded liabilities
remain large
- Cunulative underfundinq of pension paymsnts relative to actuarially annual required contnbutions (ARCs)

 exceeded $7 bllion in the period of fiscal 2003 through fiscal 2014; continued underfunding provides the city with
near term operatingflexibilitybut hastens the plans'ti'ajectorytoward insolvency, which in turn could present
extreme budgetary crises for the city
- Despite the prospect tar pension cost reductions brought about Uirough state legislation, unfunded liabilities will
likely remain large; furthennore, the Illinois Constitution expliclUy protects paision benefits, raising the possibility
that an atterrpt to reduce accrued tienefits of existing menrtjers would face litigation
- City management's legal ability to increase revenue to fund pensions at actuarially sound levels is offset by
practical and political limtations to immediately rasing taxes so as to support actuarially sound contributions to
pension plans
- Operating budget is constrained by fixed costs, namely detit service and pension contributions, which comprise
a growing percentage of the city's operating budget; annual pension costs are set to increase by $600 million in
budget year 2015
- Direct and overall debt and pension burdens are well above average and grcvuing; the substanti"al funding needs
of overiapping gcvemments exacerbate the practical limitations of generating nav revenue from a shared tax base
DETAILED CREDIT DISCUSSION
YEARS OF INSUFFICIENT PENSION FUNDING DRIVE SUBSTANTIAL AND CONTINUED GROWTH IN
UNFUNDED UABIUTIES
Chicago's four pension ftjnds are in exti^emely poor condition following years of insufficient contiibutitxis from Uie
city. Fromfiscal2003 Uiroughfiscal2012, Chicago underfunded its actuarially-deterrrined ARC by a cumulative
$5.1 bllion, as annual underfunding grewfrom$108 million in fiscal 2003 to over $1 billion in fiscal 2012. As a
consequence, Uie city's four-plan corrtoined unfunded actuarial accrued liability (UAAL) ballooned frcm $5.4 billion
in fiscal 2003 to $19.4 billion in fiscal 2012 Net of proportional shares allocated to business enterprises (water and
sewer systems; O'Hare and McJway airports) based on actual contiibutions from Uiose entities, the city's fiscal
2012 acfjustod net pension liability is $32 bllion. In Uie three years Uiroughfiscal2012, Uie ANPL has averaged a
very elevated 6.7timesannual operating revenue and 12.6% of full valuation
\Ahile audited information is not yet available for fiscal 2013, ttie city's txjdget for Uiat year included a paynrait of
$480 miDion to Uie four pension funds. The budgeted payment was $1.2 bllion less Uian the ARC calculated for
2013. The city's adopted fiscal 2014 budget included a similar $480 million payment to Uie pension funds, which
likely falls weil below Uie ARC for Uie current year. Because Uie city has continued to contritxite far below actuarial
standards, we expect fiscal 2013 and 2014 actual valuatitxis of ttie pension plans to show Uiat unfunded liablities
remain substantial.
STATE PENSION REFORM MAY MAKE POSSIBLE RESTRUCTURING OF ACCRUED BENEFITS BLTT
UABILITIES WILL REMAIN LARGE
In December 2013, the Illinois General Assembly passed reform legislation for pension plans of the state and
CPD. These developments are positive witti respect to Chicago's credit profile as Uiey suggest Uie state
legislature may soon tum its attention to crafting a simlar refomri package for Uie city. However, while restiucturing
of accrued pension liabilities is possibe, Uie city's exposure to unfunded liablities will remain very high going
forward. To achieve material savings, state legislation would have to significanUy reduce accrued liabilities of Uie
city's four pension plans. To achieve a significant reduction in accrued liabilities, Uie legislation would have to
inrpact current plan participants. For exarrple, Uie state and CPD pension reforms included reductions to cost of
living adjustinents (COLAs). Wfe anticipate such changes, if enacted for the city's pension plans, could be
vociferously fought by labor union representatives. Pension refom legislation for uie city's plans could also include
increases to en^loyee conb-ibutions to its pension plans. Hcwever, growth in employee payments could also be
challenged by the city's unions. Affected parties have challenged the state pension refonrs in court on grounds
Uiat the changes vicjiate the state's ccnstitutiiDn. To date, no challenges to the CPD reforms have been filed.
In the higtily unlikely event that anticipated refonm legislation faces no legal challenges from organized labor
groups, thefinancialimpact of reforms to the city's pension plans would, to a large extent, be offset by the city's
Kirlher underfunding in 2013 and 2014. Since any adopted reforms would, optimistically, reduce the city's total
actuanal accmed liablity to a level simlar to that reported in fiscal 2012, Chicago's unfijnded pension liability will
likely remain an extreme outlier annong US local governments for years to come.
UNDERFUNDING OF PENSIONS PROVIDES SHORT-TERM BUDGETARY RELIEF WHILE RAISING

 LONGER TERM RISKS OF PLAN INSOLVENCY AND BUDGET CRISIS
Actuaries of Uie city's pension fijnds have indicated Uiat, based on current fijnding practices and assumed rates of
retum of between 7.5% and 8%, one or more of the four plans could be insolvent by 2022. Underperformance of
plan assets relative to achjarial assunptions could drive Uie fijnds to insolvency even sooner. In 2010, Uie state
adopted Pubic Act 96-1495, which requires Illinois municipalities to increase contributions to police and fire
pension plans such Uiat plan assets are projected to reach 90% of the value of actuarial accrued liabilities by
2040. The city's compliance wiUi current state law vrajld likely stave off insolvency of Uie police and fire pension
plans. However, Uie law requires a $600 nrillion, or 125% increase in Uie city's total pension contribution in fiscal
2016 (levy year 2015). Deferral of all or part of the increased funding requirements called for in PA 96-1495 may
ultimately be part of any refomns tiiat the slate adopts on the city's behalf. While Uiis delay would provide Chicago
with short term iDudgetary relief, it would permit the city to ftjrther underfund pension contrilxjtions relative to an
actuarially sound basis and would allow tfie funds to continue on ttia'r current trajectory tcward insolvency wiUiin a
foreseeabe timeframe.
At Uie close of fiscal 2012, Uie city's General Fund balance was $231.3 million, or an adequate 7.8% of fijnd
revenue. An additional $625 million in the city's asset leasing reserve resulted in a total availaWe fund balance of
$856 nillion, or 21% of operating revenue, the city has maintained a sinilar level of satisfactory reserves for a
number yea^, but has done so only by vasUy underfunding its actuarially-deterrrined annual pension
requirements. While Uie city's $478 mllion coitiibution to its pension ftjnds in fiscal 2012 comprised 10% of
(Dperating revenue, contiibuting UieftjilARC of $1.5 billion would have consumed 32% of Uie city's annual
operating revenue. Had ttie city made its fijll ARC in fiscal 2012, available reserves would have been completely
ctepleted. As such, Uie city is operating with a struchjral deficit as nwiagement has sustainedfinancialreserves
by notfijlfillingannual opaBting obigations as calculated by pension plan actuaries.
Going forward, contiibuting to pension plans according to actuarial standards will require substantial expendihjre
reductions, revenue growUi, or a combination of Uie two. Unwillingness to utilize ttie city's fijil taxing authority to
fijnd pension ARCs is a clear credit negative Moody's estimates Uiat fullfijndingof Uiefiscal2012 ARC would
have required a near doubing of the city's property tax rate. As the city's own property tax rate comprises only
20% of the total rate levied wiUiin its boundaries, we believe Uiat a doubing of city taxes may be absorbed by Uie
tax base wiUiout placing too much negative pressure on Uie lixal econorry. However, needs of Uie city essentially
compete with those of overiapping entities, most notably Chicago Pubic Schools (CPS) (A3 negative). CPS faces
its OAfi operating pressures and sizeable unfuntjed pension liabilities, boUi of which may ultimately require new
revenue to address. Wfe anticipate Uiat concern for overiapping entities and maintenance of positive economic
ti^ends will likely cause Uie city to phase in any revenue growth over several years, corrtrilxiting to continued
underfunding of pensions relative to actuarially-bosed ARCs.
DIRECT AND OVERALL LONG-TERM UABIUTIES ARE ELEVATED AND GROWING, PLACING
INCREASED PRESSURE ON CHICAGO'S TAX BASE AND TAXPAYERS
The city's direct debt burden, excluding unftjnded pension liabilities, is a high 5% of full valuation and 2.4 times
operating revenue up from 3.2% of full valuation and 2.0 times operating revenue in 2009. The current direct debt
burden calculations include Uie current offerings as well as the recent increase in Uie city's ccmnercial paper (CP)
auUiorizati'on to $1 bllion from $500 million. The city anticipates taking greater advantage of its CP program to
provide short-temifinancingof capital projects at Icwer interest cost prior to Uie issuance of long-term GO txjnds.
A low 29% of the city's direct obigations are scheduled to be repaid wiUiin ten years. Debt service comprised 18%
of operating expenditures infiscal2012.
The city's cverall debt burden is a very high 10.3% of full valuation, wiUi over 60% of outstanding overiapping debt
having been issued by CPS. The overall debt burden has steadily increased from 6.6% of full valuation in 2009
due to a corrtination of tax base depreciation and new bcrrcwving on the part of the city and cveriappng entities.
Combined overall debt and ovaall adjusted net pension liabilities associated wiUi CPS, CPD, Cook County (A1
negative). Cook County Forest Preserve District (A1 negative), and the Metropolitan Wferter Reclamation District of
Greater Chicago (Aal negative) are equivalent to a very elevated 37% of fijll valuation and $27,000 per capita in
ttie city.
NARROW DISTANCE FROM LOC AND SWAP TERMINATION RATING TRIGGERS, BUT AVAILABLE
UQUIDITY SUFFICIENF TO COVER TERMINATION EVENTS
The city has one letter of credit (LOC) agreement that includes a downgrade to Baa2 or the equivalent by any
rating agency as an event of default. Rating triggers on ail olher LOCs and SBPAs consist of a downgrade to
Baa3 or tx^cw. Tbe city has 19 interest rate swap aqreements tied to outstandinq GO txnds. All Ixit two of the

 swaps include a doMigrade belcw Baal as an event of default, which would provide the counterparty Uie option to
terminate. The total niark-to-mari<et valuation of Uie 17 swaps is currentiy estimated at $139 million. A downgrade
belcw B3a2 constitutes an event of default for ttie remaining two swaps, which currenUy cany an estimated rTBri<to-mari<et valuation of $33 mllion. The city's existing liquidity is more tfian sufficient to cover cun^ent mark-tomari<et valuations on ttie swaps associated with the city's GO debt
DIVERSE AND LARGE TAX BASE REMAINS CITYS KEY CREDIT STRENGTH THOUGH REGIONAL
ECONOMY NOT FREE OF PRESSURE
Chicago's p(3siticn as Uie nation's Uiird largest city and center of one of the largest and most diverse econorries in
Uie US is by far Uie sti^ongest attiilxite of an oUierwise vjeak credit profile The regional econorry is supported by a
mx of industiies, includingfinancialservices, healUi care, higher education, UansptDrtation, and tourism Despite
ttie economc support bestowed tiy the diversity of errployment opportunities and institutions, the city has ndt been
spared the challenges brought on by and partty sustained since the recent recession. The city realized a 6.9%
decline in population in Uie 2010 US Census and Uie unenrployment rate in November 2013 remained high al
9.6% Total errployment in Uie cityttiroughout2013 was 8% belcw Uie prerecession p ^ recorded in 2007. While
fijll valuation remains an irrmense $196 bllion, it has fallen 23% frcm its peak of $254 billion in 2009. Median ferrily
income in ttie city is estimated at 85% of ttie national figure.
RATING ON SALES TAX BONDS CAPPED AT GO RATING GIVEN LACK OF LEGAL SEPARATION
BETWEEN PLEDGED REVENUE AND GENERAL OPERATIONS
The city's outstanding sales tax revenue bonds are secured by a seniw lien on Ixith Uie city's 1.25% horns rule
sales lax and ^% allocation of ttie slate's 6.25% sales tax. Because Uie city terrporarily pods pledged sales tax
revenue wiUi general operating revenue prior to making debt service sinking fijnd payments to Uie trustee, we do
not consider Uie pledged revenue to be effectively segregatedfromUie city. Therefore, Uie rating on outstanding
sales tax revenue bonds is capped at Uie city's GO rating. Fiscal 2012 pledged revenue provided 14.4 times
maxinrum annual debt service (MADS) on sales lax revenue bonds. The security includes a 5.0tinresMAIDS
additional bonds test
CITY COUNCIL HAS ULTIMATE AUTHORITY OVER WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS AND HAS RECENTLY
ADOPTED NOTABLE RATE INCREASES; PENSION CONTRIBUTIONS COMPRISE MODEST SHARE OF
OPERATIONS
Chicago's water and sewer systems are business enterprises of ttie city and ultimately governed by Uie mayor
and city ctxmcil. This organizational stiuchjre is Uie basis of tfie tjowngrades of Uie revenue ratings as well as Uie
maintenance of ttie negative outtooks. The differerx;e between Uie A2 ratings on senior lien water and sewer
revenue debt and Uie Baal rating on Uie GO debt reflects the utilities' more limited exposure to Uie pension
pressures weighing on Uie city's general operations. Botti enterprises rein±iurse ttie city's General Fund for costs
associated with utility employees' participation in Uie Municipal and Laborer pension plans. Recorded as operating
expenses of ttie utilities, Uiese reimbursements totaled $127 rrillion, or 2 2 % of operating revenue, in Uie water
enterprise and $4.7 mllion, or 1.9% operating revenue, in the sewer enterprise during fiscal 2012 As contiibuticns
curraiUy ccrrprise a small share of boUi systems' operating txidgets, we expect Uiat an increase in ctiarges, if
adopted by Uie city, would result in modestfinancialimpact on utility operatitxis.
The city's water and sewsr utilities otherwise exhibt healUiy creditftjndamentals.The water systerrfs service area
extends well beyond city boundaries, providing freatirent and distiilxition for a populati'on of 5.3 rrillion, or 41% of
Uie entire state. The sewer system is nearly coterrrinous with Uie city and is responsibe for wastewater collection
and transmssion, but not treatinenL Fblcwing years of inconsistent rate growUi, city council approved a series of
rate increases Uirough 2015, with rates fijrlher rising along witti inflation thereafter. Wfeiter and sewer rates grew by
25% and 30% respectively, in fiscal 2012, and are scheduled to increase 15%peryearttirough2015. The city
intends to combine tfie new revenue with a lesser dependence on debt tofinanceprtojected capital improvements
of $1.9 billion and $1.3 billion in ttie water and sewer enterpnses, respectively, Uirough 2017. BoUi Uie water and
SBA/er systems are heavily leveraged, reporting debt ratios of 70% and 83% respectively, infiscal2012.
Fiscal 2012 net revenues provided 20.7 times and 2.2 times coverage, respectively, of senior lien and total debt
service of Uie water enterprise. This was up from 8.4 limes and 1.4 tines coverage in fiscal 2011 fblcwing Uie
25% rate increase. Fiscal 2012 MADS coverage was 13.4timesand 1.8times.The water enterprise closed the
year witti an unresfricted cash balance of $128.5 nillion, or 44% of operating expenses.
Fiscal 2012 net revenues provided 9.5 tinres and 1.7 times coverage, respectively, of senior lien and total debt
service of ttie sewer enterprise. This was upfrom6.2 times and 1.1 times coverage in fiscal 2011 following Uie

 30% rate increase. Fiscal 2012 MADS coverage was 5.7 times and 1.4 times. The sewer enterprise closed Uie
year wiUi an unrestricted cash balance of $34.6 mllion, or 31% of operating expenses.
OLfTLOOK
The negative outttxik reflects Uie expectation Uiat, absent a comrritinent to significanUy increase revenue and/or
materially restiucture accnjed pension liablities to reduce costs, Uie city's credit quality will likely weaken. The
farridabe legal and politicalfcjarriersto Uiese actions are incorporated in Uie ouUook. The State of lllinois's
constitutiiDnal protection of pension benefits raises Uie possibility Uiat any atterrpt to reduce accnjed benefits will
tie litigated by plan members. Ongoing unwillingness to sufficientiy increase revenue ensures that annual pension
payments will remain a considerable operating stress while continuing to fall well below actuarially sound
ctontributions. As such, Uie city'sfinancialoperations v\rtll remain structuralty imbalanced and the long-term
solvency of the city's pension funds will be exposed to a significant degree of assdL retum risk.
WHAT COULD MOVE THE GO RATING UP
- State passage of pension reform legislation ttiat survives near-certain litigation to materially lower Uie city's
pension obigations to a level Uiat allows Uie city to make annual contributions on an actuarially sound basis
- Demonstrated conTritmenl to increase tax revenue so as to fund pension obigations on an actuarially sound
basis
- Substantial expansion of ttie tax base and/a growUi infinancialreserves ttiat more adequately compensates for
ttie city's exposure to unftjnded liabilities
WHAT COULD MOVE THE GO RATING DOWN
- Lack of action by ttie city and state to arrest the growUi of unftjnded pension liabilities
- Continued unwillingness on the part of Uie city to raise tax revenue in amounts sufficient to ftjnd annual pension
contributions in line witti actuarial standards
- Further grcwUi in direct and overall debt burdens
- Court decision ttiat recenUy adopted pension refonrs by Uie Slate of Illinois violate ttie slate ctxistitution
WHAT COULD MOVE THE SALES TAX, WATER, AND SEWER REVENUE RATINGS UP
- Upward mcvement in ttie city's GO rating
WHAT COULD MOVE THE SALES TAX. WATER, AND SEWER REVENUE RATINGS DOWM
- Downward nrovement in the city's GO rating
- Wfeakening of debt service coverage provided by respective sales tax, water and sewer revenue
KEY STATISTICS
Estinrated fijll valuation: $196 bllion
Estimated full valuation per capita $72,600
Estimated median famly incon^ as % of Uie US. 85%
Fiscal 2012 availabe ftjnd balance / operating revenue: 21%
5-year change in available fund balance / operating revenue: 3%
Fiscal 2012 net cash / operating revenue: 17%
5-year change in net cash / operating revenue. 1%
Institutionalframewori<score. Aa
5-year average operating revenue / operating expenditures' 0 97

 Net direct ciebt tiurden: 5% of ftjil valuation; 2.4timesoperating revenue
3-year average Moojy's adjusted net pension liability: 12.6% offrillvaluation; 6.7 times operating revenue
RATING METHODOLOGY
The principal methoddogy used in rating the general obigation debt was US Local GcvemnBnt General Obigation
Debt pubished in January 2014. The principal meUiodology used in rating the special tax debt was US Pubic
Rnance Special Tax MeUioddogy pubished in March 2012 The principal nneUioddogy used in ratingttieWfeiter
and Sewer debt was Analytical Framewort< For Wfater And Sewer System Ratings in August 1999. Please see Uie
Credit Pdicy page on vwwv.moodys.com for a copy of these metfioddogies.
REGULATORY DISCLOSURES
For ratings issued on a progran^ series or category/class of debt, Uiis announcement provides certain regulatory
dsclosures in relation to each rating of a subsequentiy issued bond or note of ttie same series or category/class
of debt or pursuant to a program for which ttie ratings are derived exclusivdy frcm existing ratings in accordance
witti Moody's rating practices. For ratings issued on a support provider, Uiis announcement provides certain
regulatory disclosures in relation to Uie rating action iDn the support provider and in rdation to each particular rating
action for securities ttiat derive their credit ratings from Uie support provider's credit rating. For provisional ratings,
Uiis announcement provides certan regulatory disclosures in rdation to Uie provisional rating assigned, and in
rdation to a definitive rating Uiat may be assigned subsequent to Uiefinalissuance of ttie d ^ in each case where
ttie ti^nsaction stiucture and lemB have not changed prior to Uie assignment of ttie definitive rating in a manner
ttiat would have affected ttie rating. For further information please see Uie ratings tab on Uie issuer/entity page for
ttie respective issuer on vwwv.moodys.can
Regulatory disclosures contained in Uiis press rdease apply to ttie credit rating and, if applicabe, Uie rdated rating
ouUook or rating review.
Hease see vwwv.moodys.com for any updates on cfianges to Uie lead rating analyst and to Uie Motody's legal
entity ttiat has issued Uie rating.
Rease see Uie ratings tab on Uie issuer/entity page on vwwv.moodys.com for additional regulatory disclosures for
each credit rating.
Analysts
Matttiew Butler
Lead Analyst
Pubic Rnance Group
Moody's Investors Service
Jack Dorer
Backup Analyst
Pubic Finance Group
Moody's Investors Service
Rachd Cortez
Additional Contact
Pubic Finance Group
Moody's Investas Service
Contacts
Journalists: (212) 553-0376
Research Clients: (212) 553-1653
Mootjy's Investors Service, Inc.
250 Greenwich Street
NewYori<, NY 10007
USA

 MOODY'S
I N V E S T O R S SERVICE

©2014 Moody's Corporation, Moody's Investors Service, Inc., Moody's Analytics, Inc. and/or thdr licensors and
affiliates (cdlectivdy, "MOODYS"). Allrightsreserved.

CREDIT RATINGS ISSUED BY MOODYS INVESTORS SERVICE, INC. ("MS") AND ITS AFTIUATES A R E
MOODYS CURRENT OPINIONS OF THE RELATIVE FUTURE CREDTT RISK OF ENTITIES, CREDIT
COMVrnVENTB, OR DEBT OR DEBT-UKE SECURITIES, AND CREDIT RATINGS AND RESEARCH
PUBUCAT10NS PUBUSHED BY MDODYS ("MOODYS PUBUCATION") MAY INCLUDE MOODYS
CURRENT OPINIONS OF THE RELATIVE FUTURE CREDIT RISK OF ENTITIES, CREDIT COMVinVENTS,
OR DEBT OR DEBT-UKE SECURITIES. MOODYS DEFINES CREDIT RISK AS THE RISK THAT AN
ENTITY M^Y NOT WEET ITS CONTRACTUAL, RNANQAL OBUGATIONS AS THEY COIVE DUE AND ANY
ESTIMATED RNANOAL LOSS IN THE EVENT OF DEFAULT. CREDIT RATINGS DO NOT ADDRESS ANY
OTHER RISK, INCLUDING BUT NOT UMTED TO: UQUIDITY RISK, MARKET VALUE RISK, OR PRICE
VOLATIUTY. CREDIT RATINGS AND MOODYS OHNIONS INCLUDED IN MOODYS PUBUCAT10NS ARE
NOT STATEIVENTS OF CURRENT OR HISTORICAL FACT. MOODYS PUBUCATIONS MOLY ALSO
INCLUDE QUANTITATIVE MODEL-BASED ESTIMATES OF CREDIT RISK AND RELATED OHNIONS OR
COMVENTARY PUBUSHED BY MOODYS ANALYHCS, INC. CREDIT RATINGS AND MOODYS
PUBUCATIONS DO NOT CONSTTTUTE OR PROVIDE INVESTWENT OR HNANOAL ADVICE, AND
CREDIT RATINGS AND MOODYS PUBUCATIONS ARE NOT AND DO NOT PROVIDE
RECOIVIVENDATIONS TO PURCHASE, SELL, OR HOLD PARTICULAR SECURITIES. NHTHER CREDIT
RATINGS NOR MOODYS PUBUCATIONS COWWENT ON THE SUITABILITY OF AN INVESTTVENT FOR
ANY PARTICULAR INVESTOR. MOODYS ISSUES ITS CREDIT RATINGS AND PUBUSHES MOODYS
PUBUCATIONS WITH THE EXPECTATION AND UNDERSTANDING THAT EACH INVESTOR WLL, WITH
DUE CARE, MAKE ITS CfMi STUDY AND EVALUATION OF EACH SECURITY THAT IS UNDER
CONSIDERATION FOR PURCHASE, HOLDING, OR S A L E

MOODYS CREDIT RATINGS AND MOODYS PUBLICATIONS ARE NOT INTENDED FOR USE BY RETAIL
INVESTORS AND IT WOULD BE RECKLESS FOR RETAIL INVESTORS TO CONSIDER MOODYS CREDIT
RATINGS OR MOODYS PUBUCATIONS IN MAKING ANY INVESTTVlEfMT DECISION. IF IN DOUBT YOU
SHOULD CONTACT YOUR FINANCIAL OR OTHER PROFESSIONAL ADVISER.

ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED HEREIN IS PROTECTED BY LAW, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
COPYRIGHT LAW, AND NONE OF SUCH INFORMATION MAY BE COPIED OR OTHERWISE
REPRODUCED, REPACKAGED, FURTHER TRANSMITTED, TRANSFERRED, DISSEMINATED,
REDISTRIBUTED OR RESOLD, OR STORED FOR SUBSEQUENT USE FOR ANY SUCH PURPOSE, IN
WMOLE OR IN PART IN ANY FORM OR MANNER OR BY ANY MEANS WHATSOEVER, BY ANY PERSON
WITHOUT MOODYS PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT

All infamation contained herein is obtaned by MOODYS from sources believed by it to be accurate and rdiable.
Because of the possiblity of human or mechanical error as wdl as other factors, IxM/ever, all information contained
herein is orovided "AS IS" without warrantv of anv kind. MOODYS adorts all nccessarv measures so Uiat the

 infomiaticn it uses in assigning a credit rating is of sufficient quality andfromsources MOODYS considers to be
rdiabe including, when appropriate, independent third-party sources. Hcwever, MOODYS is not an auditor and
cannot in every instance independentty verify or validate irrformation recdved in Uie rating process or in preparing
Uie Moody's Pubications.

To Uie extent perrritted by law, MOODYS and its directors, officers, employees, agents, representatives, licensors
and suppliers disclaim liability to any person or entity for any indirect, special, consequential, or incidental liosses or
damages wfiatsoever arising from or in connection with the information ct^ntained herdn or the use of or inability to
use any such information, even if MOODYS or any of its directors, officers, employees, agents, representatives,
licensors or suppliers is advised in advance of Uie possiblity of such losses or darnages, including but not limiled
to: (a) any loss of present or prospective profits or (b) any loss or damage arising where Uie rdevant financial
instrument is not Uie subject of a particular cret^t rating assigned by MOODYS.

To Uie extent perrritted by law, MOODYS and its directors, officers, errployees, agents, representatives, licensors
and suppliers disclaim liablity for any direct or compensatory losses or damages caused to any person or entity,
including but not lirrited to by any negligence (but excludingfraud,willftjl misconduct rx any oUier type of liability
Uiat, for Uie avoidance d doubt, by law cannot be excluded) on ttie part of, or any contingency wittiin or beyond ttie
cortrd of, MOODYS cr any of its directors, officers, employees, agents, representatives, licensors or suppliers,
arising from or in connection witti Uie information contained herdn or ttie use of or inabTity to use any such
information.

NO WiARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPUED, AS TO THE ACCURACY, TIMELINESS, COMPLETENESS,
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OF ANY SUCH RATING OR OTHER
OPINION OR INFORMATION IS GIVEN OR MADE BY MOODYS IN ANY FORM OR MANNER
WHATSOEVER

MIS, a whdly-owned credit rating agency subsidiary of Moody's Corporation ("MCO"), hereby discloses that most
issuers of debt securities (including corporate and municipal bonds, debentures, notes and comnercial paper) arxl
preferred stock rated by MIS have, pria to assignment of any rating, agreed to pay to MIS for appraisal and rating
services rendered by it fees rangingfrom$1,500 to approximatdy $2,500,000. MCO and MIS also maintain pdicies
and procedures to address the independence of MIS's ratings and rating processes. Information regarding certain
affiliations Uiat nray exist t)etween directors of MCO and rated entities, and between entities wtio fidd ratings from
MIS and have also pubicly reported to Uie SEC an ownership interest in MCO of more Uian 5% is posted annually
at vwwv.nxodv5.com under the heading "Shareholder Rdations — Corporate Governance — Director and
Shareholder Affiliation Pdicy."

For Australia only: Any pubication into Australia of this docunrent is pursuant to Uie Austi'alian Financial Services
Lcense of MOODYS affiliate, Moody's Investors Service Pty bmted ABN 61 003 399 657AFSL 336969 and/or
Moody's Analytics Australia Pty Ltd ABN 94 105 136 972 AFSL 383569 (as applicabe). This document is intended
to be provided only to "whdesale clients" within the meaning of section 761G of the Corporations Act 2001. By
continuing to access Uiis document from within Australia, you represent lo MOODYS that you are. or are
accessing Uie dtocument as a representative of, a "whdesale client' and that nather you nor the entity you
represent w,ll directiy or indirectly dissemnate this document or its contents to "retail clients" within Uie meaning of

 section 761G of Uie Corporations Act 2001. MOODYS credit rating is an opinion as to the creditworthiness of a
debt obigation of the issuer, not on the equity securities of Uie issuer or any form of security Uiat is availabe to
retail clients. It vwould be dangerous for "retal clients" to make any investinent decision based on MOODYS credit
rating. If in doubt you should contact yourfinancialor oUier professional adviser.

 Fitch Ratines I Press Release

Page 1 of 5

FitchRatings
Fitch Rates Chicago, IL's ULTGOs 'A-'; Outlook Negative Ratings Endorsement Policy
24 Feb 2014 4:27 PM (EST)
Fitch Ratings-New York-24 February 2014: Fitch Ratings has assigned an 'A-' rating to the following Chicago, IL bonds:
--$108.9 million general obligation bonds, project series 2014A;
--$108.2 million general obligation bonds, refunding series 2014B;
-$43.3 million general obligation bonds, taxable project series 2014C;
-$127.3 million general obligation bonds, taxable refunding series 2014D.
Proceeds will be used to refund various outstanding series for overall restructuring purposes, to fund various capital
improvements, and to finance legal settlement payments. The bonds are expected to sell the week of March 3rd via
negotiation.
Fitch has also affirmed the following ratings:
" $ 8 billion unlimited tax general obligation (ULTGO) bonds at 'A-';
-$602 million sales tax bonds at 'A-';
-$200 million commercial paper notes, 2002 program series A (tax exempt) and B (taxable) bank bond rating at 'BBB+'.
The Rating Outlook is Negative.
SECURITY
The ULTGO bonds are secured by the city's lull failh and credit and ils ad valorem tax, without limitation as to rate or
amount.
The sales lax bonds are secured by a first lien on the city's 1.25% home rule sales and use tax and Ihe city's local share of
state-distributed 6.25% sales and use tax. Additionally, there is a springing debt service reserve, funded over a 12-month
period, that is triggered if coverage falls below 2.5x.
The bank bond rating for Ihe commercial paper (CP) notes is based upon the city's general obligation pledge payable from
any legally available funds without an ability or obligation to levy additional taxes. The CP noles are additionally secured by
a letter of credit.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
LACK OF PENSION SOLUTION; LIMITED OPTIONS: The A-' and Negative Outlook reflect the lack of meaningful
solutions to both the near- and long-term burdens associated wilh Ihe city's underfunded pension plans. The city has been
unsuccessful thus far in its attempts to negotiate a solution with labor unions and lobby Ihe slate legislature, which
ultimately controls the benefit formula, although elforts lo forge a solution persist.
OTHER IMPROVEMENT EVIDENT; BUDGET STILL TIGHT Pension concerns overshadow recent improvement in other
aspects ol the city's credit prolile. Recent budgets have been narrowly balanced wilh lesser reliance upon one-lime items.
Maintenance ol significant long-term reserves is an important element ol linancial llexibility.
WEAK DEBT PROFILE & OVERLAPPING PENSION BURDEN EXACERBATES PRESSURE' Pension stress
e;<accrbales the already weak debt profile, which leatures above-average debt burden and slow payout. Several
overlapping area governments also have underlunded pension systems, winch will require some measure of increased
funding, presenting a slacked burden on residents and taxpayers.

hilp.s7/www.t'iichiating.s.coni/cicditdcsk/press_iclc;isc-;/dcl:iil.crin?priiit=l&pr_id=821512

2/24/2014

 Fitch Ratings I Press Release

Page 2 of 5

ECONOMIC HUB; SLUGGISH RECOVERY: Chicago serves as an economic hub for the Midwest region and maintains
good prospects for long-term stability if not expansion. Growth in cyclical revenues reflects a measure ol economic
recovery; however, high unemployment persists and property tax base recovery has been elusive.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
PENSION REFORM: Maintenance of the 'A-' rating requires implementation of an attainable plan to put all city pension
plans on a clear path towards adequate funding. Fitch believes a pension solution that enhances funding levels while
preserving sustainable budgetary balance is necessary to stabilize the credit. Inaction, or affirmative steps to avoid
actuarial-based funding of pensions, will have a negative impact on the rating.
ULTGO RATING SERVES AS A CAP TO SALES TAX AND CP (BANK BOND) RATINGS: The ULTGO rating serves as a
ceiling to the sales tax rating. The CP (bank bond) rating is capped one notch below the ULTGO rating. A downgrade of
the ULTGO rating, therefore, would result in a downgrade to both the sales tax and CP (bank bond) ratings.
CREDIT PROFILE
PENSION RISKS OVERSHADOW RECENT FISCAL IMPROVEMENT
Fitch recognizes the current administration's notably improved financial and budgetary management which has brought the
city closer lo structural balance, following the prior administration's long-term trend of reliance upon asset sales and other
non-recurring items to fund operations. This improvement, however, is inflated by the making of statutorily-based pension
payments, which severely underfund the ARC. Fitch considers full ARC funding a necessary component ol structural
balance.
MANAGEMENTS PENSION OPTIONS ARE LIMITED
Management has presented a plan to address the pension problem but lacks the legal authority to implement it unilaterally.
Direct negotiations with labor groups have failed to yield a solution and attempts to lobby the legislature for benefit
changes which would reduce the unfunded actuarially accrued liability (UAAL) have been unsuccessful thus far.
Any changes lo Ihe benefit structure would require an act ol Ihe stale legislature, which recently passed legislation lo
address the Chicago Park District as well as its own pension funding issues. The legislature has identified local pension
reform as a high priority lor the current legislative session. Even if the legislature were to pass comprehensive pension
reform for the Chicago pension plans, Illinois law affords strong legal protection to pension benefits and Fitch expects that
any such changes would face protracted legal challenges.
LONG-TERM PENSION RISKS
The combination of low funded ratios and a statutorily-based contribution requirement that funds approximately one-third of
the ARC is unsustainable. Each year of sub-ARC funding results in an increase in the ARC for the subsequent year, and a
widening distance between statutory and ARC payment.
The amount that would be required to amortize the unfunded liability grows larger as time passes, both in nominal terms
and as a percent of governmental spending, threatening to crowd out other cily spending priorities. The combined reported
funding ratio for the four plans has declined steadily, reaching a low 35.2% at Dec. 31, 2012 and down from 57.3% live
years ago. Fitch estimates the funding ratio to bo a wcaker-siill 32.9%, assuming a 7% rate of return.
NEAR-TERM PENSION RISKS
Management is focused on reducing the size of Ihe liability, but any meaninglul solution to Ihe pension funding problem is
likely to require significantly higher annual contributions from the city. Fiscal 2012 carrying costs for pension, OPEB and
debt service would have amounted lo a very high 35.0% of governmental fund spending if Ihe ARC were fully funded, well
above Ihe 19.5% burden under the current slalutorily-based payment structure.
Slate law requires dramatically increased annual funding requirements for Iwo of the city's four pension systems beginning
in 2016, which would need to be addressed in Ihe fiscal 2015 budget The new formula requires a contribution that would
be sullicieni to bring both the police and fire systems lo 90% funding level by 2040.
The city esiimates Iho annual requirement will rise by $590 million as a result, an amount lhat will raise carrying cosis lo

hlips://www riichialings.com/cieditdesk/picss,..rclcasc,s/delail clm?prinl= I &pr_id=82 1512

2/24/2014

 Filch Ratings I Press Release

Page 3 of 5

above-average levels. Legislation to delay the implementation and to require property tax increases to fund it has been
introduced, but the legislature has not acted on it. Fitch believes deferral of the increased actuarially based requirement
would exacerbate the problem absent a meaningful reduction in the UAAL.
LONG-TERM LIABILITY PRESSURE HEIGHTENED BY OVERLAPPING STRESS
The city's weak long-term liability profile is characterized by its underfunded pensions combined with its above-average
overall debt burden of 8.5% of market value. Payout is slow at 37% and annual 'scoop and toss' restructurings continue to
marginally weaken debt structure.
The widespread use of slatutorily-based pension contributions for single employer plans in Illinois results in multiple
underfunded Chicago area pension plans, placing stress on the city's residents and taxpayers. As a home rule entity, the
city has a variety of revenue-raising options available to it; bul typically, such plans are funded from the properly tax levy. If
the city were to raise its property tax sufficient to fully fund the ARC (2012 level) with no offsetting revenue increase or
liability reduction, the tax levy/rate would rise a dramatic 136%.
The city's property tax comprises 20% of the overall property tax bill, so the increase to an individual property owner would
be materially less at approximately 15%. Fitch estimates that if each area government including the city raised its property
tax rate to cover the ARC (2012 level) with no corresponding reduction in the liability, the overall impact lo an individual
payer would be a 35% tax increase, flitch believes such an increase could present stress to the local economy, which has
been slow to recover from the recession. Both the city and the overall increase required under this scenario will rise each
year as funding levels fall and the ARC grows.
ECONOMIC HUB; SLUGGISH RECOVERY
Chicago's population totaled 2.7 million in 2012, down 7% from the 2000 census, but still accounts for 2 1 % of the state's
population. The city's highly educated work force supports its status as a major linancial and business services center.
Educational altainment levels are strong, with nearly 33% achieving a bachelor's degree and 13% an advanced degree,
compared with the U.S. averages of 28.2% and 10.5%, respectively.
Employment contracted 0.1% in 2013 following a gain of over 20,000 jobs or 2.2% in 2012. Gains in professional and
business services and transportation and utilities offset reductions in both manufacturing and governmenl. The
unemployment rate remains elevated. The November 2013 rate of 9.6% was marginally lower than the 9.7% recorded a
year prior, reflecting stable employment and a slight contraction of the labor force over that time frame. The rate compares
unfavorably lo Ihe 8.3% rate recorded by the state and the 6.6% by the U.S.
Overall income and wealth indices are mixed. Per capita income is at 95% of the slate and 100% of the U.S. levels;
however, Ihe poverty rate remains elevated at 21.4%, much higher than the U.S. average of 14.3%. Economically sensitive
tax revenues have recovered to pre-recession levels. The tax base, down 30% over the past four years, has not yet shown
signs of recovery, duo in part to the lagging assessment cycle.
NON-PENSION FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE IMPROVING
Management has made significant progress toward matching ongoing revenues with non-pension annual expenditures.
Filch views positively the city's stated commitment to ending the practice of using the corpus of its long-term reserves to
balance the operating budget. Other recurring improvements over the past two years include a hiring freeze for nonessential positions, the elimination of 2,000 vacant positions and a marked reduction in retiree health care costs, although
the latter is subject lo litigation.
REVENUE FLEXIBILITY A STRENGTH
Fitch views the city's home rule status as a credit positive, fostering revenue independence and flexibility. The general fund
derives support from utility taxes, state sales taxes, transaction taxes, and recreation taxes among others. The general
fund does nol rely upon properly taxes lor operations, as they are earmarked lor pensions, library expenses and debt
service
The city's homo rule status also exempts it from ihe stale's Property Tax Extension LuTiitation Act. A sell-imposed limit
matches thai of the stale, limiting increases in the levy lo ihe lesser of 5% or the CPI In recent years, the city has kept its
levy Hat, without accessing the allowable growth. Filch believes Ihe self-imposed levy limit is relatively flexible and that
increased properly taxes rnay provide an important source of funding lor potenlial future increases in pension paymenis

hlips://wwvv. fiichiatings.com/ciedildcsk/prcs.s_rclca.scs/dctai I.cl'ni'^priiit= I &pi_id=R21.512

2/24/2014

 Fitch Ratings I Press Release

Page 4 of 5

FY2012 AUDITED DEFICIT; FY2013 ESTIMATES FAVORABLE
The general fund recorded a $101 million operating deficit after transfers reflecting -3.3% of spending in fiscal 2012, the
firsl full year under the current mayor. This compares favorably to Ihe budgeted appropriation ol $143 million of general
fund balance, supported by some recurring solutions and the use of reserves from other funds.
Fiscal 2012 unrestricted general fund balance dropped to 6.8% from 10.2% of spending a year prior. Fitch views the
approximately $625 million, or 20.1% of fiscal 2012 general fund spending, in the service concession and reserve fund as
an important element of financial flexibility. The sum includes the remaining amount of the Skyway lease proceeds.
Published preliminary fiscat 2013 results show revenues outperforming budget by a larger margin than expenditures
exceeded budget. Detail is not yet available, but early projections indicate a net positive budgetary variance of $45 million
which if realized, may decrease further the amount of reliance on non-recurring sources. The preliminary fiscal 2014
budget seeks to appropriate $50 million ol identified surplus from fiscal 2013, to be used toward increased police overtime
expenses.
FY2014 BUDGET BALANCED WITH RECURRING AND ONE-TIME ITEMS
The $3.3 billion fiscal 2014 budget closed the previously identified budget gap of $338.7 million through a variety o(
recurring and one-time measures. Revenue measures include an assumed $101 million growth in economically sensitive
revenues, $53 million of general fund and $35 million other fund balances, and $34 million of increased taxes, fees and
lines. Expenditure measures include $66 million ol savings, including $24 million ot savings from the elimination of retiree
health care for certain retirees, which is subject to litigation.
Fitch believes thai these identified measures are achievable given the city's recent history of budgetary adherence;
however. Fitch will nol consider the city's financial operations to be structurally balanced until recurring revenues support
recurring expenditures, including actuarially based pension cosls.
Contact:
Primary Analyst
Arlene Bohner
Director
-fi-212-908-0554
Fitch Ratings, Inc.
One State Street Piaza
New York, NY 10004
Secondary Analyst
Eric Friedman
Director
•1-1-212-908-9181
Tertiary Analyst
Richard Raphael
Managing Director
-1-1-212-908-0506
Committee Chairperson
Jessalynn Moro
Managing Director
+ 1-212-908 0608

Media Relations: Elizabeth Fogeriy, New York, Tel -i-l (212) 908 0526. Email elizabelh.fogerty@litchratings.com.
Additional inlormation is available al 'wwrw.Iitchralings.com'.
In addition lo Ihe sources of information identified in Fitch's Tax-Supported Rating Criteria, Ihis action was additionally
irilornied by information Irom Credilscope, University Financial Associales, SSP/Case-Shiller Home Price Index, IHS
Global Insight, National Association of Realtors

htlps://www.fitchralings.com/ciodildesk/pi'cs.s_i'eleascs/(lclail cfiii7priiil= I &pr_id=821512

2/24/2014

 Fitch Ratings I Press Release

Page 5 of 5

Applicable Criteria and Related Research:
-'Tax-Supporled Rating Criteria' (Aug. 14, 2012);
-'U.S. Local Government Tax-Supported Rating Criteria' (Aug. 14, 2012).
Applicable Criteria and Related Research:
Tax-Supported Rating Criteria
U.S. Local Government Tax-Supported Rating Criteria

Addilional Disclosure
Solicitation Status
ALL FITCH CREDIT RATINGS ARE SUBJECT TO CERTAIN LIMITATIONS AND DISCLAIMERS. PLEASE READ
THESE LIMITATIONS AND DISCLAIMERS BY FOLLOWING THIS LINK:
H T T P : / / F I T C H R A T I N G S . C O M / U N D E R S T A N D 1 N G C R E D I T R A T 1 N G S . I N ADDITION, RATING DEFINITIONS AND THE
TERMS OF USE OF SUCH RATINGS ARE AVAILABLE ON THE AGENCY'S PUBLIC WEBSITE
'WWW.FITCHRATINGS.COM'. PUBLISHED RATINGS, CRITERIA AND METHODOLOGIES ARE AVAILABLE FROM
THIS SITE AT ALL TIMES. FITCH'S CODE OF CONDUCT, CONFIDENTIALITY, CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, AFFILIATE
FIREWALL, COMPLIANCE AND OTHER RELEVANT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES ARE ALSO AVAILABLE FROM
THE -CODE OF CONDUCT SECTION OF THIS SITE. FITCH MAY HAVE PROVIDED ANOTHER PERMISSIBLE
SERVICE TO THE RATED ENTITY OR ITS RELATED THIRD PARTIES. DETAILS OF THIS SERVICE FOR RATINGS
FOR WHICH THE LEAD ANALYST IS BASED IN AN EU-REGISTERED ENTITY CAN BE FOUND ON THE ENTITY
SUMMARY PAGE FOR THIS ISSUER ON THE FITCH WEBSITE.
Copyright ©2014 by Fitch Ratings. Inc., Filch Ralings Ltd and its subsidiaries.

hitps://ww\v.litchiatiiigs coin/crcdildesk/pies,s_i'eleascs/dciail.cl'm'^print=l &pr_id=821512

2/24/2014

 