City of Chicago
Office of the City Clerk

F2014-79

Document Tracking Sheet

Meeting Date:

10/8/2014

Sponsor(s):

City Clerk (transmitted by)

Type:

Communication

Title:

General Obligation Revolving Line of Credit Closing
Certificate, Amended and Restated Revolving Credit
Agreement dated as of September 16, 2014
Committee on Finance

Committee(s) Assignment:

 $200,000,000
CITY OP CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION REVOLVING LINE OF CREDIT
CLOSING CERTIFICATE
This Closing Certificate is being delivered pursuant to the authority contained in the
Ordinance adopted by the City Council (the "City Council") ofthe City of Chicago (the "City") on
March 14, 2012, authorizing among other things, the City's Line of Credit Program, the City to
execute and deliver one or more line of credit agreements with one or more commercial banks and
otherfinancialinstitutions to provide a revolving line of credit to meet the City's need for working
capital or interimfinancingfor capital projects (the "Ordinance"). Pursuant to Section 18 ofthe
Ordinance, Bank of America, N.A. has been selected to serve as the bank providing a revolving
line of credit to the City in the amount of $200,000,000.
The City has executed that certain Amended and Restated Revolving Credit Agreement
dated as of September 16, 2014 between the City and Bank of America, N.A. (the "Credit
Agreement"), a copy of which is attached as Exhibit A hereto.
L the undersigned, LOIS A. SCOTT, Chief Financial Officer of the City, hereby certify
that 1 have executed the Credit Agreement, in the manner and capacity indicated by my signature
and title appended hereto.
I, the undersigned, LOIS A. SCOTT, Chief Financial Officer of the City, do further certify
that (i) the conditions specified in Sections 4.02(a) and (b) of the Credit Agreement have been
satisfied and (ii) there has been no event or circumstance since December 31,2013 that has had or
could be reasonably expected to have, either individually or in the aggregate a Material Adverse
Effect (as defined in the Credit Agreement).
1, the undersigned, SUSAN A A MENDOZA, City Clerk ofthe City, do hereby certify that
attached hereto as Exhibit B is a certified copy ofthe Ordinance.
1, the undersigned, SUSAN A A MENDOZA, City Clerk ofthe City, do further certify that
LOIS A. SCOTT is the duly authorized Chief Financial Officer of the City, and that the signature
of said LOIS A. SCOTT as it appears below is in all respects the true and genuine signature ofthe
officer of the City authorized to execute the Credit Agreement.
I, the undersigned SUSAN A A. MENDOZA, City Clerk ofthe City, direct a copy of this
filing to the City Council.
O

-tr-

o'n
—<—

£/>
-o

r-p
rn '1

-n

— ~ i

m

-Q

~

co-

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto affixed our signatures and have caused to be affi.xed
hereto the Corporate Seal of the City this j U ^ day of September, 2014.

SIGNATURES

OFFICIAL T I T L E

ief Financial Officer, City of Chicago
y Clerk, City of Chicago

[SEAL]

  

Respectfully submitted this [fcl^day of September, 2014.

CITY OF CHICAGO

Susana A. Mendbza
City Clerk
[SEAL]

Amended and Restated Revolvin^^ Credit Agreement
Closing Certificate Signature Page

 \

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF FILING
\
The Closing Certificate ofthe City for its $200,000,000 Revolving Line of Credit
Program including all exhibits thereto was filed in the Office of the City Clerk ofthe City of
Chicago, this
j , ^
day of September, 2014.

Susana A.
City Clerk
[SEAL]

CD

r
/—CP

 EXHIBIT A

AMENDED AND RESTATED
CREDIT AGREEMENT

[See Axtachedj

ExKcuTiON COPY

AMENDED AND RESTATED
REVOLVING CREDIT AGREEMENT

dated as of September 16,2014

between

CITY OF CHICAGO

and

BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

362970.') .01.14.tloc
4102950

 TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION

HEADING

ARTICLE I

Section
Section
Section
Section
Section

DEFINITIONS AND ACCOUNTING TERMS

1.01.
1.02.
1.03.
1.04.
1.05.

ARTICLE II

Section 2.01.
Section 2.02.
Section 2.03.
Section 2.04.
Section 2.05.
Section 2.06.
Section 2.07.
Section 2.08.
Section 2.09.
Section 2.10.
Section 2.11.
Section 2.12.
ARTICLE III

Section 3.01.
Section 3.02.
Section 3.03.
Section 3.04.
Section 3.05.
Section 3.06.
ARTICLE IV

Section 4.01.
Section 4.02.
Section 4.03.
ARTICLE V

Section 5.01.
Section 5.02.
Section 5.03.
Section 5.04.

Defined Terms
Other Interpretive Provisions
Accounting Terms
Rounding
Times of Day
THE COMMITMENTS AND CREDIT EXTENSIONS

Loans
Borrowings and Conversions of Loans
Prepayments
Termination or Reduction of Commitment
Repayment of Loans
Interest
Fees
Computation of Interest and Fees
Evidence of Debt
Payments
Extension of Commitment Termination Date
Maximum Rate
TAXES , YIELD PROTECTION AND ILLEGALITY

Taxes
Increased Costs
Illegality
Inability to Determine Rates
Compensation for Losses
Survival
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO BORROWINGS

Conditions of Initial Borrowing; Authority;
Enforceability
Conditions to All Borrowings
Conditions to Term Loan
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES

Due Authorization
Enforceability
Ordinance
Consents

PAGE
1

1
12
13
13
13
13

13
13
15
15
15
16
16
17
17
17
17
18
18

18
20
22
22
23
23
23

23
24
25
25

25
25
25
25

 Section 5.05.
Section 5.06.
Section 5.07.
Section 5.08.
Section 5.09.
Section 5.10.
Section 5.11.
Section 5.12.
Section 5.13.
Section 5.14.
Section 5.15.
Section 5.16.
Section 5.17.
Section 5.18.
Section 5.19,
Section 5.20,
Section 5.21,
ARTICLE VI

Section 6.01.
Section 6.02,
Section 6.03,
ARTICLE Vll

Section 7.01,
Section 7.02,
ARTICLE

Vlll

Section 8.01.
Section 8.02,
Section 8.03.
Section 8.04.
Section 8.05.
Section 8.06,
Section 8.07,
Section 8.08,
Section 8.09,
Section 8.10,
Section 8.11,
Section 8.12,
Section 8.13
Section 8.14,
Section 8.15,
Section 8.16,
Section 8.17,

No Violation
Litigation
Security
Organization
Financial Statements
Absence of Default
Environmental Laws
No Proposed Legal Changes
Incorporation of Representations and Warranties
Solvent
Disclosure
Use of Proceeds; Margin Stock
Investment Company
ERISA
O F A C Sanctions
Other Bank Agreements
MEN General Obligation Debt Ratings
COVENANTS

Affirmative Covenants of the City
Amendments
Compliance with other Covenants
DEFAULTS

Events of Default and Remedies
Remedies
MISCELLANEOUS

Amendments, Etc
Notices; Effectiveness; Electronic Communication
No Waiver; Cumulative Remedies; Enforcement
Costs and Expenses; Damage Waiver
Payments Set Aside
Successors and Assigns; Participations
Treatment of Certain Information; Confidentiality
Counterparts; Integration; Effectiveness
Survival of Representations and Warranties
Severability
Governing Law; Jurisdiction; Etc
Waiver of Jury Trial
No Advisory or Fiduciary Relationship
Electronic Execution of Certain Documents
USA Patriot Act
Time of the Essence
Entire Agreement

26
26
26
26
26
26
27
27
27
27
27
27
28
28
28
28
28
28

28
31
31
31

31
33
34

34
34
35
35
37
37
38
38
38
39
39
40
40
41
41
41
41

 Section 8.18.
Section 8.19.

No Third-Party Rights
Amendment and Restatement

SCHEDULES

9.02

—

Lender's Office, Certain Addresses for Notices

EXHIBITS

Form of
A
—
B
—
C
—
D
—

Loan Notice
Note
Compliance Certificate
Ratings Clause Notice

- HI -

41
4]

 AMENDED AND RESTATED REVOLVING CREDIT AGREEMENT

This AMENDED AND RESTATED REVOLVING CREDIT AGREEMENT (as amended, modified
or supplemented from time to time, this "Agreement") is entered into as of September 16, 2014,
between the CITY OF CHICAGO, a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local government
duly organized and existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois (the "C(7y"),
and BANK OF AMERICA, N.A. (the "Lender").
the City and the Lender are parties to that certain Revolving Credit Agreement
dated as of March 1,2013 (the "Original Agreement").
WHEREAS,

WHEREAS, the City and the Lender have agreed to amend and restate the Original
Agreement in its entirety by entering into this Agreement.

Now, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and agreements herein
contained, the parties hereto covenant and agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS AND ACCOUNTING TERMS

Section 7.07. Defined Terms. As used in this Agreement, the following terms shall have
the meanings set forth below:
"Affiliate" means, with respect to a Person, any Person (whether for-profit or not-forprofit), which "controls," is "controlled" by, or is under common "control" with such Person.
For purposes of this definition, a Person "controls" another Person when the first Person
possesses or exercises directly, or indirectly through one or more other affiliates or related
entities, the power to direct the management and policies of the other Person, whether through
the ownership of voting rights, membership, the power to appoint members, trustees or directors,
by contract, or otherwise.
"Agreement" has the meaning set forth in the introductory paragraph hereto.
"Applicable Rate" means, the rates per annum associated with the Rating as specified
below:

 In the event of a split Rating {i.e. one of the foregoing Rating Agency's Rating is at a different
level than the Rating of either of the other Rating Agencies), the Applicable Rate shall be based
upon the level in which the lowest rating appears. Any change in the Applicable Rate resulting
from a change in a Rating shall be and become effective as of and on the date of the
announcement ofthe change in such Rating. References to ratings above are references to rating
categories as presently determined by the Rating Agencies and in the event of adoption of any
new or changed rating system by any such Rating Agency including, without limitation, any
recalibration of the long-term debt rating of any debt of the City in connection with the adoption
of a "global" rating scale, each of the Ratings from the Rating Agency in question referred to
above shall be deemed to refer to the rating category under the new rating system which most
closely approximates the applicable rating category as currently in effect. The City
acknowledges, and the Lender agrees, that as of the Closing Date the Applicable Rate is that
specified above for Level 4.
"Authorized Officer" means the Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer, the City Comptroller
or any other officer of the City authorized to act on its behalf.
"Availability Period" means the period from and including the Closing Date to the
Commitment Termination Date.
"Bank Agreement" means any credit agreement, liquidity agreement, standby bond
purchase agreement, reimbursement agreement, direct purchase agreement (such as a continuing
covenant agreement or supplemental bondholder's agreement), bond purchase agreement, or
other agreement or instrument (or any amendment, supplement or other modification thereof)
under which, directly or indirectly, any Person or Persons undertake(s) to make or provide funds
to make payment of, purchase or provide credit enhancement or advance loans thereunder;
provided that the term Bank Agreement does not include any Swap Contract.
"Base Rate" means, for any day, a fluctuating rate of interest per annum equal to the
greatest of (i) the Prime Rate in effect at such time plus ' ^ g ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ / f ^ (ii) the Federal
Funds Rate in effect at such time plus ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ M and (iii) 

"Borrowing" means a borrowing of Loans from the Lender pursuant to Section 2.01
hereof.
"Business Day" means a day which is not (a) a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday on
which banking institutions in New York, New York or the state where the principal corporate

-2-

 office of the City is located are authorized by law to close, (b) a day on which the New York
Stock Exchange or the Federal Reserve Bank is closed or (c) a day on which the principal office
of the Lender is closed.
"Change in LMW" means the occurrence, after the Closing Date, of any of the following:
(a) the adoption or taking effect of any law, rule, regulation or treaty, (b) any change in any law,
rule, regulation or treaty or in the administration, interpretation, implementation or application
thereof by any Governmental Authority or (c) the making or issuance of any request, rule,
guideline or directive (whether or not having the force of law) by any Governmental Authority;
provided that notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, (i) the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act and all requests, rules, guidelines or directives thereunder
or issued in connection therewith and (ii) all requests, rules, guidelines or directives promulgated
by the Bank for International Settlements, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (or any
successor or similar authority) or the United States or foreign regulatory authorities, in each case
pursuant to Basel III, shall in each case be deemed to be a "Change in Law", regardless of the
date enacted, adopted or issued.
"City" has the meaning set forth in the introductory paragraph hereto.
"Closing Date" means the date hereof.
"Code" means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and, where appropriate
any statutory predecessor or any successor thereto.
"Commitment" means the Lender's obligation to make Loans to the City pursuant to
Section 2.01, in an aggregate principal amount at any one time outstanding not to exceed the
Commitment Amount, as such Commitment Amount may be adjusted from time to time in
accordance with this Agreement.
"Commitment Amount" means $200,000,000.
"Commitment Fee" has the meaning set forth in Section 2.07(a) hereof.
"Commitment Fee Rate" means the rate per annum associated with the Rating, as
specified below:

 In the event of a split Rating {i.e. one of the foregoing Rating Agency's Rafing is at a different
level than the Rating of either of the other Rating Agencies), the Commitment Fee Rate shall be
based upon the level in which the lowest rating appears. Any change in the Commitment Fee
Rate resulting from a change in a Rating shall be and become effective as of and on the date of
the announcement of the change in such Rating. References to ratings above are references to
rating categories as presently determined by the Rating Agencies and in the event of adoption of
any new or changed rating system by any such Rating Agency including, without limitation, any
recalibration of the long-term debt rating of any debt of the City in connection with the adoption
of a "global" rating scale, each of the Ratings from the Rating Agency in question referred to
above shall be deemed to refer to the rating category under the new rating system which most
closely approximates the applicable rating category as currently in effect. The City
acknowledges, and the Lender agrees, that as of the Closing Date the Commitment Fee Rate is
that specified above for Level 4. Upon the occurrence and during the continuance of an Event of
Default or in the event that any Rating is suspended, withdrawn or is otherwise unavailable for
credit related reasons, the Commitment Fee Rate shall be increased from the rate then in effect
by an additional]
"Commitment Termination Date" shall mean the earliest of:
(a) May 8, 2015, or such later date as may be established pursuant to Section
2.11 hereof; and
(b) the date the Commitment is reduced to zero pursuant to Section 2.04 or
Section 7.02 hereof
"Corporate Fund" means the City's general operating fund, which supports basic City
operations and services such as public safety, public health, waste collection and recycling.
"Debt" of any Person means at any date, without duplication, (i) all obligations of such
Person for borrowed money (including, without limitation, Swap Contracts with respect to
borrowed money), (ii) all obligations of such Person evidenced by bonds, debentures, notes or
other similar instruments, (iii) all obligations of such Person to pay the deferred purchase price of
property or services, except trade accounts payable in the ordinary course of business, (iv) all
obligations of such Person as lessee under capital leases, (v) all Debts of others secured by a lien

-4-

 on any asset of such Person, whether or not such Debts are assumed by such Person, (vi) all
Guarantees by such Person of Debt of other Persons and (vii) all obligations of such Person to
reimburse or repay any bank or other Person in respect of amounts paid or advanced under a
letter of credit, credit agreement, liquidity facility or other instrument.
"Debtor Relief Laws" means the Bankruptcy Code of the United States, and all other
liquidation, conservatorship, bankruptcy, assignment for the benefit of creditors, moratorium,
rearrangement, receivership, insolvency, reorganization, or similar debtor relief Laws of the
United States or other applicable jurisdictions from time to time in effect.
"Defaidt" means any event or condition that, with the giving of any notice, the passage
of time, or both, would be an Event of Default.
"Default Rate" means, for any day, a rate of interest per annum equal to the sum of the
Base Rate in effect on such day p l u s ^ ^ m ^ m ^ ^ m i
"Dollar" and "$" mean lawful money of the United States.
"Draw Fees" has the meaning set forth in Section 2.07(c) hereof.
"ERISA" means the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
"Eurodollar Rate" means, for any Interest Period with respect to a Eurodollar Rate Loan,
the rate per annum equal to the London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR"), or a comparable or
successor rate which rate is approved by the Lender, as published on the applicable Bloomberg
screen page (or such other commercially available source providing such quotations as may be
designated by the Bank from time to time) at or about 11:00 a.m., London time, two (2) London
Banking Days prior to the commencement of such Interest Period, for Dollar deposits (for
delivery on the first day of such Interest Period) with a term equivalent to such Interest Period;
provided that (i) to the extent a comparable or successor rate is approved by the Bank in
connection herewith, the approved rate shall be applied in a manner consistent with market
practice; provided, further that to the extent such market practice is not administratively feasible
for the Bank, such approved rate shall be applied in a manner as otherwise reasonably
determined by the Bank and (ii) if the Eurodollar Rate shall be less than zero, such rate shall be
deemed zero for purposes of this Agreement.
"Eurodollar Rate Loan " means a Loan that bears interest at the Eurodollar Rate.
"Event of Default" has the meaning specified in Section 7.01 hereof.
"Excess Interest" has the meaning specified in Section 2.12 hereof.
"E.xcluded Taxes" means any of the following Taxes imposed on or with respect to the
Lender or required to be withheld or deducted from a payment to the Lender, (a) Taxes imposed
on or measured by net income (however denominated), franchise Taxes, and branch profits
Taxes, in each case, (i) imposed as a result of the Lender being organized under the laws of, or

 having its principal office located in the jurisdiction imposing such Tax (or any political
subdivision thereoO or (ii) that are Other Connection Taxes, (b) in the case of the Lender, U.S.
federal withholding Taxes imposed on amounts payable to or for the account of the Lender
pursuant to a law in effect on the date on which the Lender acquires such interest in the Loans or
the Commitment and (c) Taxes attributable to the Lender's failure to comply with
Section 3.01(e).
"Federal Funds Rate" means, for any day, the rate per annum equal to the weighted
average of the rates on overnight federal funds transactions with members of the Federal Reserve
System arranged by federal funds brokers on such day, as published by the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York on the Business Day next succeeding such day; provided that (a) if such day is not
a Business Day, the Federal Funds Rate for such day shall be such rate on such transactions on
the next preceding Business Day as so published on the next succeeding Business Day, and (b) if
no such rate is so published on such next succeeding Business Day, the Federal Funds Rate for
such day shall be the average rate (rounded upward, if necessary, to a whole multiple of 1/100
of 1%) charged to the Lender on such day on such transactions as determined by the Lender.
"Fee Payment Date" has the meaning specified in Section 2.07(a) hereof.
"Fitch" means Fitch, Inc., and any successor rating agency.
"Floating Rate" means, for any day, the fiuctuating rate of interest equal to the rate per
annum equal to the London Interbank Offered Rate (or a comparable or successor rate which is
approved by the Bank), as published by Bloomberg (or other commercially available source
providing quotations of such rate as selected by the Lender from time to time) as determined for
each Business Day at approximately 11:00 a.m. London time two (2) London Banking Days
prior to the date in question, for Dollar deposits with a one-month term, as adjusted from time to
time in the Lender's commercially reasonable discretion for reserve requirements, deposit
insurance assessment rates and other regulatory costs. If such rate is not available at such time
for any reason, then the rate will be determined by such alternate method as commercially
reasonably selected by the Lender; provided, that subject to Section 2.12 hereof, at no time shall
the Floating Rate exceed the Maximum Rate.
"Floating Rate Loan" means a Loan that bears interest based on the Floating Rate.
"FRB" means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System of the United
States, together with any successors thereof.
"General Obligation Ad Valorem Tax Debt" means Debt payable from any moneys,
revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City legally available for such purposes and
supported or secured by the City's full faith and credit for which the ad valorem taxing power of
the City is pledged.
"General Obligation Debt" means Debt payable from any moneys, revenues, receipts,
income, assets or funds of the City legally available for such purposes and supported or secured

 by the City's full faith and credit, including, without limitation, General Obligation Ad Valorem
Tax Debt.
"Generally Accepted Accounting Principles" or "GAAP" means generally accepted
accounting principles in effect from time to time in the United States and applicable to entities
such as the City.
"Governmental Authority" means the government of the United States or any other
nation, or of any political subdivision thereof, whether state or local, and any agency, authority,
instrumentality, regulatory body, court, central bank or other entity exercising executive,
legislative, judicial, taxing, regulatory or administrative powers or functions of or pertaining to
government (including any supra-national bodies such as the European Union or the European
Central Bank).
"Guarantee" means, as to any Person, (a) any obligation, contingent or otherwise, of
such Person guaranteeing or having the economic effect of guaranteeing any Debt or other
obligation payable or performable by another Person (the "primary obligor") in any manner,
whether directly or indirectly, and including any obligation of such Person, direct or indirect,
(i) to purchase or pay (or advance or supply funds for the purchase or payment of) such Debt or
other obligation, (ii) to purchase or lease property, securities or services for the purpose of
assuring the obligee in respect of such Debt or other obligation of the payment or performance of
such Debt or other obligation, (iii) to maintain working capital, equity capital or any other
financial statement condition or liquidity or level of income or cash flow of the primary obligor
so as to enable the primary obligor to pay such Debt or other obligation, or (iv) entered into for
the purpose of assuring in any other manner the obligee in respect of such Debt or other
obligation of the payment or performance thereof or to protect such obligee against loss in
respect thereof (in whole or in part), or (b) any Lien on any assets of such Person securing any
Debt or other obligation of any other Person, whether or not such Debt or other obligation is
assumed by such Person (or any right, contingent or otherwise, of any holder of such Debt to
obtain any such Lien). The amount of any Guarantee shall be deemed to be an amount equal to
the stated or determinable amount of the related primary obligation, or portion thereof, in respect
of which such Guarantee is made or, if not stated or determinable, the maximum reasonably
anticipated liability in respect thereof as determined by the guaranteeing Person in good faith.
The term "Guarantee" as a verb has a corresponding meaning.
"Indemnified Ta.xes" means (a) Taxes, other than Excluded Taxes, imposed on or with
respect to any payment made by or on account of any obligation of the City under the Agreement
or the Note and (b) to the extent not otherwise described in (a). Other Taxes.
"Indenmitees" has the meaning specified in Section 8.04(b) hereof
"Information" has the meaning specified in Section 8.07 hereof.
"Interest Payment Date" means, (a) as to any Eurodollar Rate Loan, the last day of each
Interest Period applicable to such Loan and the Commitment Termination Date; provided,
however, that if any Interest Period for a Eurodollar Rate Loan exceeds three months, the

 respective dates that fall every three months after the beginning of such Interest Period shall also
be Interest Payment Dates; and (b) as to any Floating Rate Loan and the Term Loan, the first
Business Day of each month.
"Interest Period" means, as to each Eurodollar Rate Loan, the period commencing on the
date such Eurodollar Rate Loan is disbursed or converted to or continued as a Eurodollar Rate
Loan and ending on the date one, two, three or six months thereafter, as selected by the City in
its Loan Notice; provided that:
(i)
any Interest Period that would otherwise end on a day that is not a
Business Day shall be extended to the next succeeding Business Day unless such
Business Day falls in another calendar month, in which case such Interest Period shall
end on the next preceding Business Day;
(ii)
any Interest Period that begins on the last Business Day of a calendar
month (or on which there is no numerically corresponding day in the calendar month at
the end of such Interest Period) shall end on the last Business Day of the calendar month
at the end of such Interest Period; and
(iii)

no Interest Period shall extend beyond the Commitment Termination Date.

"IRS" means the United States Internal Revenue Service.
"Laws" means, collectively, all international, foreign. Federal, state and local statutes,
treaties, rules, guidelines, regulations, ordinances, codes and administrative or judicial
precedents or authorities, including the interpretation or administration thereof by any
Governmental Authority charged with the enforcement, interpretation or administration thereof,
and all applicable administrative orders, directed duties, requests, licenses, authorizations and
permits of, and agreements with, any Governmental Authority, in each case whether or not
having the force of law.
"Lender" has the meaning specified in the introductory paragraph hereto.
"Lending Office" means, the office or offices of the Lender described as such in
Schedule 8.02, or such other office or offices as the Lender may from time to time notify the
City.
"Lien" means any mortgage, pledge, hypothecation, assignment, deposit arrangement,
encumbrance, lien (statutory or other), charge, or preference, priority or other security interest or
preferential arrangement in the nature of a security interest of any kind or nature whatsoever
(including any conditional sale or other title retention agreement, any easement, right of way or
other encumbrance on title to real property, and any financing lease having substantially the
same economic effect as any ofthe foregoing).
"Loan" has the meaning specified in Section 2.01 hereof.

-8-

 "Loan Notice" means a notice of a Borrowing pursuant to Section 2.02(a), which, if in
writing, shall be substantially in the form of Exhibit A.
"London Banking Days" means any day on which banks in London are open for business
and dealing in offshore dollars.
"Material Adverse Effect" means: (a) a material adverse change in, or a material adverse
effect upon, the operations, business, properties, liabilities (actual or contingent) or condition
(financial or otherwise) of the City; (b) a material impairment of the ability of the City to
perform its obligations under this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance; or (c) a material
adverse effect upon the legality, validity, binding effect or enforceability against the City of this
Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance.
"Maximum Rate" means the lesser of (i) eighteen percent (18%) and (ii) the maximum
non-usurious lawful rate of interest permitted by applicable law.
"MEN General Obligation Debt" means Debt payable from any moneys, revenues,
receipts, income, assets or funds of the City legally available for such purposes and supported or
secured by the City's full faith and credit; provided that the term MEN General Obligation Debt
does not include General Obligation Ad Valorem Tax Debt.
"Moody's" means Moody's Investors Service, Inc. and any successor rating agency.
"Note" means the Note dated March 22, 2013, of the City in favor of the Lender
evidencing Loans and the Term Loan made by the Lender and substantially in the form of
Exhibit B hereto.
"Obligations" means all advances to, and debts, liabilities, obligations, covenants and
duties of, the City arising under this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance or otherwise with
respect to any Loan or Term Loan, whether direct or indirect (including those acquired by
assumption), absolute or contingent, due or to become due, now existing or hereafter arising and
including interest and fees that accrue after the commencement by or against the City or any
Affiliate thereof of any proceeding under any Debtor Relief Laws naming such Person as the
debtor in such proceeding, regardless of whether such interest and fees are allowed claims in
such proceeding.
"OFAC" means the United States Department of Treasury Office of Foreign Assets
Control.
"OFAC Sanctions Programs" means all laws, regulations, and executive orders
administered by OFAC, including without limitation, the Bank Secrecy Act, anti-money
laundering laws (including, without limitation, the Patriot Act), and all economic and trade
sanction programs administered by OFAC, any and all similar United States federal laws,
regulations or executive orders, and any similar laws, regulations or orders adopted by any State
within the United States.

 "OFAC SDN List" means the list of the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked
Persons maintained by OFAC.
"Ordinance" means that certain ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on
March 14, 2012, appearing in the Journal of Proceedings of the City Council of the City on such
date at pages 21706 through 21748.
"Original Agreement" has the meaning set forth in the recitals to this Agreement.
"Other Connection Taxes" means Taxes imposed as a result of a present or former
connection between the Lender and the jurisdiction imposing such Tax (other than connections
arising from the Lender having executed, delivered, become a party to, performed its obligations
under, received payments under, received or perfected a security interest under, engaged in any
other transaction pursuant to or enforced this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance, or sold or
assigned an interest in the Loans or the Term Loan or this Agreement, the Note or the
Ordinance).
"Other Taxes" means all present or future stamp, court or documentary, intangible,
recording, filing or similar Taxes that arise from any payment made under, from the execution,
delivery, performance, enforcement or registration of, from the receipt or perfection of a security
interest under, or otherwise with respect to, this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance, except
any such Taxes that are Other Connection Taxes imposed with respect to an assignment.
"Outstanding Amount" means on any date, the aggregate outstanding principal amount
thereof after giving effect to any borrowings and prepayments or repayments of Loans occurring
on such date.
"Patriot Act" means the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate
Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001, Title III of Pub. L. 107-56
(signed into law October 26. 2001).
"Person" means any natural person, corporation, limited liability company, trust, joint
venture, association, company, partnership. Governmental Authority or other entity.
"Prime Rate" means on any day, the rate of interest per annum then most recently
established by the Lender as its "prime rate." The "prime rate" is a rate set by the Lender based
upon various factors including the Lender's costs and desired return, general economic
conditions and other factors, and is used as a reference point for pricing some loans, which may
be priced at, above, or below such announced rate. Any change in such rate announced by the
Lender shall take effect at the opening of business on the day specified in the public
announcement of such change.
"Property" means any interest in any kind of property or asset, whether real, personal or
mixed, or tangible or intangible, whether now owned or hereafter acquired.

-10-

 "Rating" means the long-term unenhanced debt ratings assigned by each of Fitch, S&P
and Moody's to General Obligation Debt (without giving effect to any credit enhancement
securing such General Obligation Debt).
"Rating Agencies" means Fitch, Moody's and S&P.
"Ratings Clause Notice" means the notice that may be delivered by the City to the
Lender pursuant to Section 7.01(i)(ii) in the form attached as Exhibit D hereto.
"Related Parties" means, with respect to any Person, such Person's Affiliates and the
partners, directors, officers, employees, agents and advisors of such Person and of such Person's
Affiliates.
"Requestfor Borrowing" means with respect to a Borrowing, a Loan Notice.
"S&P" means Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, a Standard & Poor's Financial
Services LLC business, and any successor rating agency.
"SEC" means the Securities and Exchange Commission, or any Governmental Authority
succeeding to any of its principal functions.
"Swap Contract" means (a) any and all rate swap transactions, basis swaps, credit
derivative transactions, forward rale transactions, commodity swaps, commodity options,
forward commodity contracts, equity or equity index swaps or options, bond or bond price or
bond index swaps or options or forward bond or forward bond price or forward bond index
transactions, interest rate options, forward foreign exchange, transactions, cap transactions, floor
transactions, collar transactions, currency swap transactions, cross-currency rate swap
transactions, currency options, spot contracts, or any other similar transactions or any
combination of any of the foregoing (including any options to enter into any of the foregoing),
whether or not any such transaction is governed by or subject to any master agreement, and
(b) any and all transactions of any kind, and the related confirmations, which are subject to the
terms and conditions of, or governed by, any form of master agreement published by the
International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc., any International Foreign Exchange
Master Agreement, or any other master agreement (any such master agreement, together with
any related schedules, a "Master Agreement"), including any such obligations or liabilities under
any Master Agreement.
"Taxes" means all present or future taxes, levies, imposts, duties, deductions,
withholdings (including backup withholding), assessments, fees or other charges imposed by any
Governmental Authority, including any interest, additions to tax or penalties applicable thereto.
"Term Loan" shall mean the term loan made by the Lender to the City pursuant to the
terms of Section 2.05(b) hereof.
"Term Loan Maturity Date" shall mean, with respect to the Term Loan, the third
anniversary of the Commitment Termination Date.
-11-

 "Term Loan Payment Date" means each January 1 and July 1 occurring at least 270 days
after the Commitment Termination Date.
"Total Outstandings" means the aggregate Outstanding Amount of all Loans.
"Type" means with respect to a Loan, its character as a Floating Rate Loan or a
Eurodollar Rate Loan.
"United States" and "U.S." mean the United States of America.
"written" or "in writing" means any form of written communication or a communication
by means of telex, telecopier device or electronic mail.
Section 1.02. Other Interpretive Provisions. With reference to this Agreement, the Note
and the Ordinance, unless otherwise specified herein or in the Note or the Ordinance:
(a) The definitions of terms herein shall apply equally to the singular and plural forms
of the terms defined. Whenever the context may require, any pronoun shall include the
corresponding masculine, feminine and neuter forms. The words "include" "includes" and
"including" shall be deemed to be followed by the phrase "without limitation." The word "wilF
shall be construed to have the same meaning and effect as the word "shall." Unless the context
requires otherwise, (i) any definition of or reference to any agreement, instrument or other
document shall be construed as referring to such agreement, instrument or other document as
from time to time amended, supplemented or otherwise modified (subject to any restrictions on
such amendments, supplements or modifications set forth herein or in the Note or the
Ordinance), (ii) any reference herein to any Person shall be construed to include such Person's
successors and assigns, (iii) the words "hereto," "herein," "hereof and "hereunder," and words
of similar import when used in this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance, shall be construed to
refer to such document in its entirety and not to any particular provision thereof, (iv) all
references in this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance to Articles, Sections, Exhibits and
Schedules shall be construed to refer to Articles and Sections of, and Exhibits and Schedules to,
this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance in which such references appear, (v) any reference to
any law shall include all statutory and regulatory provisions con.solidating, amending, replacing
or interpreting such law and any reference to any law or regulation shall, unless otherwise
specified, refer to such law or regulation as amended, modified or supplemented from time to
time, and (vi) the words "asset" and "property" shall be construed to have the same meaning and
effect and to refer to any and all tangible and intangible assets and properties, including cash,
securities, accounts and contract rights.
(b) In the computation of periods of time from a specified date to a later specified date,
the word "from" means "fi-om and including;" the words "to" and "until" each mean "to but
excluding," and the word "through" means "to and including."
(c) Section headings herein and in the Note and the Ordinance are included for
convenience of reference only and shall not affect the interpretation of this Agreement, the Note
or the Ordinance.
•12-

 Section 1.03.

Accounting Terms.

(a) Generally. All accounting terms not specifically or completely defined herein shall
be construed in conformity with, and all financial data (including financial ratios and other
financial calculations) required to be submitted pursuant to this Agreement shall be prepared in
conformity with, GAAP applied on a consistent basis, as in effect from time to time, applied in a
manner consistent with that used in preparing the Audited Financial Statements, except as
otherwise specifically prescribed herein.
(b) Changes in GAAP. If at any time any change in GAAP would affect the
computation of anyfinancialratio or requirement set forth in any Loan Document, and either the
City or the Lender shall so request, the Lender and the City shall negotiate in good faith to
amend such ratio or requirement to preserve the original intent thereof in light of such change in
GAAP; provided that, until so amended, (A) such ratio or requirement shall continue to be
computed in accordance with GAAP prior to such change therein and (B) the City shall provide
to the Lender financial statements and other documents required under this Agreement or as
reasonably requested hereunder setting forth a reconciliation between calculations of such ratio
or requirement made before and after giving effect to such change in GAAP.
Section 1.04. Rounding. Any financial ratios required to be maintained by the City
pursuant to this Agreement shall be calculated by dividing the appropriate component by the
other component, carrying the result to one place more than the number of places by which such
ratio is expressed herein and rounding the result up or down to the nearest number (with a
rounding-up if there is no nearest number).
Section 1.05. Times of Day. Unless otherwise specified, all references herein to times of
day shall be references to Central time (daylight or standard, as applicable).
ARTICLE II
T H E COMMITMENTS AND CREDIT EXTENSIONS

Section 2.01. Loans. Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, the Lender
agrees to make loans (each such loan, a "Loan") to the City from time to time, on any Business
Day during the Availability Period, in an aggregate amount not to exceed at any time outstanding
the Commitment Amount; provided, however, that after giving effect to any Borrowing, the
Total Outstandings shall not exceed the Commitment Amount. Subject to the other terms and
conditions hereof, the City may borrow under this Section 2.01, prepay under Section 2.03, and
reborrow under this Section 2.01. Loans may be Floating Rate Loans or Eurodollar Rate Loans,
as further provided herein.
Section 2.02. Borrowings, Conversions and Continuations of Loans, (a) Each Borrowing,
each conversion and each continuation of Loans from one Type to the other, and each
continuation of Eurodollar Rate Loans shall be made upon the City's irrevocable notice to the
Lender, which may be given by telephone. The Lender must receive each such notice not later

•13-

 than 11:00 a.m.. (i) three Business Days prior to the requested date of any Borrowing of,
conversion to or continuation of Eurodollar Rate Loans, or of any conversion of Eurodollar Rate
Loans to Floating Rate Loans, and (ii) on the requested date of any Borrowing of Floating Rate
Loans. Each telephonic notice by the City pursuant to this Section 2.02(a) must be confirmed
promptly by delivery to the Lender of a written Loan Notice, appropriately completed and signed
by an Authorized Officer. Each Borrowing of, conversion to or continuation of Eurodollar Rate
Loans shall be in a principal amount of $500,000 or a whole multiple of $ 1,000 in excess thereof
Each Borrowing of or conversion to Floating Rate Loans shall be in a principal amount of
$500,000 or a whole multiple of $1,000 in excess thereof. Each Loan Notice (whether
telephonic or written) shall specify (i) whether the City is requesting a Borrowing, a conversion
of Loans from one Type to the other, or a continuation of Eurodollar Rate Loans, (ii) the
requested date of the Borrowing, conversion or a continuation, as the case may be (which shall
be a Business Day), (iii) the principal amount of Loans to be borrowed, converted, or continued,
(iv) the Type of Loans to be borrowed or to which existing Loans are to be converted, and (v) if
applicable, the duration of the Interest Period with respect thereto. If the City fails to specify a
Type of Loan in a Loan Notice or if the City fails to give a timely notice requesting a conversion
or continuation, then the applicable Loans shall be made as, or converted to. Floating Rate
Loans. Any such automatic conversion to Floating Rate Loans shall be effective as of the last
day of the Interest Period then in effect with respect to the applicable Eurodollar Rate Loans. If
the City requests a Borrowing of, conversion to, or continuation of Eurodollar Rate Loans in any
such Loan Notice, but fails to specify an Interest Period, it will be deemed to have specified an
Interest Period of one month.
(b) Upon satisfaction of the applicable conditions set forth in Section 4.02 (and, if such
Borrowing is the initial Borrowing, Section 4.01), the Lender shall make all funds available to
the City by 3:00 p.m. on the Business Day specified in the applicable Loan Notice by wire
transfer of such funds for deposit to an account specified by the City in the applicable Loan
Notice, in each case in accordance with instructions provided to (and reasonably acceptable to)
the Lender by the City.
(c) Except as otherwise provided herein, a Eurodollar Rate Loan may be continued or
converted only on the last day of an Interest Period for such Eurodollar Rate Loan. During the
existence of a Default, no Loans may be requested as, converted to or continued as Eurodollar
Rate Loans without the consent of the Lender, and the Lender may demand that any or all of the
then outstanding Eurodollar Rate Loans be converted immediately to Floating Rate Loans and
the City agrees to pay all amounts due under Section 3.05 in accordance with the terms thereof
due to any such conversion upon receipt of invoice of such charges.
(d) The Lender shall promptly notify the City of the interest rate applicable to any
Interest Period for Eurodollar Rate Loans upon determination of such interest rate and the date
on which such Interest Period ends.
(e) After giving effect to all Borrowings, all conversions of Loans from one Type to the
other, and all continuations of Loans as the same Type, there shall not be more than six Interest
Periods in effect with respect to Loans.

•14-

 Section 2.03. Prepayments, (a) The City may, upon notice to the Lender, at any time or
from time to time voluntarily prepay Loans and the Term Loan in whole or in part without
premium or penalty; provided that (i) such notice must be received by the Lender not later than
2:00 p.m. (A) one Business Days prior to any date of prepayment of Eurodollar Rate Loans and
(B) on the date of prepayment of Floating Rate Loans or the Term Loan; and (ii) any prepayment
of Eurodollar Rate Loans shall be in a principal amount of $500,000 or a whole multiple of
$1,000 in excess thereof; and (iii) any prepayment of Floating Rate Loans or the Term Loan shall
be in a principal amount of $500,000 or a whole multiple of at least $1,000 in excess thereof or,
in each case, if less, the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding. Each such notice shall
specify the date and amount of such prepayment and the Type(s) of Loans to be prepaid and, if
Eurodollar Rate Loans are to be prepaid, the Interest Period(s) of such Loans. If the City gives
such notice, the City shall make such prepayment and the payment amount specified in such
notice shall be due and payable on the date specified therein. Any prepayment of principal shall
be accompanied by all accrued interest on the amount prepaid, together with any additional
amounts required pursuant to Section 3.05. No amount of the Term Loan paid or prepaid may be
reborrowed, and any such prepayment of the outstanding Term Loan pursuant to this
Section 2.03(a) shall be applied to the principal repayment installments thereof in inverse order
of maturity.
(b) If for any reason the Total Outstandings at any time exceed the Commitment then in
effect, the City shall immediately prepay Loans in an aggregate amount equal to such excess.
Section 2.04. Termination or Reduction of Commitment. The City may, upon notice to
the Lender, terminate the Commitment, or from time to time permanently reduce the
Commitment; provided that (i) any such notice shall be received by the Lender not later than
2:00 p.m. three (3) Business Days prior to the date of termination or reduction, (ii) any such
partial reduction shall be in an aggregate amount of $500,000 or any whole multiple of $1,000 in
excess thereof, and (iii) the City shall not terminate or reduce the Commitment if, after giving
effect thereto and to any concurrent prepayments hereunder, the Total Outstandings would
exceed the Commitment. All Commitment Fees accrued until the effective date of any
termination of the Commitment shall be paid on the effective date of such termination.
Section 2.05. Repayment of Loans, (a) The City shall repay to the Lender on the
Commitment Termination Date the aggregate principal amount of Loans outstanding on such
date.
(b) Subject to the satisfaction of the terms and conditions of Section 4.03 hereof, on the
Commitment Termination Date the Outstanding Amount of the Loans shall convert into a Term
Loan and the proceeds of such Term Loan shall be used to pay in full the Loans. Any Loan not
converted to the Term Loan shall be due and payable on the Commitment Termination Date and
shall bear interest at the Default Rate.
(c) The principal of the Term Loan shall be due and payable in 4 substantially equal
installments due semiannually on each Term Loan Payment Date; provided, however, that any
remaining portion of the Term Loan shall be due and payable no later than the Term Loan
Maturity Date.

•15-

 Section 2.06. Interest, (a) Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) below, (i) each
Eurodollar Rate Loan shall bear interest on the outstanding principal amount thereof for each
Interest Period at a rate per annum equal to the Eurodollar Rate for such Interest Period plus the
Applicable Rate; (ii) each Floating Rate Loan shall bear interest on the outstanding principal
amount thereof from the applicable borrowing date at a rate per annum equal to the Floating Rate
plus the Applicable Rate and (iii) the Term Loan shall bear interest on the outstanding principal
amount thereof at a rate per annum equal to the Base Rate; provided, that subject to Section 2.12
hereof, at no time shall the interest rate on a Loan or Term Loan, as applicable, exceed the
Maximum Rate. Each invoice for interest sent by the Lender to the City shall include a detailed
breakdown of the Eurodollar Rate or Floating Rate, as applicable, for such period being
invoiced.
(b) (i) While any Event of Default exists, the City shall pay interest on all outstanding
Obligations hereunder (including, without limitation, all Loans and the Term Loan) at a
fiuctuating interest rate per annum at all times equal to the Default Rate to the fullest extent
permitted by applicable Laws.
(ii) Accrued and unpaid interest on past due amounts (including interest on past due
interest) shall be due and payable upon demand.
(c) Interest on each Loan and the Term Loan shall be due and payable in arrears on
each Interest Payment Date applicable thereto and at such other times as may be specified herein.
Interest hereunder shall be due and payable in accordance with the terms hereof before and after
judgment, and before and after the commencement of any proceeding under any Debtor Relief
Law.
Section 2.07.

Fees.

(a) Commitment Fee. The City shall pay to the Lender, a commitment fee (the
"Commitment Fee") equal to the product of (i) Commitment Fee Rate and (ii) the actual daily
amount by which the Commitment Amount exceeds the Outstanding Amount of Loans. The
Commitment Fee shall accrue at all times during the Availability Period, including at any time
during which one or more of the conditions in Article IV is not met, and shall be due and payable
quarteriy in arrears on the first Business Day of each January, April, July and October (each a
"Fee Payment Date"), commencing with the first such date to occur after the Closing Date, and
on the last day of the Availability Period. The Commitment Fee shall be calculated quarterly in
arrears, and if there is any change in the Commitment Fee Rate during any quarter, the actual
daily amount shall be computed and multiplied by the Commitment Fee Rate separately for each
period during such quarter that such Commitment Fee Rate was in effect.
(b) Amendment and Waiver Fees. The City hereby agrees to pay to the Lender, on the
date of each amendment to this Agreement or any other Loan Document, or execution of any
standard waiver or consent relating thereto, a non-refundable fee equal t o ^ ^ , plus, in each
case, the reasonable fees and expenses of counsel to the Lender in an amount to be agreed upon
by the parties prior to the commencement of such action. Such fees shall be fully earned when
paid and shall not be refundable for any reason whatsoever.

-16-

 (c) Draw Fees. The City hereby agrees to pay a non-refundable drawing fee (each, a
"Draw Fee") o f   m to the Lender for each advance of a Loan under this Agreement to be paid
quarterly in arrears on each Fee Payment Date; provided that the aggregate amount of such Draw
Fees shall not exceed m
in any calendar year.
Section 2.08. Computation of Interest and Fees. All computations of fees and interest
shall be made on the basis of a year of three hundred sixty-five (365) or three hundred sixty-six
(366) days, as the case may be, and actual days elapsed. Interest shall accrue on each Loan and
the Term Loan for the day on which the Loan or the Term Loan is made, and shall not accrue on
a Loan or the Term Loan, or any portion thereof, for the day on which the Loan or such portion
is paid, provided that any Loan or the Term Loan that is repaid on the same day on which it is
made shall, subject to Section 2.10(a), bear interest for one day. Each determination by the
Lender of an interest rate or fee hereunder shall be conclusive and binding for all purposes,
absent manifest error.
Section 2.09. Evidence of Debt. The Borrowings made by the Lender shall be evidenced
by one or more accounts or records maintained by the Lender in the ordinary course of business.
The accounts or records maintained by the Lender shall be conclusive absent manifest error of
the amount of the Borrowings made by the Lender to the City and the interest and payments
thereon. Any failure to so record or any ertor in doing so shall not, however, limit or otherwise
affect the obligafion of the City hereunder to pay any amount owing with respect to the
Obligations. The City shall execute and deliver to the Lender a Note, which shall evidence the
Lender's Loans and the Term Loan in addition to such accounts or records. The Lender may
attach schedules to its Note and endorse thereon the date, amount and maturity of its Loans and
the Term Loan and payments with respect thereto.
Section 2.10. Payments, (a) General. All payments to be made by the City shall be made
in Dollars and immediately available funds by debit to a deposit account, as described in this
Agreement or as authorized by the City and without condition or deduction for any counterclaim,
defense, recoupment or setoff. If any payment to be made by the City shall come due on a day
other than a Business Day, payment shall be made on the next following Business Day, and such
extension of time shall be reflected in computing interest or fees, as the case may be. For
payments not made by direct debit, payments will be made to the Lender at the Lending Office
not later than 12:00 noon on the date specified herein. All payments received by the Lender after
12:00 noon shall be deemed received on the next succeeding Business Day and any applicable
interest or fee shall continue to accrue.
(b) Payments by the City. For any payment under this Agreement made by debit to a
deposit account, the City will maintain sufficient immediately available funds in the deposit
account to cover each debit. If there are insufficient immediately available funds in the deposit
account on the date the Lender enters any such debit authorized by this Agreement, the Lender
may reverse the debit.
Section 2.11.
Extension of Commitment Termination Date. At least sixty (60) days and
no more than two hundred and ten (210) days prior to the Commitment Termination Date, the
City may make a request to the Lender, upon written notice, to extend the Commitment

•17-

 Termination Date. Not more than thirty (30) days from the date on which the Lender shall have
received any such notice from the City pursuant to the preceding sentence, the Lender shall
notify the City of the initial consent or nonconsent of the Lender to such extension request,
which consent shall be given at the sole and absolute discretion of the Lender. If the Lender
shall have consented to such extension request, the Lender shall deliver to the City written notice
of the Lender's election to extend Commitment Termination Date. Failure of the Lender to
respond to a request for extension of the Commitment Termination Date shall constitute denial of
such extension.
Section 2.12.
Maximum Rate. If the rate of interest payable hereunder shall exceed the
Maximum Rate for any period for which interest is payable, then (a) interest at the Maximum
Rate shall be due and payable with respect to such interest period, and (b) interest at the rate
equal to the difference between (i) the rate of interest calculated in accordance with the terms
hereof and (ii) the Maximum Rate (the "Excess Interest"), shall be deferred until such date as
the rate of interest calculated in accordance with the terms hereof ceases to exceed the Maximum
Rate, at which time the City shall pay to the Lender, with respect to amounts then payable to the
Lender that are required to accrue interest hereunder, such portion of the deferred Excess Interest
as will cause the rate of interest then paid to the Lender to equal the Maximum Rate, which
payments of deferred Excess Interest shall continue to apply to such unpaid amounts hereunder
until the earlier of (i) the date of payment in full of all Obligations (other than Excess Interest
which has not been recaptured) and on which this Agreement is no longer in effect, and (ii) the
date on which all deferred Excess Interest is fully paid to the Lender.
ARTICLE I I I
TAXES, YIELD PROTECTION AND ILLEGALITY

Section 3.01.

Ta.xes.

(a) Payments Free of Taxes; Obligation to Withhold: Payments on Account of Taxes.
(i) Any and all payments by or on account of any obligation of the City hereunder or under any
other Loan Document shall to the extent permitted by applicable Laws be made free and clear of
and without reduction or withholding for any Taxes. If any applicable Laws require the
withholding or deducting of any Tax, such Tax shall be withheld or deducted in accordance with
such Laws as determined by the City or the Lender, as the case may be, upon the basis of the
information and documentation to be delivered pursuant to subsection (e) below.
(ii) If the City shall be required by any applicable Laws to withhold or deduct any
Taxes, including both United States Federal backup withholding and withholding taxes, from any
payment, then (A) the City, as required by such Laws, shall withhold or make such deductions as
are determined by it to be required based upon the information and documentation it has received
pursuant to subsection (e) below, (B) the City, to the extent required by such Laws, shall timely
pay the full amount withheld or deducted to the relevant Governmental Authority in accordance
with such Laws, and (C) to the extent that the withholding or deduction is made on account of
Indemnified Taxes, the sum payable by the City shall be increased as necessary so that after any

•18-

 required withholding or the making of all required deductions (including deductions applicable
to additional sums payable under this Section 3.01) the Lender, receives an amount equal to the
sum it would have received had no such withholding or deduction been made.
(b) Payment of Other Taxes by the City. Without limiting the provisions of sub.section
(a) above, the City shall timely pay to the relevant Governmental Authority in accordance with
applicable Law, or at the option of the Lender at its opfion to timely reimburse it for the payment
of, any Other Taxes.
(c) Tax Indemnifications, (i) Without limiting the provisions of subsection (a) or (b)
above, the City shall, and does hereby, indemnify the Lender, and shall make payment in respect
thereof within ten (10) days after demand therefor, for the full amount of any Indemnified Taxes
(including Indemnified Taxes imposed or asserted on or attributable to amounts payable under
this Section 3.01) payable or paid by the Lender or required to be withheld or deducted from a
payment to the Lender, and any penalties, interest and reasonable expenses arising therefrom or
with respect thereto, whether or not such Indemnified Taxes were correctly or legally imposed or
asserted by the relevant Governmental Authority. A certificate as to the amount of such payment
or liability delivered to the City by the Lender shall be conclusive absent manifest error.
(ii) Without limiting the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) above, the Lender shall, and
does hereby, indemnify the City and shall make payment in respect thereof within ten (10) days
after demand therefor, against any and all Taxes and any and all related losses, claims, liabilities,
penalties, interest and expenses (including the reasonable fees, charges and disbursements of any
counsel for the City) incurred by or asserted against the City by any Governmental Authority as a
result of the failure by the Lender to deliver, or as a result of the inaccuracy, inadequacy or
deficiency of, any documentation required to be delivered by the Lender to the City pursuant to
subsection (e). The agreements in this clause (ii) shall survive any assignment of rights by, or
the replacement of, the Lender, the termination of the Commitment and the repayment,
satisfaction or discharge of all other Obligations.
(d) Evidence of Payments. Upon request by the City or the Lender, as the case may be,
after any payment of Taxes by the City or by the Lender to a Governmental Authority as
provided in this Section 3.01, the City shall deliver to the Lender or the Lender shall deliver to
the City, as the case may be, the original or a certified copy of a receipt issued by such
Governmental Authority evidencing such payment, a copy of any return required by Laws to
report such payment or other evidence of such payment reasonably satisfactory to the City or the
Lender, as the case may be.
(e) Status of the Lender; Tax Documentation, (i) If the Lender is entitled to an
exemption from or reduction of withholding Tax with respect to payments made under this
Agreement or the Note, the Lender shall deliver to the City, at the time or times reasonably
requested by the City, such properly completed and executed documentation reasonably
requested by the City as svill permit such payments to be made without withholding or at a
reduced rate of withholding. In addition, the Lender, if reasonably requested by the City, shall
deliver such other documentation prescribed by applicable Law or reasonably requested by the
City as will enable the City to determine whether or not the Lender is subject to backup

-19-

 withholding or information reporting requirements. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
the preceding two sentences, the completion, execution and submission of such documentafion
(other than such documentation set forth in Section 3.01(e)(ii) below) shall not be required if in
the Lender's reasonable judgment such completion, execution or submission would subject the
Lender to any material unreimbursed cost or expense or would materially prejudice the legal or
commercial position of the Lender.
(ii) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Lender shall deliver to the City
(and from time to time thereafter upon the reasonable request of the City), executed originals of
IRS Form W-9 certifying that the Lender is exempt from U.S. federal backup withholding tax.
(0 Treatment of Certain Refunds. If the Lender determines that it has received a
refund of any Taxes as to which it has been indemnified by the City or with respect to which the
City has paid addiuonal amounts pursuant to this Section 3.01, it shall pay to the City an amount
equal to such refund (but only to the extent of indemnity payments made, or additional amounts
paid, by the City under this Section 3.01 with respect to the Taxes giving rise to such refund), net
of all out-of-pocket expenses (including Taxes) incurred by the Lender, and without interest
(other than any interest paid by the relevant Governmental Authority with respect to such
refund); provided that the City, upon the request of the Lender, agrees to repay the amount paid
over to the City (plus any penalties, interest or other charges imposed by the relevant
Governmental Authority, prov/i/^i/, that the City shall not be obligated to pay the Lender for any
penalties, interest or expenses relating to Taxes or Other Taxes arising from the Lender's gross
negligence or willful misconduct) to the Lender in the event the Lender is required to repay such
refund to such Governmental Authority. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
subsection, in no event will the Lender be required to pay any amount to the City pursuant to this
subsection the payment of which would place the Lender in a less favorable net after-Tax
position than the Lender would have been in if the indemnification payments or additional
amounts giving rise to such refund had never been paid. This subsection shall not be construed
to require the Lender to make available its tax returns (or any other information relating to its
taxes that it deems confidential) to the City or any other Person.
(g) Survival. Each party's obligafions under this Section shall survive the repayment,
satisfaction or discharge of all other Obligations.
Section 3.02.
(a)

Increased Costs.

Increased Costs Generally. If any Change in Law shall:

(i)
impose, modify or deem applicable any reserve, liquidity ratio, special
deposit, compulsory loan, insurance charge or similar requirement against assets of,
deposits with or for the account of, or credit extended or participated in by, the Lender
(except any reserve requirement contemplated by Section 3.02(e));
(ii)
subject the Lender to any Taxes (other than (A) Indemnified Taxes,
(B) Taxes described in clauses (b) through (d) of the definition of Excluded Taxes and
(C) Connection Income Taxes) on its loans, loan principal, letters of credit, commitments,
-20-

 or other obligations, or its deposits, reserves, other liabilities or capital attributable
thereto; or
(iii)
impose on the Lender or the London interbank market any other condition,
cost or expense affecting this Agreement, the Loans or the Term Loan made by the
Lender or participation therein;
and the result of any of the foregoing shall be to increase the cost to the Lender of making or
maintaining any Loan or the Term Loan (or of maintaining its obligation to make any such Loan
or the Term Loan), or to reduce the amount of any sum received or receivable by the Lender
hereunder (whether of principal, interest or any other amount) then, upon request of the Lender,
the City will pay to the Lender, such additional amount or amounts as will compensate the
Lender, for such additional costs incurred or reduction suffered.
(b) Capital Requirements. If the Lender determines that any Change in Law affecting
the Lender or any Lending Office of the Lender or the Lender's holding company, if any,
regarding capital requirements has or would have the effect of reducing the rate of return on the
Lender's capital or on the capital of the Lender's holding company, if any, as a consequence of
this Agreement, the Commitment of the Lender or the Loans or the Term Loan made by, to a
level below that which the Lender or the Lender's holding company could have achieved but for
such Change in Law (taking into consideration the Lender's policies and the policies of the
Lender's holding company with respect to capital adequacy), then from time to time the City will
pay to the Lender, as the case may be, such additional amount or amounts as will compensate
Lender or the Lender's holding company for any such reduction suffered.
(c) All payments of amounts referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Section shall
be due and payable, in full, on the date which is thirty-one (31) days following the City's receipt
of notice. Interest on the sums due as described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Section, and in
the preceding sentence, shall begin to accrue at a rate per annum equal to (i) the Base Rate from
the date which is thirty-one (31) days following the City's receipt of notice thereof to and
including the date which is sixty (60) days following the City's receipt of notice thereof and
(ii) the Default Rate from and including the date which is sixty-one (61) days following the
City's receipt of notice thereof and at all times thereafter and shall otherwise be payable in
accordance with Section 2.06 hereof A certificate as lo such increased cost, increased capital or
reduction in return incurred by the Lender as a result of any event mentioned in paragraphs (a) or
(b) of this Section setting forth, in reasonable detail, the basis for such calculation and the
amount of such calculation shall be submitted by the Lender to the City and shall be deemed
conclusive if reasonably determined. In making the determinations contemplated by the above
referenced certificate, the Lender may make such reasonable estimates, assumptions, allocations
and the like that the Lender in good faith determines to be appropriate; provided that the Lender
shall provide to the City such additional information in connection with such certificate as the
City may reasonably request in writing.
(d) Delay in Requests. Failure or delay on the part of the Lender to demand
compensation pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this Section shall not constitute a waiver of
the Lender's right to demand such compensation, yyravfJer/ that the City shall not be required to

-2f

 compensate the Lender pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this Section for any increased
costs incurred or reductions suffered more than nine months prior to the date that the Lender,
notifies the City of the Change in Law giving rise to such increased costs or reductions and of the
Lender's intention to claim compensation therefor (except that, if the Change in Law giving ri.se
to such increased costs or reductions is retroactive, then the nine-month period referred to above
shall be extended to include the period of retroactive effect thereof).
(e) Reserves on Eurodollar Rate Loans. The City shall pay to the Lender, as long as
the Lender shall be required to maintain reserves with respect to liabilities or assets consisting of
or including Eurocurrency funds or deposits (currently known as "Eurocurrency liabilities"),
additional interest on the unpaid principal amount of each Eurodollar Rate Loan equal to the
actual costs of such reserves allocated to such Loan by the Lender (as determined by the Lender
in good faith, which determination shall be conclusive), which shall be due and payable on each
date on which interest is payable on such Loan, provided the City shall have received at least
10 days' prior notice of such additional interest from the Lender. If a Lender fails to give notice
10 days prior to the relevant Interest Payment Date, such additional interest shall be due and
payable 10 days from receipt of such notice.
Section 3.03. Illegality. If the Lender determines that any Law has made it unlawful, or
that any Governmental Authority has asserted that it is unlawful, for the Lender or its applicable
Lending Office to make, maintain or fund Loans whose interest is determined by reference to the
Eurodollar Rate, or to determine or charge interest rates based upon the Eurodollar Rate, or any
Governmental Authority has imposed material restrictions on the authority of the Lender to
purchase or sell, or to take deposits of. Dollars in the London interbank market, then, on notice
thereof by the Lender to the City, any obligation of the Lender to make or continue Eurodollar
Rate Loans or to convert Floating Rate Loans to Eurodollar Rate Loans shall be suspended, until
the Lender notifies the City that the circumstances giving rise to such determination no longer
exist. Upon receipt of such notice, the City shall, upon demand from the Lender, prepay or, if
applicable, convert all Eurodollar Rate Loans of the Lender to Floating Rate Loans, either on the
last day of the Interest Period therefor, if the Lender may lawfully continue to maintain such
Eurodollar Rate Loans to such day, or immediately, if the Lender may not lawfully continue to
maintain such Eurodollar Rale Loans. Upon any such prepayment or conversion, the City shall
also pay accrued interest on the amount so prepaid or converted.
Section 3.04. Inability to Determine Rates. If the Lender determine that for any reason in
connection with any request for a Eurodollar Rate Loan or a conversion to or continuation
thereof that (a) Dollar deposits are not being offered to banks in the London interbank eurodollar
market for the applicable amount and Interest Period of such Eurodollar Rate Loan, (b) adequate
and reasonable means do not exist for determining the Eurodollar Rate for any requested Interest
Period with respect to a propo.sed Eurodollar Rate Loan or in connection with an existing or
propo.sed Floating Rate Loan, or (c) the Eurodollar Rate for any requested Interest Period with
respect to a proposed Eurodollar Rate Loan does not adequately and fairly reflect the cost to the
Lender of funding the Loan, the Lender will promptly so notify the City. Thereafter, the
obligation of the Lender to make or maintain Eurodollar Rate Loans shall be suspended, until the
Lender revokes such notice. Upon receipt of such notice, the City may revoke any pending
request for a Borrowing of, conversion to or continuation of Eurodollar Rate Loans or, failing

-22-

 that, will be deemed to have converted such request into a request for a Borrowing of Floating
Rate Loans in the amount specified therein.
Section 3.05. Compensation for Losses. Upon demand of the Lender from time to time,
the City shall promptly compensate the Lender for and hold the Lender harmless from any loss,
cost or expense incurred by it as a result of
(a) any continuation, conversion, payment or prepayment of any Eurodollar
Rate Loan on a day other than the last day of the Interest Period for such Loan (whether
voluntary, mandatory, automatic, by reason of acceleration, or otherwise); or
(b)
any failure by the City (for a reason other than the failure of the Lender to
make a Loan) to prepay, borrow, continue or convert any Eurodollar Rate Loan on the
date or in the amount notified by the City;
including any loss of anticipated profits and any loss or expense arising from the liquidation or
reemployment of funds obtained by it to maintain such Loan or from fees payable to terminate
the deposits from which such funds were obtained.
For purposes of calculating amounts payable by the City to the Lender under this Secfion 3.05,
the Lender shall be deemed to have funded each Eurodollar Rate Loan made by it at the
Eurodollar Rate for such Loan by a matching deposit or other borrowing in the London interbank
eurodollar market for a comparable amount and for a comparable period, whether or not such
Eurodollar Rate Loan was in fact so funded.
Section 3.06. Survival. All of the City's obligations under this Article III shall survive
termination of the Commitment and repayment of all other Obligations hereunder.
ARTICLE IV
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO BORROWINGS

Section 4.01.
Conditions of Initial Borrowing; Authority; Enforceability. This Agreement
shall become binding on the parties hereto upon the satisfaction of the following conditions
precedent (all Loan Documents and other documents to be delivered to the Lender pursuant to
this Section 4.01 shall be subject to prior approval as to form and substance by the Lender, with
delivery by the Lender of its signature page to this Agreement evidencing such Person's
acknowledgement that the conditions set forth in this Section 4.01 have been satisfied, unless
otherwise waived in writing):
(a) The Lender's receipt of the following, each of which shall be originals or
telecopies (followed promptly by originals) unless otherwise specified, each properly
executed by an Authorized Officer of the City, each dated the Closing Date (or, in the
case of certificates of governmental officials, a recent date before the Closing Date) and
each in form and substance satisfactory to the Lender:

-23-

 (i)

executed counterparts of this Agreement;

(ii)
a favorable opinion of counsel to the City acceptable to the Lender
addressed to the Lender, as to the matters set forth concerning the City and this
Agreement, the Note and the Ordinance in form and substance satisfactory to the
Lender;
(iii)
a certificate signed by an Authorized Officer of the City certifying
(A) that the conditions specified in Sections 4.02(a) and (b) have been satisfied,
and (B) that there has been no event or circumstance since December 31, 2013
that has had or could be reasonably expected to have, either individually or in the
aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect; and
(iv)
recent evidence that the Ratings are at least "Baal" by Moody's,
"A+" by S&P and "A-" by Fitch, respectfully.
For purposes of determining compliance with the conditions specified in this
Section 4.01, the Lender that has signed this Agreement shall be deemed to have consented to,
approved or accepted or to be satisfied with, each document or other matter required thereunder
to be consented to or approved by or acceptable or satisfactory to the Lender.
Section 4.02. Conditions to All Borrowings. The obligation of the Lender to honor any
Request for Borrowing is subject to the following conditions precedent:
(a) The representations and warranties of the City contained in Article V
hereof or in the Ordinance, or which are contained in any document furnished at any time
under or in connection herewith or therewith, shall be true and correct on and as of the
date of such Borrowing, except to the extent that such representations and warranties
specifically refer to an earlier date, in which case they shall be true and correct as of such
earlier date, and except that for purposes of this Section 4.02, the representations and
warranties contained in Section 5.09 shall be deemed to refer to the most recent
statements furnished pursuant to clause (b)(i) of Section 6.01.
(b) No Default or Event of Default shall exist, or would result from such
proposed Borrowing or from the application of the proceeds thereof
(c) The Lender shall have received a Request for Borrowing in accordance
with the requirements hereof.
(d) After giving effect to any Loan, the aggregate principal amount of all
Loans outstanding hereunder shall not exceed the Commitment.
(c) Such Borrowing shall not violate any order, judgment or decree of any
court or authority of competent jurisdiction or any provision of law as then in effect.

-24-

 (f) The Lender shall have received, in form and substance satisfactory to it,
such other assurances, certificates, documents or consents related to the foregoing as the
Lender reasonably may require.
Each Request for Borrowing submitted by the City shall be deemed to be a representation and
warranty that the conditions specified in Sections 4.02(a) and (b) have been safisfied on and as of
the date of the applicable Borrowing.
Section 4.03. Conditions to Term Loan. The obligation of the Lender to make any Term
Loan is subject to (i) the representations and warranties contained in Article V hereof and in each
certificate or other writing delivered to the Lender pursuant hereto on or prior to the
Commitment Termination Date shall be true and correct on and as of the Commitment
Termination Date as though made on and as of such date, except to the extent a representation or
warranty relates specifically to an earlier date (in which case such representation or warranty
shall be true and cortect as of such date); (ii) no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred
and be continuing on the Commitment Termination Date; and (iii) the Lender shall have received
a certificate, signed by an Authorized Officer and dated the Commitment Termination Date,
confirming that all of the foregoing conditions have been satisfied.
ARTICLE V
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES

The City represents and warrants to the Lender as follows:
Section 5.01.
Due Authorization. The City has full legal right, power and authority to
enter into, to execute and deliver this Agreement and the Note as provided herein and in the
Ordinance. The City has duly authorized and approved the execution and delivery of this
Agreement, the Ordinance and the Note.
Section 5.02. Enforceability. No further authorization or approval is required for the
City's execution and delivery of this Agreement or the Note, and this Agreement, the Ordinance
and the Note constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of the City, enforceable in
accordance with their respective terms, except as such enforcement may be limited by
bankruptcy, reorganization, insolvency, moratorium or other laws relating to or affecting the
enforcement of creditors' rights generally or by general principles of equity; and no further
authorization or approval is required with respect to the enforceability of the City's obligations
hereunder or thereunder.
Section 5.03. Ordinance. The City Council has duly adopted the Ordinance, which is in
full force and effect. In connection with the issuance of the Note, the City has complied in all
material respects with the Ordinance and the Constitution ofthe laws of the State.
Section 5.04. Consents. All approvals, consents registrations, declarations and filings
(except, if any, under applicable state blue sky or securities laws) with, any federal, state or other

-25-

 governmental body or instrumentality, having jurisdiction which would constitute a condition
precedent to the performance by the City of its obligations hereunder, under the Ordinance or
under the Note have been obtained or made.
Section 5.05. No Violation. The adoption of the Ordinance and compliance with the
provisions thereof do not, and the execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement and the
Note do not and will not violate any existing law or administrative regulation of the State or of
any department, division, agency or instrumentality thereof or of the United States, or any court
or administrative regulation, judgment, decree or order to which the City is subject, or conflict
with in a material manner or constitute on the part of the City a material breach of, or a material
default under, any material provision of any agreement, indenture, mortgage, lease, note,
ordinance, resolution, agreement or other instrument to which the City is subject or by which it is
bound.
Section 5.06. Litigation. Except as disclosed in writing to the Lender, no action, suit or
proceeding, at law or in equity, or before any court, public board or body is pending (or to the
knowledge of the City threatened) against the City or any officers of the City in their respective
capacities as such (i) questioning the authority of the City to adopt the Ordinance or to issue, or
the issuance or validity of this Agreement, the Note or any other General Obligation Debt, or
(ii) questioning the constitutionality of any statute or the validity of any proceedings authorizing
the issuance of this Agreement, the Ordinance or the Note, or (iii) questioning the validity or
enforceability of the Ordinance, or (iv) questioning in any manner the City's pledge of its full
faith, credit and resources and any taxes pledged to the repayment of the Loans, or (iv) which
could materially adversely affect the business,financialcondition or results of operations of the
City.
Section 5.07. Security. Pursuant to the Ordinance, the Loans constitute direct and general
obligations of the City for the payment of which the City has pledged its full faith and credit.
Section 5.08. Organization. The City is a municipal corporation and "home rule unit" as
that term is defined in Secfion 6 of Article VII of the 1970 Constitution of the State.
Section 5.09. Financial Statements. The most recent audited financial statements of the
City delivered to the Lender fairly present the financial position and results of operation of the
City as of December 31, 2013, and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles as consistently applied to governmental units,
except as otherwise noted therein. Except as disclosed in writing to the Lender, to the best
knowledge of the City's Chief Financial Officer, no material adverse change in the financial
position of the City as shown on such financial statements has occurred since December 31,
2013.
Secfion 5.10. Absence of Default. No Default or Event of Default has occurred and is
continuing and the City is not in default under any material provision of the Ordinance. The City
is not in default under any material agreements or instruments to the extent such default would
have a (a) material impairment of the ability of the City to perform its obligations under this

-26-

 Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance; or (b) a material adverse effect upon the legality, validity,
binding effect or enforceability against the City of this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance.
Section 5.11.
Environmental Laws. Except as disclosed in writing to the Lender, the City
has not received notice to the effect that the any of the operations of the City are nol in
compliance with any of the requirements of applicable federal, state or local environmental,
health and safety statutes and regulations or are the subject of any governmental investigation
evaluating whether any remedial action is needed to respond to a release of any toxic or
hazardous waste or substance into the environment, which non-compliance or remedial action
would have a material adverse effect on the City's ability to pay its obligations under this
Agreement or the Note.
Section 5.12. No Proposed Legal Changes. Except as disclosed in writing to the Lender,
there is no amendment, or to the knowledge of the City, proposed amendment certified for
placement on a .statewide ballot, to the Constitution of Ihe State of Illinois or any published
administrative interpretation of the Constitution of the State of Illinois or any State of Illinois
law, or any legislafion that has passed either house of the State legislature, or any published
judicial decision interpreting any of the foregoing, the effect of which is to materially adversely
affect the Lender or the ability of the City to perform its obligations under this Agreement, the
Ordinance or the Note.
Section 5.13. Incorporation of Representations atui Warranties. The City hereby makes
to the Lender the same representations and warranties as were made by it in the Ordinance,
which representations and warranties, together with the related definitions of terms contained
therein, are hereby incorporated by reference with the same effect as if each and every such
representation and warranty and definition were set forth herein in its entirety.
Section 5.14.

Solvent. The City is solvent.

Section 5.15. Disclosure. All infomiation heretofore furnished by the City to the Lender
for purposes of or in connection with this Agreement or any transaction contemplated hereby
(and the ability of the City to perform its obligations under this Agreement or the Note) is, and
all such information hereafter furnished by the City to the Lender will be, true, accurate and
complete in all material respects or based on reasonable estimates on the date as of which such
information is stated or certified and such information does not omit to state a material fact
necessary to make such statements and information, in light of the circumstances under which
they were made, not misleading in any material respect. The City has disclosed to the Lender in
writing any and all facts which materially and adversely affect or may affect (to the extent the
City can now reasonably foresee), the business, operations, prospects or condition, financial or
otherwise, of the City, or the ability of the City to perform its obligations under this Agreement
or the Note.
Section 5.16. Use of Proceeds; Margin Stock. The City shall use the proceeds of the
Loans to provide funds for the payment of necessary expenses incurred for the general corporate
purposes of the City. The City is not engaged, and will not engage, principally or as one of its
important activities, in the business of purchasing or carrying Margin Stock (within the meaning
-27-

 of Regulation U issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System), or extending
credit for the purpose of purchasing or carrying Margin Stock.
Section 5.17. Investment Company. The City is not an "investment company" or a
company "controlled" by an "investment company" within the meaning of the Investment
Company Act of 1940, as amended.
Section 5.18. ERISA. The City does not maintain or contribute to, and has not maintained
or contributed to, any employee pension benefit plan that is subject to Title IV of ERISA or that
is subject to the minimum funding standards under Section 412 of the Code.
Section 5.19. OFAC Sanctions. To the actual knowledge of the Chief Financial Officer,
the City (i) is in compliance with the requirements of all OFAC Sanctions Programs to the extent
applicable to the City, and (ii) the City is not, as of the date hereof, named on the current OFAC
SDN List.
Section 5.20. Other Bank Agreements. As of the date the Ratings Clause Notice is
delivered to the Lender, the City is not a party to a Bank Agreement relating to any General
Obligation Debt that contains a more restrictive rating downgrade event of default than the
provision found in Section 7.01 (i) hereof.
Section 5.21. MEN General Obligation Debt Ratings. The City does not maintain a longterm unenchanced debt rating on the MFN General Obligation Debt.
ARTICLE VI
COVENANTS

Section 6.01. Affirmative Covenants ofthe City. The City will do the following so long as
any Obligations remain outstanding under this Agreement or the Note, unless the Lender shall
otherwise consent in writing:
(a) Further Assurances.
The City shall execute, acknowledge where
appropriate, and deliver, and cause to be executed, acknowledged where appropriate, and
delivered, from time to time promptly at the request of the Lender, all such instruments
and documents as in the reasonable judgment of the Lender are necessary to comply with
this Agreement, the Ordinance and the Note.

-28-

 The City hereby covenants and agrees that:
(b)
Information. The City will deliver to the Lender, in as many copies as it
reasonably shall request in wrifing, or ensure that the same have been posted on a website
that the Lender has access to as soon as available, the following documents:
(i)
within two hundred forty (240) days after the close of each of its
fiscal years, the audited financial statements of the City certified by independent
certified public accountants covering the operations of the City for such fiscal
year and containing balance sheets, statements of revenues, expenses and changes
in retained earnings and statements of cash flows of the City for such fiscal year,
all prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(ii)
in addition, if specifically requested by the Lender in writing on or
after the date on which the financial statements referred to in clau.se (i) have been
posted, the City shall deliver, within ten (10) Business Days of such request, a
certificate stating that no Default or Event of Default has occurred which was
continuing at the end of such period and on the date of such certificate, or, if a
Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, a certificate indicating
the nature of such event and the action which the City proposed to take with
respect hereunder or thereto; and
(iii)
promptly following any request by the Lender and no later than
thirty (30) days following the commencement of each fiscal year of the City, the
City's annual appropriation ordinance, which shall include the budget;
(iv)
from time to time, with reasonable promptness, such additional
information regarding the financial condition of the City as the Lender may
reasonably request in writing; and
(v)
prompt written notice of the assignment by any rating agency of a
long-term unenhanced debt rating to any MFN General Obligation Debt.
(c)
Book and Records; Inspection of Records. Upon the reasonable request of
the Lender and during normal business hours, the City will give the Lender, or any
attorney-in-fact or counsel therefor, access to and permission to examine, copy or make
excerpts from, any and all books, records and documents under control of the
Comptroller relating to the financial condition of the City, and to the extent permitted by
applicable law, visit, the properties of the City to discuss the affairs, finances and
accounts of the City with any of the City's officers, trustees and independent auditors
(and by this provision the City authorizes said auditors to discuss with the Lender and its
agents and representatives the affairs, finances and accounts of the City).
(d)
Compliance With Laws. The City shall comply in all material respects
with all laws, ordinances, investment policies, orders, rules and regulations that may be

-29-

 applicable to it if the failure to comply would have a material adverse effect on the City's
ability to repay when due its obligations under this Agreement or the Note.
(e) Notices. The Borrower will promptly, and in any event not later than five
(5) Business Days after the Chief Financial Officer, City Comptroller, Corporation
Counsel or Deputy Comptroller receives knowledge ofthe same, furnish, or cause to be
furnished, to the Lender (i) notice of the occurrence of any Event of Default or Default as
defined herein or in the Ordinance, (ii) notice of any litigation or administrative
proceeding which, if adversely determined, would materially adversely affect the ability
of the Borrower to pay its obligations under this Agreement or under any of the Loan
Documents to which it is a party, and (iii) such further financial and other information
with respect to the Borrower and its affairs as the Lender may reasonably request from
time to time.
(0
Maintenance of Approvals; Filings, Etc. The City shall at all times
maintain in effect, renew and comply with all the terms and conditions of all consents,
licenses, approvals and authorizations as may be necessary under any applicable law or
regulation for its execution and delivery of (i) this Agreement and the Note and (ii) with
respect to the Ordinance to the extent that failure to do so would have a material adverse
effect on the City's ability to pay when due its Obligations under this Agreement or the
Note.
(g)
Use of Proceeds. The City agrees to use the proceeds of the Loans for the
necessary expenses incurred for the general purposes of the City.
(h) Ratings. The City shall, at all times, cause to be maintained a long-term
unenhanced rating on its General Obligation Ad Valorem Tax Debt by at least one Rating
Agency.
(i)
Issuance of Debt. On or after the date a Term Loan is made to the City,
the City shall use its best efforts to (A) within ninety (90) days of the date a Term Loan is
made to the City, seek the approval of City Council to refinance the Term Loan and any
other Obligations owing to the Bank and (B) issue Debt in an amount at least equal to the
sum of (i) the aggregate principal amount of the Term Loan, plus (ii) the aggregate
amount of accrued interest to maturity on the Term Loan, plus (iii) any other Obligations
owing to the Bank in order to pay to the Bank all such Obligations within one hundred
fifty (150) days ofthe date City Council approves such issuance.
(j)
Other Agreements, (i) In the event that the City shall, directly or
indirectly, enter into or otherwise consent to any Bank Agreement relating to any MFN
General Obligation Debt which such Bank Agreement provides such Person with
different or additional covenants, events of default or greater rights and remedies than are
provided to the Bank in this Agreement, the City shall provide the Bank with a copy of
each such Bank Agreement and such different or additional covenants, events of default
or greater rights and remedies shall automatically be deemed to be incorporated into this
Agreement and the Bank shall have the benefits of such different or additional covenants.

-30-

 events of default or greater rights and remedies as if specifically set forth herein. The
City shall promptly enter into an amendment to this Agreement to include different or
additional covenants, events of default or greater rights and remedies; provided that the
Bank shall have and maintain the benefit of such different or additional covenants, events
of default or greater rights and remedies even if the City fails to provide such
amendment.
(ii)
In the event that the City shall enter into or otherwise consent to any Bank
Agreement relating to any MFN General Obligation Debt, which such Bank Agreement
provides for any term or provision which permits any outstanding advance, loan or
drawing to be amortized over a period shorter than the amortization period set forth in
Section 2.05 hereof (such shorter amortization period, the "Shorter Amortization
Period"), this Agreement shall automatically be deemed to be amended such that the
amortization period set forth in Section 2.05 hereof shall be such Shorter Amortization
Period. Upon the occurrence of the conditions set forth in the immediately preceding
sentence, the City shall promptly enter into an amendment to this Agreement such that
the amortization period equals such Shorter Amortization Period; provided that the
amortization period shall equal the Shorter Amortization Period regardless of whether
this Agreement is amended.
Section 6.02. Amendments. So long as any Loans or the Term Loan shall be outstanding
or any amounts remain unpaid hereunder, the City shall not amend or modify or permit to be
amended or modified the Ordinance in a manner relating in any way to this Agreement or the
Lender or having a Material Adverse Effect (contemplated by subsections (b) and (c) of such
definition), without the prior written consent of the Lender.
Section 6.03. Compliance with other Covenants. From and after the date hereof and so
long as this Agreement is in effect, except to the extent compliance in any case or ca.ses is
waived in writing by the Lender, the City agrees that it will, for the benefit of the Lender,
comply with in all material respects abide by all material agreements, covenants, obligations and
undertakings contained in the Ordinance, which provisions, as well as related defined terms
contained therein, are hereby incorporated by reference herein. No amendment or waiver with
respect to the foregoing provisions shall be effective as to this Agreement unless and until
specifically agreed to in writing by the Lender with reference to this Agreement.
ARTICLE V I I
DEFAULTS

Section 7.01. Events of Default and Remedies. If any of the following events shall occur,
each such event shall be an "Event of Default":
(a)
the City fails to pay, or cau.se to be paid, when due, (i) any amount of
principal or interest of any Loan or the Term Loan or (ii) any other Obligation owing to
the Lender hereunder and such failure continues for a period offifteen(15) days;

-31-

 (b) any representation, warranty or statement made by or on behalf of the City
herein or in the Ordinance or in any certificate delivered pursuant hereto or thereto shall
prove to be untrue in any material respect on the date as of which made or deemed made;
or the documents, certificates or statements of the City (including unaudited financial
reports, budgets, projections and cash flows of the City) furnished to the Lender by or on
behalf of the City in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby, when taken as
a whole, are materially inaccurate in light of the circumstances under which they were
made and as of the date on which they were made;
(c)
(i) the City fails to perform or observe any term, covenant or agreement
contained in Section 6.01 (e)(i) or 6.02 hereof; (ii) the City fails to perform or observe any
term, covenant or agreement contained in Section 6.01(c) hereof and any such failure
cannot be cured or, if curable, remains uncured for five (5) days after written notice
thereof to the City; or (iii) the City fails to perform or observe any other term, covenant
or agreement contained in this Agreement (other than those referred to in
Sections 7.01(a), (c)(i) and (c)(ii)) and any such failure cannot be cured or, if curable,
remains uncured for thirty (30) days after written notice thereof to the City; provided,
however, that such default will not constitute an Event of Default after such thirty (30)
day period of time as, if in the sole judgment of the Bank, the City is diligently pursuing a
cure or correction of such default; provided, further, that such cure period shall not
exceed sixty (60) days from the date of such default without receipt of the Bank's written
consent to such extension.
(d)
the City shall default in any payment of principal of or premium, if any, or
interest on any of its General Obligation Debt and such default shall continue beyond the
expiration of the applicable grace period, if any, or the City shall fail to perform any other
agreement, term or condition contained in any agreement under which any such
obligation is created or secured, which shall permit or result in the declaring due and
payable of such obligation prior to the date on which it would otherwise have become
due and payable;
(e) any material provision of this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance shall
at any time for any reason cease to be valid and binding on the City or any other party
thereto or shall be declared to be null and void, or the validity or enforceability thereof
shall be contested in writing by an Authorized Officer of the City or such other party
thereto or by any Governmental Authority having jurisdiction, or the City or such other
party shall deny in writing that it has any or further liability or obligation under any such
document and the occurrence of any such event would have a material adverse effect on
the City's ability to pay its obligations under this Agreement;
(f)
any provision of this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance relating to the
City's ability to pay the Obligations or perform its obligations hereunder or the rights and
remedies of the Lender, or any material provision thereof;
(g) one or more final, unappealable judgments against the City not covered by
insurance, or attachments against the property of the City, the operation or result of
-32-

 which, individually or in the aggregate, equal or exceed $25,000,000 shall remain unpaid,
undischarged, unbonded or undismissed for a period of ninety (90) days;
(h) (i) a debt moratorium, debt restructuring, debt adjustment or comparable
restriction is imposed on the repayment when due and payable of the principal of or
interest on any debts of the City; (ii) under any existing or future law of any jurisdiction
relating to bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization or relief of debtors, the City seeks to
have an order for relief entered with respect to it or seeking to adjudicate it insolvent or
bankrupt or seeking reorganization, arrangement, adjustment, winding-up, liquidation,
dissolution, composifion or other relief with respect to it or its debts; (iii) the City seeks
appointment of a receiver, trustee, custodian or other similar official for itself or for any
substantial part of the City's property, or the City shall make a general assignment for the
benefit of its creditors; (iv) there shall be commenced against the City any case,
proceeding or other action of a nature referred to in clause (ii) above and the same shall
remain undismissed; (v) there shall be commenced against the City any case, proceeding
or other action seeking issuance of a warrant of attachment, execution, distraint or similar
process against all or any substantial part of its property which results in the entry of an
order for any such relief which shall not have been vacated, discharged, or stayed or
bonded pending appeal, within sixty (60) days from the entry thereof; (vi) the City takes
action in furtherance of, or indicating its consent to, approval of, or acquiescence in, any
of the acts set forth in clause (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) or (v) above; or (vii) the City shall
generally not, or shall be unable to, or shall admit in wrifing its inability to, pay its debts
as they become due; or
(i)
(a) at any time before the date the City delivers to the Lender the Ratings
Clause Notice, any Rafing Agency shall have downgraded the Rating to or below "Baa3"
(or its equivalent) or "BBB-" (or its equivalent), respectively, or suspended or withdrawn
its rating of the same; or (b) at any time on or after the date the City delivers to the
Lender the Rafings Clause Notice, any Rating Agency shall have downgraded the Rating
to or below "Bal" (or its equivalent) or "BB-H" (or its equivalent), respectively, or
suspended or withdrawn its rating of the same.
Section 7.02. Remedies. If any Event of Default occurs and is continuing, the Lender
may take any or all of the following acfions:
(a) declare the Commitment of the Lender to make Loans or the Term Loan to
be terminated, whereupon such Commitment and obligation shall be terminated;
(b) declare the unpaid principal amount of all outstanding Loans and the Term
Loan, all interest accrued and unpaid thereon, and all other amounts owing or payable
hereunder or under the Note to be immediately due and payable, without presentment,
demand, protest or other notice of any kind, all of which are hereby expressly waived by
the City; and
(c) exercise all rights and remedies available to the Lender under this
Agreement or the Note.
-33-

 provided, however, that upon the occurrence of an actual or deemed entry of an order for
relief with respect to the City under the Bankruptcy Code of the United States, the
obligation of the Lender to make Loans and the Term Loan shall automatically terminate,
and the unpaid principal amount of all outstanding Loans and the Term Loan and all
interest and other amounts as aforesaid shall automatically become due and payable, in
each case without further act of the Lender.
ARTICLE

Vlll

MISCELLANEOUS

Section 8.01. Amendments, Etc.. No amendment or waiver of any provision of this
Agreement or the Note, and no consent to any departure by the City therefrom, shall be effective
unless in wrifing signed by the Lender and the City, and each such waiver or consent shall be
effecfive only in the specific instance and for the specific purpose for which given. In the case of
any such waiver or consent relating to any provision hereof, any Default or Event of Default so
waived or consented to shall be deemed to be cured and not continuing, but no such waiver or
consent shall extend to any other or subsequent Default or Event of Default or impair any right
consequent thereto.
Section 8.02. Notices; Effectiveness; Electronic Communication, (a) Except in the case
of notices and other communications expressly permitted to be given by telephone (and except as
provided in subsection (b) below), all notices and other communications provided for herein
shall be in wrifing and shall be delivered by hand or overnight courier service, mailed by
certified or registered mail or sent by facsimile as follows, and all notices and other
communications expressly permitted hereunder to be given by telephone shall be made to the
applicable telephone number, if to the City or the Lender, to the address, facsimile number,
electronic mail address or telephone number specified for such Person on Schedule 8.02.
Notices and other communications sent by hand or overnight courier service, or mailed by
certified or registered mail, shall be deemed to have been given when received; notices and other
communications sent by facsimile shall be deemed to have been given when sent (except that, if
not given during normal business hours for the recipient, shall be deemed to have been given at
the opening of business on the next Business Day for the recipient). Notices and other
communications delivered through electronic communications to the extent provided in
subsection (b) below, shall be effective as provided in such subsection (c).
(b) Electronic Communications. Notices and other communications to the Lender
hereunder may be delivered or furnished by electronic communicafion (including e-mail and
Internet or intranet websites) pursuant to procedures approved by the Lender.
(c) Unless the Lender otherwi.se prescribes, (i) notices and other communications sent
to an e-mail address shall be deemed received upon the sender's receipt of an acknowledgement
from the intended recipient (such as by the "return receipt requested" function, as available,
return e-mail or other written acknowledgement), and (ii) notices or communications posted to
an Internet or intranet website shall be deemed received upon the deemed receipt by the intended

-34-

 recipient at its e-mail address as described in the foregoing clause (i) of notification that such
notice or communication is available and idenfifying the website address therefor; provided that,
for both clauses (i) and (ii), if such nofice, email or other communication is not sent during the
normal business hours of the recipient, such notice, email or communication shall be deemed to
have been sent at the opening of business on the next business day for the recipient.
(d) In no event shall the Lender or any of its Related Parties have any liability to the
City or any other Person for losses, claims, damages, liabilities or expenses of any kind (whether
in tort, contract or otherwise) arising out of the City's or the Lender's transmission of materials
through the Internet.
(e) Change of Address, Etc. Each of the City and the Lender may change its address,
facsimile or telephone number for notices and other communications hereunder by notice to the
other parties hereto.
(f) Reliance by the Lender. The Lender shall be entitled to rely and act upon any
notices (including telephonic or electronic notices) purportedly given by or on behalf of the City
even if (i) such notices were not made in a manner specified herein, were incomplete or were not
preceded or followed by any other form of notice specified herein, or (ii) the terms thereof, as
understood by the recipient, varied from any confirmation thereof. The City shall indemnify the
Lender and the Related Parties of the Lender from all losses, costs, expenses and liabilifies
resulting from the reliance by such Person on each notice purportedly given by or on behalf of
the City. All telephonic notices to and other telephonic communications with the Lender may be
recorded by the Lender, and each of the parties hereto hereby consents to such recording.
Section 8.03. No Waiver; Cumulative Remedies; Enforcement. No failure by the Lender
to exercise, and no delay by the Lender in exercising, any right, remedy, power or privilege
hereunder or under, the Note or the Ordinance shall operate as a waiver thereof; nor shall any
single or partial exercise of any right, remedy, power or privilege hereunder preclude any other
or further exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right, remedy, power or privilege. The
rights, remedies, powers and privileges herein provided, and provided under the Note and the
Ordinance, are cumulative and not exclusive of any rights, remedies, powers and privileges
provided by law.
Section 8.04. Costs and Expenses; Damage Waiver, (a) The City shall pay (i) promptly
after closing and upon receipt of an invoice, all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred by
the Lender (including the reasonable fees, charges and disbursements of counsel for the Lender),
in connection with the preparation, negotiation, execution, delivery and administration of this
Agreement and the Note or any amendments, modifications or waivers of the provisions hereof
or thereof, and (ii) all out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Lender (including the fees, charges
and disbursements of any counsel for the Lender), and shall pay all fees and time charges for
attorneys who may be employees of the Lender, in connection with the enforcement or
protection of its rights (A) in connection with this Agreement, the Note and the Ordinance,
including its rights under this Section, or (B) in connection with the Loans and the Term Loan
made hereunder, including all such out-of-pocket expenses incurred during any workout,
restructuring or negotiations in respect of such Loans or the Term Loan.

-35-

 (b) Indemnification by the City. To the extent permitted by Law, the City shall
indemnify the Lender (and any sub-agent thereoO and each Related Party of any of the Lender
(each such Person being called an "Indemnitee") against, and hold each Indemnitee harmless
from, any and all losses, claims, damages, liabilities and related expenses (including the
reasonable fees, charges and disbursements of any counsel for any Indemnitee), and .shall
indemnify and hold harmless each Indemnitee from all fees and time charges and disbursements
for attorneys who may be employees of any Indemnitee, incurred by any Indemnitee or asserted
against any Indemnitee by any Person (including the City) other than such Indemnitee and its
Related Parties arising out of, in connection with, or as a result of (i) the execution or delivery of
this Agreement, the Note, the Ordinance or any agreement or instrument contemplated hereby or
thereby, the performance by the parties hereto of their respective obligations hereunder or
thereunder, the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby, or, in the case
of the Lender (and any sub-agent thereof) and its Related Parties only, the administration of this
Agreement, the Note and the Ordinance (including in respect of any matters addressed in Section
3.01), (ii) any Loan, the Term Loan or the use or proposed u.se of the proceeds therefrom, or
(iii) any actual or prospective claim, litigafion, investigafion or proceeding relating to any of the
foregoing, whether based on contract, tort or any other theory, whether brought by a third party
or by the City, and regardless of whether any Indemnitee is a party thereto; provided that such
indemnity shall not, as to any Indemnitee, be available to the extent that such los.ses, claims,
damages, liabilities or related expenses (x) are determined by a court of competent jurisdiction
by final and nonappealable judgment to have resulted from the gross negligence or willful
misconduct of such Indemnitee or (y) result from a claim brought by the City or any other party
against an Indemnitee for breach in bad faith of such Indemnitee's obligations hereunder, under
the Note or the Ordinance, if the City or other party has obtained a final and nonappealable
judgment in its favor on such claim as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. Without
limiting the provisions of Section 3.01(c), this Section 8.04(b) shall not apply with respect to
Taxes other than any Taxes that represent losses, claims, damages, etc. arising from any non-Tax
claim.
(c) Waiver of Consequential Damages, Etc. To the fullest extent permitted by
applicable law, the City shall not assert, and hereby waives, and acknowledges that no other
Person shall have, any claim against any Indemnitee, on any theory of liability, for special,
indirect, consequential or punitive damages (as opposed to direct or actual damages) arising out
of, in connection with, or as a result of, this Agreement, the Note, the Ordinance or any
agreement or instrument contemplated hereby, the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby,
any Loans or the Term Loan or the use of the proceeds thereof. No Indemnitee referred to in
subsection (b) above shall be liable for any damages arising from the use by unintended
recipients of any information or other materials distributed to such unintended recipients by such
Indemnitee through telecommunications, electronic or other information transmission systems in
connection with this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance or the transactions contemplated
hereby or thereby other than for direct or actual damages resulting from the gross negligence or
willful misconduct of such Indemnitee as determined by a final and nonappealable judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(d) Payments. All amounts due under this Section shall be payable not later than sixty
(60) days after demand therefor.
-36-

 (e) Survival. The agreements in this Section shall survive the termination of this
Agreement and the repayment, satisfaction or discharge of all the other Obligations.
Section 8.05. Payments Set Aside. To the extent that any payment by or on behalf of the
City is made to the Lender and such payment or any part thereof is subsequently invalidated,
declared to be fraudulent or preferential, set aside or required (including pursuant to any
settlement entered into by the Lender in its discretion) to be repaid to a trustee, receiver or any
other party, in connection with any proceeding under any Debtor Relief Law or otherwise, then
to the extent of such recovery, the obligation or part thereof originally intended to be satisfied
shall be revived and continued in full force and effect as if such payment had not been made.
Section 8.06.

Successors and A.ssigns; Participations.

(a) Successors and Assigns Generally. The provisions of this Agreement shall be
binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto and their respective successors and
assigns permitted hereby, except that the City may not assign or otherwise transfer any of its
rights or obligafions hereunder without the prior written consent of the Lender. Nothing in this
Agreement, expressed or implied, shall be construed to confer upon any Person (other than the
parties hereto, their respective successors and assigns permitted hereby, participants to the extent
provided in subsection (b) of this Section and, to the extent expressly contemplated hereby, the
Related Parties of the Lender) any legal or equitable right, remedy or claim under or by reason of
this Agreement.
(b) Participations. The Lender shall have the right to grant participations in all or a
portion of the Lender's rights and/or obligations under this Agreement (including all or a portion
of its Commitment and/or the Loans and the Term Loan owing to it) to one or more other
banking insfitutions (each such person a "Participant"), and such Participants shall be entitled to
the benefits of this Agreement, including, without limitation, Sections 3.01 and 3.02 hereof, to
the same extent as if they were a direct party hereto; provided that (i) the Lender's obligations
under this Agreement shall remain unchanged, (ii) the Lender shall remain solely responsible to
the other parties hereto for the performance of such obligations and (iii) the City, shall continue
to deal solely and directly with the Lender in connection with the Lender's rights and obligations
under this Agreement, and provided further that no such Participant shall be entitled to receive
payment hereunder of any amount greater than the amount which would have been payable had
the Lender not granted a participation to such Participant. Upon the grant of a participation of
the Lender's rights and/or obligations under this Agreement, the Lender will promptly notify the
City ofthe Participant and the proportionate amount granted under such participation.
(c) Certain Pledges. The Lender may at any time pledge or assign a security interest in
all or any portion of its rights under this Agreement (including under its Note, if any) to secure
obligations of the Lender, including any pledge or assignment to secure obligations to a Federal
Reserve Bank; provided that no such pledge or assignment shall release the Lender from any of
its obligations hereunder or substitute any such pledgee or assignee for the Lender as a party
hereto.

-37-

 Section 8.07. Treatment of Certain Information; Confidentiality Each ofthe City and the
Lender agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the Information (as defined below), except that
Information may be disclosed (a) to its Affiliates and to its Related Parties (it being understood
that the Persons to whom such disclosure is made will be informed of the confidential nature of
such Information and instructed to keep such Informafion confidential), (b) to the extent required
or requested by any regulatory authority purporting to have jurisdiction over such Person or its
Related Parties (including any self-regulatory authority, such as the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners), (c) to the extent required by applicable laws or regulations or by any
subpoena or similar legal process, (d) to any other party hereto, (e) in connection with the
exercise of any remedies hereunder or under the Note or any action or proceeding relating to this
Agreement or the Note or the enforcement of rights hereunder or thereunder, (0 subject to an
agreement containing provisions substantially the same as those of this Section, to (i) any
assignee of or Participant in, or any prospective assignee of or Participant in, any of its rights and
obligations under this Agreement or (ii) any actual or prospective party (or its Related Parties) to
any swap, derivative or other transaction under which payments are to be made by reference to
the City and its obligations, this Agreement or payments hereunder, (g) on a confidential basis to
(i) any rafing agency in connection with rating the City or the credit facilities provided
hereunder or (ii) the CUSIP Service Bureau or any similar agency in connection with the
issuance and monitoring of CUSIP numbers or other market identifiers with respect to the credit
facilities provided hereunder, (h) with the consent of the City or (i) to the extent such
Information (x) becomes publicly available other than as a result of a breach of this Section or
(y) becomes available to the Lender or any of its Affiliates on a nonconfidential basis from a
source other than the City. For purposes of this Section, "Information" means all information
received from the City relating to the City or any of their respective businesses, other than any
such information that is available to the Lender on a nonconfidential basis prior to disclosure by
the City, provided that, in the case of information received from the City after the date hereof,
such information is clearly identified at the time of delivery as confidenfial. The Lender
acknowledges that (a) the Information may include material non-public information concerning
the City, as the case may be, (b) it has developed compliance procedures regarding the use of
material non-public information and (c) it will handle such material non-public information.
Section 8.08. Counterparts; Integration; Effectiveness. This Agreement may be executed
in counterparts (and by different parties hereto in different counterparts), each of which shall
constitute an original, but all of which when taken together shall constitute a single contract.
This Agreement, the Ordinance and the Note constitute the entire contract among the parties
relating to the subject matter hereof and supersede any and all previous agreements and
understandings, oral or written, relating to the subject matter hereof. Except as provided in
Section 4.01, this Agreement shall become effective when it shall have been executed by the
Lender and when the Lender shall have received counterparts hereof that, when taken together,
bear the signatures of each of the other parties hereto. Delivery of an executed counterpart of a
signature page of this Agreement by facsimile or other electronic imaging means {e.g., "pdf or
" t i f ) shall be effective as delivery of a manually executed counterpart of this Agreement.
Section 8.09. Survival of Representations and Warranties. All representations and
warranfies made hereunder and in the Ordinance or any other document delivered pursuant
hereto or thereto or in connection herewith or therewith shall survive the execution and delivery
-38-

 hereof and thereof Such representations and warranties have been or will be relied upon by the
Lender, regardless of any investigation made by the Lender or on its behalf and notwithstanding
that the Lender may have had notice or knowledge of any Default at the time of any Borrowing,
and shall continue in full force and effect as long as any Loan, the Term Loan or any other
Obligation hereunder shall remain unpaid or unsatisfied.
Section 8.10. Severability. If any provision of this Agreement, the Note or the Ordinance
is held to be illegal, invalid or unenforceable, (a) the legality, validity and enforceability of the
remaining provisions of this Agreement, the Note and the Ordinance shall not be affected or
impaired thereby and (b) the parties shall endeavor in good faith negotiations to replace the
illegal, invalid or unenforceable provisions with valid provisions the economic effect of which
comes as close as possible to that of the illegal, invalid or unenforceable provisions. The
invalidity of a provision in a particular jurisdiction shall not invalidate or render unenforceable
such provision in any other jurisdiction.
Section 8.11.

Governing Law; Jurisdiction Etc. (a) GovERNtNG LAW. THIS AGREEMENT

SHALL BE GOVERNED BY, AND CONSTRUED IN ACCORDANCE WITH, THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF
NEW YORK WITHOUT GIVING EFFECT TO CONFLICTS OF LAWS PROVISIONS (OTHER THAN NEW
YORK GENERAL OBLIGATIONS LAWS 5-1401 AND 5-1402); PROVIDED THAT THE OBLIGATIONS OF
CITY HEREUNDER SHALL BE GOVERNED BY, AND CONSTRUED IN ACCORDANCE WITH, THE LAW OF
THE STATE OF ILLINOIS.
(b)
SUBMISSION TO JURISDICTION.
CITY IRREVOCABLY AND UNCONDITIONALLY
SUBMITS, FOR ITSELF AND ITS PROPERTY, TO THE NONEXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS OF
THE STATE OF ILLINOIS SITTING IN COOK COUNTY AND OF THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE NORTHERN DISTRICT OF ILLINOIS, AND ANY APPELLATE COURT FROM ANY THEREOF, IN
ANY ACTION OR PROCEEDING ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO THIS AGREEMENT OR ANY OTHER
L O A N D O C U M E N T , OR FOR R E C O G N I T I O N OR ENFORCEMENT OF A N Y J U D G M E N T , A N D EACH OF T H E

PARTIES HERETO IRREVOCABLY AND UNCONDITIONALLY AGREES THAT ALL CLAIMS IN RESPECT OF
A N Y SUCH A C T I O N OR PROCEEDING MAY BE HEARD AND DETERMINED IN SUCH STATE COURTS OR,
TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE L A W S , IN SUCH FEDERAL COURTS. EACH OF
T H E PARTIES HERETO AGREES T H A T A F I N A L J U D G M E N T I N A N Y SUCH A C T I O N OR PROCEEDING
S H A L L BE C O N C L U S I V E A N D M A Y BE ENFORCED

I N OTHER JURISDICTIONS

BY SUIT O N T H E

J U D G M E N T OR I N A N Y OTHER M A N N E R PROVIDED B Y L A W . N O T H I N G I N T H I S A G R E E M E N T , T H E

NOTE OR THE ORDINANCE SHALL AFFECT ANY RIGHT THAT THE LENDER MAY OTHERWISE HAVE TO
BRING ANY ACTION OR PROCEEDING RELATING TO THIS AGREEMENT, THE NOTE OR THE
ORDINANCE AGAINST CITY OR ANY OF ITS PROPERTIES IN THE COURTS OF ANY OTHER
JURISDICTION.
(c)
WAIVER OF VENUE. THE LENDER HEREBY SUBMITS TO THE JURISDICTION OF ANY
FEDERAL COURT SITTING IN THE CITY OF CHICAGO OVER ANY PROCEEDING ARISING OUT OF THE
LENDER'S ALLEGED FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ITS OBLIGATIONS HEREUNDER. THE LENDER

HEREBY WAIVES ANY OBJECTION THAT THE LENDER MAY NOW OR HEREAFTER HAVE TO THE
LAYING OF THE VENUE OF ANY SUCH SUIT, ACTION OR PROCEEDING AND ANY CLAIM THAT SUCH
SUIT, ACTION OR PROCEEDING BROUGHT IN SUCH A COURT HAS BEEN BROUGHT IN AN
INCONVENIENT FORUM.

-39-

 (d)
SERVICE OF PROCESS. EACH PARTY HERETO IRREVOCABLY CONSENTS TO SERVICE OF
PROCESS I N T H E MANNER PROVIDED FOR NOTICES IN SECTION 8.02. NOTHING IN THIS AGREEMENT
WILL AFFECT THE RIGHT OF ANY PARTY HERETO TO SERVE PROCESS IN ANY OTHER MANNER
PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW.

(e) To the fullest extent permitted by law, the City represents that it is subject to suit
with respect to its Obligations under this Agreement and the Note and that no sovereign
immunity exists under Illinois law, as of the date that this Agreement is executed and delivered
by the City, with respect to the City's contractual obligations under this Agreement and the Note.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, (i) in accordance with the laws of the
State of Illinois, the City shall not waive any sovereign immunities from fime to time available
under the laws of the State of Illinois as to jurisdiction, procedures and remedies, (ii) subject to
clause (i) above, this Agreement and the Note shall otherwise be fully enforceable as a valid and
binding contract as and to the extent provided by applicable law and, the City may not claim
sovereign immunity with respect to any Obligations under this Agreement or the Note; and
(iii) nothing in this Agreement or the Note shall be deemed to create any rights of action for
persons or entities not a party to this Agreement or the Note or to circumvent any of the
immunities contained in the Local Government and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity
Act, 745 ILCS 10/1-101 etseq.,iifi amended.
Section 8.12.

Waiver of Jury Trial. EACH PARTY HERETO HEREBY IRREVOCABLY WAIVES,

TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, ANY RIGHT IT MAY HAVE TO A TRIAL BY
JURY IN ANY LEGAL PROCEEDING DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO THIS
AGREEMENT, THE NOTE OR THE ORDINANCE OR THE TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED HEREBY OR
THEREBY (WHETHER BASED ON CONTRACT, TORT OR ANY OTHER THEORY). EACH PARTY HERETO
(A) CERTIFIES THAT NO REPRESENTATIVE, AGENT OR ATTORNEY OF ANY OTHER PERSON HAS
REPRESENTED, EXPRESSLY OR OTHERWISE, THAT SUCH OTHER PERSON WOULD NOT, IN THE EVENT
OF LITIGATION, SEEK TO ENFORCE THE FOREGOING WAIVER AND (B) ACKNOWLEDGES THAT IT AND
THE OTHER PARTIES HERETO HAVE BEEN INDUCED TO ENTER INTO THIS AGREEMENT AND THE NOTE
BY, AMONG OTHER THINGS, THE MUTUAL WAIVERS AND CERTIFICATIONS IN THIS SECTION.

Section 8.13. No Advisory or Fiduciary Relationship. In connection with all aspects of
each transaction contemplated hereby (including in connection with any amendment, waiver or
other modification hereof, the Note or the Ordinance), the City acknowledges and agrees, and
acknowledges its Affiliates' understanding, lhat: (a) (i) the services regarding this Agreement
provided by the Lender and any Affiliate thereof are arm's-length commercial transactions
between the City, on the one hand, and the Lender and its Affiliates, on the other hand, (ii) the
City has consulted its own legal, accounting, regulatory and tax advisors to the extent it has
deemed appropriate, and (iii) the City is capable of evaluating, and understands and accepts, the
terms, risks and conditions of the transactions contemplated hereby and by the Note and the
Ordinance; (b) (i) the Lender and its Affiliates each is and has been acfing solely as a principal
and, except as expressly agreed in writing by the relevant parfies, has not been, is not, and will
not be acting as an advisor (municipal,financialor otherwise), agent or fiduciary, for the City, or
any other Person and (ii) neither the Lender nor any of its Affiliates has any obligation to the
City with respect to the transactions contemplated hereby except those obligations expressly .set
forth herein, in the Note and in the Ordinance; and (c) the Lender and its Affiliates may be

-40-

 engaged in a broad range of transactions that involve interests that differ from those of the City,
and neither the Lender nor any of its Affiliates has any obligation to disclose any of such
interests to the City. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the City, hereby waives and releases
any claims that it may have against the Lender or any of its Affiliates with respect to any breach
or alleged breach of agency or fiduciary duty in connection with any aspect of any transactions
contemplated hereby.
Section 8.14. Electronic E.xecution of Certain Documents. The words "execute,"
"execution," "signed," "signature," and words of like import in any in any amendment or other
modification hereof (including waivers and consents) shall be deemed to include electronic
signatures, the electronic matching of assignment terms and contract formations on electronic
platforms approved by the Lender, or the keeping of records in electronic form, each of which
shall be of the same legal effect, validity or enforceability as a manually executed signature or
the use of a paper-based recordkeeping system, as the case may be, to the extent and as provided
for in any applicable law, including the Federal Electronic Signatures in Global and National
Commerce Act, the New York State Electronic Signatures and Records Act, or any other similar
state laws based on the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act.
Section 8.15. USA Patriot Act. The Lender is subject to the Patriot Act and hereby
notifies the City that pursuant to the requirements of the Patriot Act, it is required to obtain,
verify and record information that identifies the City, which information includes the name and
address of the City and other information that will allow the Lender to idenfify the City in
accordance with the Act. The City shall, promptly following a request by the Lender, provide all
documentation and other information that the Lender requests in order to comply with its
ongoing obligations under applicable "know your customer" and anti-money laundering rules
and regulations, including the Patriot Act.
Section 8.16. Time of the Essence. Time is of the essence of this Agreement, the Note
and the Ordinance.
Section 8.17. Entire Agreement. THIS AGREEMENT, THE NOTE AND THE ORDINANCE
REPRESENT THE FINAL AGREEMENT AMONG THE PARTIES AND MAY NOT BE CONTRADICTED BY
EVIDENCE OF PRIOR, CONTEMPORANEOUS, OR SUBSEQUENT ORAL AGREEMENTS OF THE
PARTIES. THERE ARE NO UNWRITTEN ORAL AGREEMENTS A.MONG THE PARTIES.
Section 8.18. No Third-Party Rights. Nothing in this Agreement, whether express or
implied, shall be construed to give to any Person other than the parties hereto any legal or
equitable right, remedy or claim under or in respect of this Agreement, which is intended for the
sole and exclusive benefit of the parties hereto.
Section 8.19. Amendment and Restatement. This Agreement shall become effective on
the Closing Date and shall supersede all provisions of the Original Agreement. From and after
the Closing Date, all references made to the Original Agreement in any document or other
instrument shall without more be deemed to refer to this Agreement.
[SIGNATURE PAGES TO FOLLOW]

-41-

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties liereto.haye-caused this Agreement, to be duly executed
as-of the datefirstabove.',wriften.
CITY OF CHICAGO

BANK OF AMERICA, N.A;

By.:.
Name:
1'itle:

.[Signature Piigc lo Anicniitd ;iiul Kestalud Revolving Credit Agreement 

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto haye.caused this Agreement to be duly executed
as of the date.fir.st abdvewrittcn.

CIT.Y OF CHICAGO

By:.
Name:
Title:

BANK OF Ai/tERiCA,

N.A.

[Sigiialijic.Pagc to. Aniciidcd'ai'id Restated Revolving Credit AgrccniciU]

 SCHEDULE 8.02
LENDER'S LENDING OFFICE,
CERTAIN ADDRESSES FOR NOTICES

City^s Account
(for loan proceeds):

BANK OF AMERICA, AS LENDER:

Bank of America, N.A.

 EXHIBIT A
FORM OF LOAN NOTICE

Date::

..201_

To; -Bankof AmericaVN.A.

Ladies and Gentlemen:
Reference is .made to.thaf certain Amended and Restated Revolving Credit Agreement,
dated as} of ;Sept,emb'er'16, 2014 (as amended, restated, extended, supplemented or otherwise
modified in writing from time to time, the "Agreement;" the terms defined therein being used
herein as therein defined), between City of Cliicago (the "Citv"), and Bank of America, N:A.
(tlie ''Lender").
The undersigned hereby requests (select one):
I I . A Borrowihg of Loans

O

A conversion or coiifinuafion of Loans

1.

On

2.

In the amount of $

3.

Comprised of
[Type of Loan Requested]

4.

FpivEurodpllar Rate Loaiis:; \yidi.an Interest Period of.
[Eurodoliar Rate Loan] [Floating Rate Loan]

5.

To the following account:

[Gjty's. Account]

(a Business Day).
.
.

months.

 The Borrowing, if any, requested herein complies with the proviso to the first sentence of
Section 2.01 of the Agreement.

CITY OF CHICAGO

By:.
Name:.
Title:

A-2

 EXHIBIT B
FORM OF NOTE

$200,000,000.00

March

2013

FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the undersigned CITY OF CHICAGO (the "City"), hereby promises
to BANK OF AMERICA, N.A. or registered assigns (the "Lender"), in accordance with the

to pay
provisions of the Agreement (as hereinafter defined), the principal amount of each Loan and the
Term Loan from time to time made by the Lender to the City under that certain Revolving Credit
Agreement, dated as of March 1, 2013 (as amended, restated, extended, supplemented or
otherwise modified in writing from time to time, the "Agreement;" the terms defined therein
being used herein as therein defined), between the City and the Lender.

The City promises to pay interest on the unpaid principal amount of each Loan and the
Term Loan from the date of such Loan and the Term Loan until such principal amount is paid in
full, at such interest rates and at such times as provided in the Agreement. All payments of
principal and interest shall be made to the Lender in Dollars in immediately available funds at
the Lender's Lending Office. If any amount is not paid in full when due hereunder, such unpaid
amount shall bear interest, to be paid upon demand, from the due date thereof until the date of
actual payment (and before as well as after judgment) computed at the per annum rate .set forth in
the Agreement.
This Note is the Note referred to in the Agreement, is entitled to the benefits thereof and
may be prepaid in whole or in part subject to the terms and conditions provided therein. Upon
the occurrence and continuation of one or more of the Events of Default specified in the
Agreement, all amounts then remaining unpaid on this Note shall become, or may be declared to
be, immediately due and payable all as provided in the Agreement. The Loans and the Term
Loan made by the Lender shall be evidenced by one or more loan accounts or records maintained
by the Lender in the ordinary course of business. The Lender may al.so attach schedules to this
Note and endorse thereon the date, amount and maturity of its Loans and the Term Loan and
payments with respect thereto.
The City, for itself, its successors and assigns, hereby waives diligence, presentment,
protest and demand and notice of protest, demand, dishonor and non-payment of this Note.

 THIS NOTE SHALL BE GOVERNED BY, AND CONSTRUED IN ACCORDANCE WITH, THE LAWS OF
THE STATE OF ILLINOIS.
CITY OF CHICAGO

By:.
Name:
Title:

B-2

 LOANS AND PAYMENTS WITH RESPECT THERETO

DATE

AMOUNT OF
LOAN MADE

AMOUNT OF
PRINCIPAL OR
INTEREST PAID THIS
DATE

B-3

OUTSTANDING
PRINCIPAL BALANCE
THIS DATE

NOTATION
MADE BY

 EXHIBIT C
FORM OF COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE

Financial Statement Date:
TO:

,

Bank of America, N . A . , as Lender

Ladies and Gentlemen:
Reference is made to that certain Amended and Restated Revolving Credit Agreement,
dated as of September 16, 2014 (as amended, restated, extended, supplemented or otherwise
modified in writing from time to time, the "Agreement;" the terms defined therein being used
herein as therein defined), between City of Chicago (the "Cir\>"), and Bank of America, N.A.,
(the "Lender").
The undersigned Authorized Officer hereby certifies as of the date hereof that he/she is
the
of the City, and that, as such, he/she is authorized to
execute and deliver this Certificate to the Lender on the behalf of the City, and that:
1. Attached hereto as Schedule 1 are the year-end audited financial statements required
by Section 6.0l(b)(i) of the Agreement for the fiscal year of the City ended as of the above date,
together with the report and opinion of an independent certified public accountant required by
such section.
2. The undersigned has reviewed and is familiar with the terms of the Agreement and
has made, or has caused to be made under his/her supervision, a detailed review of the
transactions and condition (financial or otherwise) of the City during the accounting period
covered by the attached financial statements.
3. A review of the activities of the City during such fiscal period has been made under
the supervision of the undersigned with a view to determining whether during such fiscal period
the City performed and observed all its Obligations under the Agreement and the Note, and
[select one:]
[to the best knowledge of the undersigned during suchfiscalperiod, the City
performed and observed each covenant and condition of the Agreement, the Note and the
Ordinance applicable to it, and no Default has occurred and is continuing.]
—or-[the rollowing covenants or conditions have not been perf ormed or observed and the
following is a list of each such Default and its nature and status:]

 4. The representations and warranties of the City contained in Article V of the
Agreement, and/or any representations and warranties of the City that are contained in any
document furnished at any time under or in connection with the Agreement, the Note and the
Ordinance, are true and correct on and as of the date hereof, except to the extent that such
representafions and warranties specifically refer to an earlier date, in which case they are true and
correct as of such earlier date, and except that for purposes of this Compliance Certificate, the
representations and warranties contained in Section 5.09 of the Agreement shall be deemed to
refer to the most recent statements furnished pursuant to clauses (b)(i) and (b)(ii), respectively, of
Section 6.01(b) of the Agreement, including the statements in connection with which this
Compliance Certificate is delivered.
IN

WITNESS WHEREOF,

the undersigned has executed this Certificate as of

CITY OF CHICAGO

By:.
Name:.
Title:

C-2

 EXHIBIT D
FORM OF RATINGS CLAUSE NOTICE

[Date]

To:

Bank of America, N.A., as Lender

Ladies and Gentlemen:
Reference is made to that certain Amended and Restated Revolving Credit Agreement,
dated as of September 16, 2014 (as amended, restated, extended, supplemented or otherwi.se
modified in writing from time to time, the "Agreement;" the terms defined therein being used
herein as therein defined), between City of Chicago (the "Cit}'"), and Bank of America, N.A.,
(the "Lender").
The undersigned Authorized Officer hereby certifies as of the date hereof that he/she is
the
of the City, and that, as such, he/she is authorized to
execute and deliver this Certificate to the Lender on the behalf of the City, and lhat:
1. As of the date hereof, the City is not a party to a Bank Agreement relating to any
General Obligation Debt that contains a more restrictive ratings downgrade event of default than
the provision found in Section 7.0l(i)(b) hereof.
2. The representations and warranties of the City contained in Article V of the
Agreement, and/or any representations and warranfies of the City that are contained in any
document furnished at any time under or in connection with the Agreement, the Note and the
Ordinance, are true and correct on and as of the date hereof, except to the extent that such
representations and warranties specifically refer to an earlier date, in which case they are true and
correct as of such eariier date, and except that for purposes of this Compliance Certificate, the
representations and warranties contained in Section 5.09 of the Agreement shall be deemed to
refer to the most recent statements furnished pursuant to clauses (b)(i) and (b)(ii), respectively, of
Section 6.01(b) of the Agreement, including the statements in connection with which this
Compliance Certificate is delivered.
3.

No Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing.

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF,

the undersigned has executed this Certificate as of the date first

written above.
CITY OF CHICAGO

By:.
Name:.
Title:

D-2

 EXHIBIT 
ORDINANCE

[See Attached]

S T A T E OF ILLINOIS )

COUN I Y OF COOK

>SS.
)

I, SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk of ihc Cily of Chicago in the Couniy of Cook .nnd
Slate of Illinois, DO HEREBY CERTIFY thai the annexed and foregoing is a true and correct
copy of that certain ordinance now on file in my office Aulhori/inu Issoance Of Cilv Of Chicaiio
General Obligation Ponds. Scries 2012 and Amendments I'o Commercial Pat>er Proeram.
I

DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was passed by the City Council of tlie

said City of Chicago on fourteenth CM"*^ day of March. 2012.
I

DO F U R T H E R C E R T I F Y that the vote on the question of the passage of the said

ordinance by the said City Council was taken by yeas and nays and recorded in the Journal of the
Proceedings ofthe said City Council, and that the result of said vote so taken was as follows, lo
wit:
Yeas 47

Nays 0

I D O F U R T H E R C E R T I F Y that the said ordinance was delivered lo the Mayor of the .said
City of Chicago afler the passage thereof by the said City Council, without delay, by the City
Clerk of tJie said City of Chicago, and thai the said Mayor did approve and sign said ordinance on
the sixlecnlh (16"^ day of March. 2012.
I D O F U R T H E R C E R T I F Y that the original, of which the foregoing is a true copy, is
entrusted to my care for safekeeping, and that I am Ihc lawful keeper of the same.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunio set my
hand and allixcd the corporate seal of the Cily of
Chicago aforesaid, al Ihc said City, in llie Couniy and
Stale

aforesaid,

Ihis

Scplember, 2014.
[T.P.]

SUSANAA MENDOZA

fifteenth (15'*') day of

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21707

The following is said ordinance as passed:
WHEREAS, the City of Ctvcago (the 'City") Is a body politic and corporate under the laws
of the Stale of Illinois and a home rule unit under Article Vll of the Illinois Constitution of 1970;;
and .
'
.
WHEREAS, the City has heretofore authorized tlie issuance of its general ot^ligation .
• bonds and notes and has established a commercial paper program authbrcung the'issuance of
its general obligation commercial paper from time to time; and
WHEREAS, the City's general obligation bonds and notes currently outstanding and its
general obligation commerciat paper currently or hereafter outstanding frorh time to time-(collectiycly, the 'Outstanding Indebtedness') mature and are subject to optional and mandatory
redemption as provided in the . respective proceedings authorizing the. Outstanding
Indebtedness; and'
WHEREAS, the Cily has heretofore entered into agreements of the type described in
Section 14 hereof whictJ are in existence as .of the date of adoption of this Ordinance (the
'Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements'}: and
WHEREAS, it is in ttie t)est interests of the inhabitants of the City and necessary for the
welfare of the government and affairs of the City to authorize (i) refunding all or a portion of the Outslamfing tndetJledness and (ii)terminating, amending or otherwise modifying all or anyportion of the Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements and paying any settlement,
breakage or termination amounts that may be due and owing in connection therewith, in order to •
achieve, debt service' savings for Ihe City, restructure debt, service of the Outstanding
Indebtedness or reduce, limit or manage the City's exposure to interest rate risk (collectively,
the 'Refunding PurposesT); and
• WHEREAS, it is in the best Interests of the inhabitants of the City and necessary for the
welfare of the government and affairs of the City to finaricd (i) public right-of-way infrastructure
improvements in City rreightxjrtwods. Including street and alley construction and improvements.
Jighling improvements, sidewalk improvements and repJacemenl, and curb afjd gutter repairs '
^ n d replacement; (S) infrastructure Imprwemerits to enhance the development of economic
activity., including industrial street construction and improvemenls, streetscaplng, -medianlandscaping, demolition of hazardous, vacant or dilapidated Ixiildings that pose a threat to
public safety arxJ welfare, shorelirie reconstruction, riveriwnk stabilization, resWential and
commercial infrastructure redevelopment and railroad viaduct clearance improvements;
(iii) transpottation improvements (to City property and fadCties an'd to Dropertv and facilities

 21708

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL--CHICAGO

3/14/2012

located within the City limits which are owned by other governmental entities), including street
resurfacing, bridge and freight tunnel rehabilitation, traffic signal modernization, new traffic
signal installation, intersection safely improvements and transit facility improvements; (iv) grants
or loans to assist not-for-profit organizalions or educational or cultural institutions, or to assist
other municipal corporations, units ot local government, school districts, the State of Illinois or
the United States of America; (v) cash flow needs of the City; (vi) the acquisition of personal
property, including, but not limited to. computer hardware and software, vehicles or other capital
items useful or necessary for City purposes; (vii) the duly authorized acquisition of improved and
unimproved real property within the City for munidpal, industrial, commercial or residential
purposes, or any combination thereof, and the improvement, demolition and/or remediation of
any such properly; (viii) constructing, equipping, altering and repairing various municipal
facilities including fire stations, police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and other
municipal facilities'; (ix)the enhancement of economic development within the City by making
direct grants or loans to, or deposits to funds or accounts to secure the obligations of.
not-for-profit or for-profit organizations doing business or seeking to do business in the City;
(x)the funding of (A) judgments entered against the City. (B) certain settlements or other
payments required to be made by the City as a condition to the resolution of litigation or
threatened litigation or arbitration and (C) such escrow accounts or other reserves as shall be
deemed necessary for any of said purposes; (xi) the payment of certain contributions (the
'Pension Conlnbutions") to the Policemen's /Annuity and Benefit Fund, the Firemen's Annuity
and Benefit Fund, the Municipal Employees'. Officers' and Officials' Annuity and Benefit Fund
and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund (collectively, the
'Pension Funds'); (xii) the provision of facilities, services and equipment to protect and enhance
public safety, including,.but not limited to, increased costs for jsolice and fire protection services,
emergency medical .services, staffing at the City's emergency call center and other City
facilities, and enhanced security measures at.airports and other major City facilities; and (xiii)
acquiring motor vehicles for a term of years or lease period (the purposes described in clauses
(i) through (xiii) above being referred to herein as the 'Project"); and
W H E R E A S , the cost of the Refunding Purposes and the Project is estimated to be not
less than $900,000,000 and the Gily expects to pay a portion of such costs by borrowing money
and issuing its general obligation bonds in one or more series and at one or more times in the
aggregate principal amount 6f not to exceed $900,000,000 (plus the amount of any original
issue discount as herein provided); and
W H E R E A S , the City has determined that it is advisable and necessary to authorize the
borrowing of the sum necessary at this time for any or all of the purposes of (i) paying costs of
the Refunding Purposes, (ii) paying costs of the Project, including capitalizing or funding such
interest on the bonds herein authorized for said purpose as rnay be necessary. (Iii) capitalizing
or funding interest on Outstanding Indebtedness and (iv) paying the 'expenses of issuing the
bonds herein authorized for the purposes described herein, and in evidence thereof to authorize
the issuance of its General Obligalion Bonds (the 'Bonds'), in one or more series and al one or

 3/14/2012

R E P O R T S OF C O M M I T T E E S

21709

more times as herein provided, such borrowing being for a proper public purpose and in the
public interest, and the Cily, by virtue of its constitutional home rule powers and all laws
applicable thereto, has the power to issue such Bonds; and
WHEREAS, the Bonds rnay.include one or more series of bonds Ihe interest on which is.
as designated by series, either includible or excludable from gross income for federal income
tax purposes under Section 103 of the Interna! Revenue Code of 1986. as amended (the
-Code'); and
WHEREAS, the Clly-has authorized the issuance of certain bonds, notes and commercial
paper of the City secured by and payable, from a specified revenue source, including, without
limitation, airport revenues, sales tax revenues, motor fuel tax revenues, water system revenues
and sewer system revenues (such bonds and notes being hereinafter referred to as .'Revenue
Bonds and Notes' and such commercial paper tieing hereinafter^referred to as 'Revenue
Commercial Paper^\ and
• WHEREAS, the .city has' deterrnined that it is necessary to provide for various
restructuring-arnendments (i) to the Outstanding Indebtedness, (11) to the Revenue Bonds and
Notes currently outstanding and the Revenue Commercial Paper currently or hereafter
outstanding from time to time (colieclively, \he'Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness") and (iii) to
the extent issued and outstanding from tihie to time in the future, the Bonds; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is necessary lo amend certain sections of the
ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City of Chicago on May 1, 2002. (the "2002
Ordinance"); vvhich authorized, the-issuance of Cornmercial Paper Notes Series A and Series B
in an amount not to exceed $200,000;000 iand pursuant to which Ihe Cily proposed to establish
a commercial, paper program, an auction rate securities program, a variable rate securities
program arid a line of credit program (collectively, the -'Borrowing Plan"); and
' : WHEREAS, the Borrowing p/an authorizes the issuance of one or more series of
Authorized Debt (as defined in the 2002 Ordinance) for (i)the payment, or reimbursement of the
City for the .payment, of the cost of all or any portion, of any capital , project approved by City
Council, (ii) cash flow needs of the City, (iii) the deposit of monies into funds and accounts as
are provided for in any indenture entered into under the Borrowing Plan, and (iv) the payrnent of
costs of issuance iiicunred in connection with each series of Authorized Debt; and
WHEREAS, the City desires .to amend the 2002 Ordinance in order to, among other
things, (i) increase the maximum aggregate principal amount of Authorized Debt to be
outstanding under the 2002 Ordinance from $200,000,000 to $500,000,000 and (lij further
delegate authority and establish the borrowing parameters for the line of credit program; now,
therefore.
.
BE IT ORDAINED B Y THE CITY C O U N C I L OF T H E CITY OF CHICAGO:

Section 1. The City Council of the City (Ihe 'City Council'), after a public meeting
heretofore held on this Ordinance by the Committee on Finance of the City Council, pursuant to

 21710

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

proper notice and in accordance with ihe findings and recommendations of such Committee,
hereby finds that all of the recitals contained in the preambles lo this Ordinance are full, true and
correct and does incorporate them into this Ordinance by this reference.
Section 2.
There shall be borrowed on the credit of and for and on behalf of the City in
one or more series and at one or more times the sum of not to exceed $900,000,000 plus an
amount equal to the amount of any net original issue discount used in the marketing of the
Bonds (not to exceed 10 percent of the principal amount of each series thereoO for the
purposes aforesaid; and the" Bonds shall be issued from time to lime in said aggregate principal
amount, or such lesser amount, as may be determined by the City's Chief Financial Officer or
the City Comptroller (each such officer being hereinafter referred to as an'Authorized
Officer^.
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds payable in one payment on a
fixed date {'Capital Appreciation Bonds"). Each series of Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be
dated the date of issuance thereof and shall also bear the date of authentication, shall be in fully
registered form, shall be numbered, as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar (as
hereinafter defined), and shall l>e in' denominations- eqtial to the original principal amounts of.
such Capital Appreciation Bonds or any integral multiple thereof, each such original principal
amount representing Compound Accreted Value (as hereinafter defined) at maturity (the
'Maturity Amount') of such minimum amounts and integral multiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an .Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Capital Appreciation Bonds (but no
single Bond shall represent Compound. Accreted Value maturing on more than one date). As
used herein, the 'Compound Accreted Value' of a Capital Appreciation Bond on any date of
determination shall be an amount equal to the original principal amount (or integral multiplethereof) plus an investment retum accrued to the date of such determination at a semiannual
compounding rate which is necessary to produce the yield to maturity borne by such Capital
Appreciation Bond (the "V7e/d to Maturity').
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at fixed rates
and paying interest semiannually as described below (the 'Current Interest Bonds'). Each
series of Current interest Bonds shall be dated such date as shall be agreed upon by an
Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Current Interest Bonds, shall be in fully registered
form, shall be in such minimum denominations and integral multiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Cunent Interest Bonds (but no single
Current Ihleriest'Bond shall represent installments of principal maliiring on more than one date),
and shall be numbered as detentiined by the applicable Bond Registrar.
The Bonds may be initially issijed as Capital Appreciation Bonds containing provisions
for the conversion of the Compound Accreted Value of such Bonds into Current Interest Bonds
(the 'Convertible Bonds") al such time following the initial issuance as shall be approved by an'
Authorized Officer. While in the form of Capital Appreciation Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shall be subject to all of the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance relating to Capital
Appreciation Bonds, and vyhiie in the fonn of Current Interest Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shall be subject to all of the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance relating to Current
Interest Bonds. In particular, when Convertible Bonds are in the form of Capital Appreciation
Bonds prior to their conversion to Current Interest Bonds, the transfer, exchange and

 3/14/2012

R E P O R T S OF C O M M I T T E E S

21711

replacement provisions of this Ordinance with respect to Capital Appreciation Bonds shall apply
to such Convertible Bonds; provided that the Convertible Bonds delivered in the form of Capital
Appreciation Bonds in connection with any such transfer, exchange or replacement shall have
identical provisions for conversion lo Current Interest Bonds as set forth in the Convertible
Bonds being transferred, exchanged or replaced. In connection with the issuance and sale of
any Convertible Bonds, the terms and provisions relating to the conversion of the Compound
Accreted Value" of such Convertible Bonds into Current Interest Bonds shall be as approved by
an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Convertible Bonds. Notwithstanding any other
provision hereof, any series of Bonds may be issued as Capital Appreciation Bonds. Current
Interest Bonds, Convertible Bonds or any combination thereof.
• /Ml or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at variable rates
established by reference to such indices or otherwise and adjustable and payable from time to
time as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer and as agreed upon by an Authorized
Officer and the purchaser of the Bonds (the 'Variable Rate Bonds'). Each series of Variable
Rate Bonds, shall t»e dated such date as shall be agreed upon by an Authorized Officer and the
purchasers of such Bonds, shall be in fully registered form, shall be in sijch denominations as
shall be. agreed upon by ah Authorized: Officer and the purchaisers of the Bonds (but no single
Bond shall represent installments of principal maturing on more than one date), and shall be
numbered as detenmirned by the applicable Bond Registrar. Each series of Variable Rate Bonds
may be issued pursuant to. and have such terms and provisions as are set forth in. a trust
indenture between the City and a. bank or trust company selected by an Authorized Officer. The
Mayor or an. Authorized, Officer is hereby authorized to enter into one or more such trust
indentures on behalf of the City. Each such .trust indenture shall be in substantially the form of
trust-indentures .previously, entered into by the City in connection with the sale of general
obligation bonds or.notes ttearing interest at variablie rates, but with such revisions in text as the
Mayorbrthe Authorized Officer executing the same shall deterrnine are necessary or desirable,
including .such revisions as shall be. necessary to incorporate provisions relating to .the manner
of estatJiishing the iriterest rate and the payment of interest from time to time on the Variable
Rate Bonds,. the execution thereof, arid any amendment thereto, by the Mayor or such
Authorized Officer to evidence the City Councirs approval of all such revisions.
• All or any portion of the Bonds niay be issued and sold from time to time on a retail basis
to individual investors (the 'Retail Bonds') or as a direct purchase to holders (the 'Direct
Purchase Bonds'). The Retail Bonds and the Direct Purchase Bonds shall t>e sold as provided
in Section 12 hereof.
The principal o f the Bonds of each series shall t>ecome due and payable on or before
the eariier of (i). January 1, 2054, or (li) 40 years after the date of issuance thereof. Each series
of Cunent Interest Bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates and each series of Capital
Appreciation Bonds shall have Yields to Maturity not to exceed 15 percent per annum. Each
series of Variable Rale Bonds shall bear Interest from time lo time at such rates detennined by
such remarketing or other indexing agent as shall be selected by an Authorized Officer for that
piirpose or as provided in the related trust indenture referred to above not to exceed 15 percent
per annum. Any portion of the Bonds may be issued as txjnds the interest on which is not

 21712

JOURNAL-CITY

COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes if
detemiined by an Authorized Officer to be beneficial to the City.
Each Capital Appreciation Bond shall accrue interest from its date at the rate per annum
compounded semiannually on each January 1 and July 1, commencing on such January 1 or
July 1 as determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale ot such Capital Appreciation
Bonds, which will produce the Yield to Maturity Identified therein until the maturity dale thereof
Interest on the Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be payable only at the respective maturity dates
thereof
Each Current Interest Bond shall bear interest from the later of its date or the most
recent interest payment date to which interest has been paid or duly provided. for, until the
principal ampuht of such Bond is paid, such Interest (computed upon the basis of a 360-day
period of twelve 30-day months) being payable on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
commencing on such January 1 or July 1 as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the
time of the sale, of each "series of Current Interest Bonds. Interest on each Current Interest
Bqhd shall, be paid to the person in whose name such Bond is registered at the close of
business on the 15th day of ttie month next preceding the interest payment date, by check or
draft of the applicable Bond Registrar, or, at the option of any registered, owner of $1,000,000 or
more in aggregate principal amount of Current jnterest Bonds of a series, by wire transfer of
immediately available funds'to such bank in the continental United States, of America as the
registered owiier of such Bonds shall request in writing to the applicable'Bond Registrar.
Each series of Variable Rate Bonds shall bear interest (computed from time-to time atsuch rates, and on such basis as shall.be detennined by an. Authorized Officer or at the time of
sale of such series of Variable Rate Bonds) payable on such dates as shall be determined by an
Authorized Officer at the time of sale of sucfh.Variable Rate Bonds. Any Variabje Rate Bonds
may be made subject to optional or niandatory tender for purchase by the owners thereof at
such tirries and at such pirices (not to exceed 105 percent of the principal.amount thereof) as
sfiall be cletermined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds. In
connection vyith the remarketing of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series so tendered for
purchase under the terms and conditions so specified by an Authorized. Officer, the Mayor arid
each Authorized Officer, are hereby authorized to execute on behalf of the City a remarketing
agreement, and any amendment thereto, with respect to such series of Variable Rate Bonds in
sutistantially the form previously used for variable rate financings of the City with appropriate
revisions to reflect the terms and provisions of such Bonds sold as Variable Rate Bonds and
. such other revisions in text as an Authorized Officer shall deterrnine are necessary or desirable
iri Connection with the sale of such Bonds as Variable Rate Bonds. The annual fee paid to any
remarketing agent serving in such capacity pursuant to any such remarketing agreement with
respect to a "series of Variable Rate Bonds shall not exceed one-quarter of one percent (0.25%)
of the average principal amount of such Variable Rate Bonds of such series outstanding during
such annual period.
The Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appreciation Bonds, the principal of the
Current Interest Bonds and the Variable Rale Bonds and any redemption premium shall be

 3/14/2012

R E P O R T S OF C O M M I T T E E S

21713

payable in lav/ful money of Ihe United Slates of America upon presentation and surrender
thereof at the designated corporate trust office of the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each of the Bonds shall be designated "General Obligation Bonds, Series
" with
such additions, modifications or revisions as shall be determined to be necessary by an
Authorized Officer at the time of Ihe sale of such Bonds to reflect the calendar year of issuance
of the Bonds, the order'of sale of Ihe Bonds, the specific series of the Bonds, whether the
Bonds are being issued on a taxable basis, whether the Bonds are Capital Appreciation Bonds,
Current Interest Bonds, Convertible Bonds. Variable Rate Bonds, Retail Bonds or Direct
Purchase Bonds, whether the Bonds are being issued and sold for the purpose of paying costs
of the Refunding Purposes, paying costs of the Project or a combination thereof and any other
aulhorized features of the Borids determined by an Authorized Officer as desirable to be
reflected in the title of the Bonds being issued and sold.
The seal of the City or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed to or printed on each of the
Bonds; and the Bonds "shall be executed by the manual or facsimile signature of the. Mayor arid
attested by th6 manual or facsirtiile signature of the City Cleric, arid 1n case any officer whose
signature shall, appear on any Bond, shall cease to be" such bfficer before the delivery of such
Bond, such'sigriature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all proposes, the same as if
such officer had remained iri office' until delivery: As used in; this Ordiriance-; "City Clerk" shall
mean the duly qualified and acting City Clerk of the City or any Deputy City Clerk or other
person that'maytawfuljy take a'specific action or perform a specific duty prescribed for the City
Clerk pursuant to this Ofdinanc'e.
;'
All Bonds stiall have thereori a certificate of authentication substantially in the form
h'fereiriafter set forth duly executed by the applicable Bond Registrar as authenticating agent of
the City and showing the date of authentication;. No Borid shall be valid or obligatory for ariy
purpose or be entitled to any security ol: benefit under this "Ordinance unless and until such
certificate of authentiCatiori shall'have bee'ri duly "executed bythe apjilicabie Bond Registrar by
mariual signature; and such certificate of a'uthienticatioh upon any such Bond shall be conclusive
evidence that such Bond has been authenticated and delivered under this Ordinance. The.
certificate of authentication on any Borid shall be deemed to have been executed by the
applicable Bond Registrar if signed by ari authorized officer of such Bond Registrar, but it"shall
not be necessary th'at the same officer'sign the certificate of authentication on all of the Bonds
issued hereunder
Section 3. ' (a) Reg/sfraf/on and Transfer The City shall cause books (the 'Sond
Register^ for the registration arid for the transfer of each series of Bonds as provided in this
Ordinance to be kepi at the designated corporate trust office of a bank or trust company
designated by ah 'Authorized Officer (the 'Bond Registrar), as the registrar for the City in
connection with such Series of Bonds. The City is authorized to prepare multifile Bond blanks
Executed by the City for use in the transfer and exchange of Bonds.
Upon surrender for transfer of any Bond at the designated corporate trust office of the
applicable Bond Registrar, duly endorsed by. or accompanied by a written inslnimeht or
instruments of transfer in fonn satisfactory to such Bond Registrar and duly executed by the

 21714

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

registered owner or its attorney duly authorized in writing, the Cily shall execute and such Bond
Registrar shall authenticate, date and deliver in the name of the transferee or transferees (a) in
the case of any Capital Appreciation Bond, a new fully registered Capital Appreciation Bond or
Bonds of the same series, maturity and yield to maturity of authorized denominations, for a like
aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same series,
maturity and yield to maturity of other authorized denominations, or (b) in the case of any other
Bonds, one or more fully registered Bonds of the same series, type (Current Interest Bonds or
Variable Rate Bonds), interest rate (or in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of interest
rate determination) and maturity of authorized denominations, for a like principal amount. Any
Capital Appreciation B.ond or Bonds may be exchanged al said office of the applicable Bond
Registrar for a like aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of
the same series, maturity and yield to maturity of other authorized denominations. Any other
Bond or Bonds may be exchanged' at said office of the applicable Bond Registrar for a like
aggregate principal amount of Bonds ofthe same" series, type, interest rate and maturity of other
authorized denominations. The execution by the City of any fully registered Borid shall
constitute full and due authorization of such Bond, and Ihe applicable' Bond Riegistrar shall
thereby be authorized to authenticate, date and deliver such Bond; provided that (a)-the
aggregate original principal amount of outstanding Capital Appreciation Bonds "of each series,
maturity arid yield- to maturity authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall not exceed
the authorized aggregate original principal amount of Capital-Appreciation Bonds of such series
and "maturity less previous refirenients and (b) the principal amount of Current Interest-Bonds or
Variable Rate Bonds of each series, maturity and interest rate (or interest rate determination
nfiethod) authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall not exceed the authorized
principal amotJnt of Current Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds for such series, maturity and
interest rate (or interest rate determination method) less previous retirements.
: The applicable Bond Registrar .shall not be required to transfer or exchange (a) any
Bond after notice calling such Bond for redemption has been mailed, or (b) any Bond during a
period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of such Bond; provided,
/jowever, that provisions relating to the transfer or exchange of Variable Rate Bonds of a series
shall be as determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale thereof ^nd may be set
forth in the trust indenture securing such series of Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in
Section 2 hereof.
The person in whose name any Bond shall be registered shall be deemed and regarded
as the absolute owner thereof for all purposes, and payment of the Compound Accreted Value
of, principal of. redemption premium, if any. or interest on any Bond, as appropriate, stiall be
made only lo or ujaon the order of the registered owner thereof or its legal representative. All
such payments Shall be valid and effectual lo satisfy and discharge the liability upon such Bond
to the extent of the sum or sums so paid.
•
No service charge shall be made for any transfer or exchange of Bonds, but the City or
the applicable Bond Registrar may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other
governmental charge that may be imposed in connecfion with any.^ transfer or exchange of
Bonds, except that no such payment may t>e required in the case of the issuance of a Bond or
Bonds for the unredeemed portion of a Bond surrendered for redemption.

 3/14/2012

R E P O R T S OF C O M M I T T E E S

21715

(b) Book-Entry Oniy System. It so determined and directed by an Authorized Officer in
connection with the sale of any of the Bonds, such Bonds may^be issued in book-entry only
form. In connection with the issuance ol Bonds in book-entry only form, an Authorized Officer is
authorized to execute and deliver to .the book-entry depository selected by such Authorized
Officer such depository's standard form of representation letter. If any of the Bonds are
registered in the name of a securities depository which uses a book-entry system, the standing
of the beneficial owner to enforce any of the covenants herein may be established through the
books and records of such securities depository or a participant theriein.
(c) Bonds Losf, Destroyed, etc. If any Bond, whether in temporary or definitive form, is
lost (whether by reason of theft or otherwise), destroyed (whether by mutilation, damage, in
whole or in part, or otherwise) or improperly cancelled, the applicable Bond Registrar may
authenticate a new Bond of like series, date, maturity date, interest rate (or, in the case of
Capital Appreciation Bonds, yield to maturity, and in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of
interest rate detenninatioh), denomination and original principal, amount (in the case of Capital
Appreciation Bonds) or principal amount (in the case of other Bonds) and bearing a number not
contemporaneously outstanding; provided that (i) in the case of any mutilated Bond, such
mutil^.ted Bond shall first t>e surrendered.tp the applicable Bond Registrar, and (ii) iri the case of
any: osl Bond or Bond destroyed in who\e. there shall be first furnished to the.applicable Bond
Registrar evidence of such'loss or desttruction, together with indernnification of the City and"
such Borid Registrar, satisfactory to such Bond .Registrar. If any lost, destroyed or improperly
cancelled Bond shall-haye matured or is about to mature; or has t>een. called for redernplion,
instead of "issuing" a duplicate Borid, the applicable Bond Registrar shall pay the same vwthout
surrender thereof if there shall be first furnished to such. Bond Registrar evidence of such loss,
destruction or cancellation, together with indemnity, satisfactory to it. Upon the issuance of any
substitute. Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar may require the payment of a sum sufficient to
cover any tax or other governmental charge that may t>e imposed in relation thereto.
' .: (d) .. Redeirtptidn and Repurchase.. The Bonds may be made subject to redemption
prior ;to maturity at the option of the:City, in whole or.in part on any date, at such times and at
such redemption prices (to-be expressed as a percentage of the principal amount of Current.
Interest Bonds or Variable. Rate Bonds being redeemed or as a formula as described below and
expressed as a percentage of the Compound Accreted Value of Capital Appreciation" Bonds to
be redeemed or as'a formula as descrilJed below) not to exceed 105 percent, plus, in the case
of Cuirent lnterest Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, accrued interest to the'date of redemption,
as detennined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale thereof
Notwithstanding the foregoing, such 105 percent limitation on the redemption price of
Bonds shall not apply where the redemption price is based upon a formula designed to
compensate the owner of Ihe Bonds to be redeemed based upon prevailing market conditions
on the date fixed for redemption; commonly known as a "make-whole' redemption price (the
'Make-Whole Rederi^ption Price"). At the tirhe of sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer shall
determine the provisions of the formula to be used to establish any Make-Whole Redemption
Price, which may vary depending on whether the Bdrids are issued ori a taxable or tax-exempt
basis. Ah Authorized Officer shall confirm and transmit the applicable Make-Whole Redemption
Price on such dates and to such parties as shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.

 21716

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/T4/2012

If fewer than all of the outstanding Bonds of a series are to be optionally redeemed, the
Bonds to be called shall be called from such maturities and interest rates of such series as may
be determined by an Authorized Officer.
Certain of the Bonds of a series may be made subject to mandatory redemption, at par
and accrued interest to the dale fixed for redemption, as determined by an Aulhorized Officer al
the time of the sale thereof Further, an Authorized Officer is hereby aulhorized to sell (at a
price determined by such Authorised Officer to be in the best interests of the City) or waive any
right the City may have lo call any of Ihe Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness for optional
redemption, in whole or in part, and is hereby further authorized to expend the proceeds of any
such sales for any purpose for which the proceeds of the Bonds are authorized to be expended
and for the payment or prepayment bf any City debt obligations, all as determined by an
Authorized Officer; provided however, to the extent that interest on such Bonds or Outstanding
Indebtedness is excluded frorh gross income for federal income tax purposes, such
expenditures shall not adversely affect such exclusion. If detennined to be necessary or
appropriate, an Aulhorized Officer is authorized to solicit the consent of holders of Outstanding
Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness to any such sale or waiver.
Retail Bonds may be made subject to repurchase by the City upon the derriand of
certain holders thereof at a price bf not to exceed 105 percent of par, as more fully described in
Section 12 hereof
At the time of sale of Bonds of a series, an Authorized Officer is authorized to determine
the manner of redeeming such Bonds, either by lot in the manner hereinaftei" provided or
pro-rata in the manner determined byan Authorized Officer at the time of sale, in the event less,
than all ofthe Bonds of the sameseries, maturity and interest rate are to be redeemed.
The Current Interest Bonds shall be redeemed only in amounts equal to the respective
minimum authorized denominations and integral multiples thereof and the Capital /Appreciation
Bonds shall be redeemed only iri amounts representing the respective minimum authorized
Maturity Amounts and integral multiples thereof. In the event of the redemption of fewer than all
the Bonds of the same series, maturity and interest rate by lot. the aggregate principal amount
or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) thereof to be'redeemed shall be the miniriium authorized
denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for such series or an integral multiple thereof,
and the applicable Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of such series, maturity and
interest rate, a distinctive riumtier for each minimum authorized denomination or Maturity
Amount (as appropriate) of such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as
many numljers as, at such minimum authorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) for each number, shall equal the principal amount or. Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of such Bonds to Ije redeemed. In such case, the Bonds to be redeemed shall be
those to which were assigned numbers so selected; provided that only so much of the principal
arnount or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall equal
such minimum authorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for each numtier
assigned to it and so selected. In the event of the redemption of fewer than all Bonds of the
same series, maturity and interest rate on a pro-rata basis, if the Bonds are held in book-entry
form at the time of redemption, at the time of sale of the Bonds, an Aulhorized Officer is

 3/14/2012

R E P O R T S OF C O M M I T T E E S

21717

authorized lo direct the Bond Registrar to instruct the book-entry depository to select the
specific Bonds within such maturity and interest rate for redemption pro-rata among such
Bonds. The City shall have no responsibility or obligation to ensure that the book-entry
depository property selects such Bonds for redemption.
The City shall, at least 45 days prior to any optional redemption date (unless a shorter
time period shall be satisfactory lo the applicable Bond Registrar), notify the applicable Bor\d
Registrar of such redemption date and of the principal amount or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of Bonds of such series to be redeemed.
In connection with any mandatory redemption of Bonds of a series as aulhorized above,
the principal amounts of Bonds (or the Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appreciation
Bonds) of such series to be mandatorily redeemed in each year may be reduced through the
eariier'optional redemption thereof, vvith any partial optional redemptions of such Bonds of such
series" credited against future mandatory redemption requirements- in such order of the.
mandatory redemption dates as an Authorized Officer may determine. In addition, on br prior to
the 60th day preceding any" mandatory redemption dale of Bonds of a series, the applicable
Bond Registrar may, arid if directed by an Authorized Officer shall, purchase Bonds of such
series 'required to t»e retired on such mandatory redemption date at such prices as an
Authorized Officer shall determine. Any such Bonds so purchased shall be cancelled and the
principal amount (or Compound Acaeted Value, as appropriate) thereof shall be credited
against the payment required on such next mandatory redemption date with respect to such
series of Bonds.
The applicable Bond Registrar shall promptly notify the City in writing of the Bonds, or
portions thereof, selected for redemption and, iri the case of any Bond selected for partial
redemption; the principal amount. Compound Accreted Value or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) thereof, and the interest rate thereof to be redeemed.
Subject to the limitation on redemption price set forth above, in the case of redempfion of
any Variable Rate Bonds, the terms of such redemption shall be determined by an Authorized
bfficer at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds and may be set forth in.the trust
indenture securing such Variable Rate Bonds as aulhorized in Section 2 hereof.
Section 4.
Except as may otherwise tie determined as provided below for Variable
Riate Bonds, unless waived by any owner of Bonds to be redeemed, notice of the call for any
such i"edemption shall be given by the applicable Bond Registrar on behalf of the City by mailing
the redemption notice by first class mail al least 30 days and not more than 60 days prior to the
date fixed for redemption to the registered owner of the Bond or Bonds to be redeemed at the
address shown on the applicable Bond Register or at such other address as is furnished in
writing by such registered owner to such Bond Registrar, but the failure to mail any such notice
or any defect therein as to any Bond shall hoi affect the validity of the proceedings for the
redemption of any other Bond. Any notice of redemption mailed as provided in this Section
shall be conclusively presumed to have t>een given whether or not actually received by the
addressee. In the case of redemption of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series, the time and
manner of giving such notice shall be determined by an Authonzed Officer at the time of sale of

 21718

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

such Variable Rate Bonds and may be set forth in the trust indenture securing such Variable
Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof
All notices of redemption shall state:
(1)

the series designation of the Bonds to be redeemed.

(2)

the redemption date.

(3)
the redemption price, or in the case of a redemption of Bonds at a
Make-Whole Redemption Price, a description of the formula by which the redemption
price shall be determined,
(4)
if less than all outstanding Bonds of a series are, lo be redeemed, the
identification (and, in the case of partial redemption, the respective principal amounts
and interest rales. Compound Accreted Values or Maturity Amounts) of the Bonds to be
redeemed,
(5)
that on the redemption date the redemption price will become due and
payable upon each such Bond or.portion thereof called for redemption, and that interest
thereon shall cease to accrue or compound from and after said date.
(6)
the place where such Bonds are lo be surrendered for payment of the
redemption price, which place of payment shall be the designated corporate trust office
of the applicable Bond Registrar, and
(7)
such other information as shall be deemed, necessary by the applicable
Bond Registrar at the time such notice is given to.comply with law. regulation or industry
standard.
With respect to an optional redemption of any series of Bonds, such notice may state
that said redemption is conditioned upon the receipt by the applicable Bond Registrar on or prior
to the date fixed for redemption of moneys sufficient to pay the redemption price of the Bonds of
such series. If such moneys are not so received, sucti redemption notice shall be of no force
and effect, the City shall not redeem such Bonds.and the applicable Bond Registrar shall give
notice, in the same manner in which the notice of redemption was given, that such moneys were
not so received and that such Bonds will not be redeemed. Unless Ihe notice of redemption
shall be made conditional as provided above, on or prior to any redemption date for a series of
Bonds, Ihe City shall deposit with the applicable Bond Registrar an amount of money sufficient
to pay the redemption pric:e of all the Bonds or portions thereof of such series which are to tie
redeemed oh lhat date.
Notice of redemption having been given as aforesaid, the Bonds, or portions thereof, so
to be redeemed shall, on the redemption date, become due and payable at Ihe redemption price
therein specified, and from and after such date (unless the City shall default in the.payment of
Ihe redempfion price or unless, in the event of a conditional notice as described above, the

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21719

necessary moneys were nol deposited) such Bonds, or portions thereof, shall cease lo bear,
accAje or compound interest. Upon surrender of such Bonds for redemption in accordance with
said notice, such Bonds shall be paid by the applicable Bond Registrar at the redemption price.
Inslallmenls of interest due on or prior lo the redemption date shall be payable as herein
provided for payment of interest. Upon surrender for any partial redernplion (i) of any Current
Interest Bond or Variable Rale Bond, there shall be prepared for the registered owner a new
Bond or Bonds of the same series, type (Current Interest Bonds or Variable Rale Bonds),
interest rale or. in the case of Vanable Rate Bonds, method of interest rate determination, and
maturity in Ihe amount of the unpaid principal or(ii) of any Capital Appreciation Bond, there shall
be prepared for the registered owner a new Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same
series. Yield to Maturity and maturity dale in the amount of the unpaid Maturity Amount.
If any Current Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond, or portion thereof, called for
redemption shall not be so paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the principal shall, until
paid, bear interest from the redemption date at the rate borne by such Bond, or portion thereof,
so called for redemption. If any Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof called for
redemption shall not be so paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the Compound Accreted
Value at such redemption date shall continue to accrue interest from such redemption date at
ttie Yield to Maturity bome by such Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof, so called for
redemption. All Bonds, which have been redeemed shall t>e cancelled, and destroyed by the
applicable Bond Registrar and shall not be reissued.
If any Bond is not presented for,,payment, when the principal amount, Compound
Accreted Value or Maturity Amount thereof tjecomes due, either at maturity or at a date fixed for
redemption thereof or otherwise, and if moneys sufficient to pay such Bond are. held by the
applicable Bond Registrar for the tienefit of the registered owner of such Bond, such Bond
Registrar shall hold such moneys for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond without
liability to the registered owner for interest. The registered owner of such Bond thereafter shall
be restricted exclusively to such funds for satisfaction of any claims relating to such Bond.
Section 5.
Tho Capital Appreciation Bonds and the Current Interest Bonds of each
series shall be prepared in substantially the following fomis with such Insertions and revisions
as shall be necessary to refiect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Bonds of such series
pursuant to Section 12 hereof; prowded that if the text of any Bond is to be printed in its entirety
on the front side of such Bond, then the text shown or appearing on the reverse side of such
Bond shall replace paragraph [2] and the legend. "See Reverse Side for Additional Provisions,'
shall t)e. omitted. The Convertible Bonds shall be prepared incorporating the provisions of the
forms of Capital Appreciation Bonds and Current Interest Bonds set forth below as necessary to
reflect the terms and proyisioris of the sale of the Convertible Bonds pursuant to Section 12
hereof. The Variable Rate Bonds shall t>e prepared in substantially the form of the Current
Interest Bonds set forth below, or as provided in the applicable trust indenture securing such
Variable Rale Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof with such insertions and revisions as
shall be necessary to reflect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Variable Rate Bonds
pursuant lo Section 12 hereof.
All Bonds may be prepared with such insertions and revisions as shall be necessary in
connection with Iho issuance of such Bonds as Retail Bonds or Direct Purchase Bonds

 JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

21720

3/14/2012

[Form of Capital Appreciation Bond — Front Side)

REGISTEFJED

No.

$
Compound Accreted
Value at MaturKy
{'Maturity Amount')
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE O F I L U N O I S
CITY O F C H I C A G O
GENERAL O B U G A T I O N B O N D
SERIES

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT PER

$
MATURITY

20_

000

Y I E L D TO

MATURITY

DATED

MATURITY

AMOUNT:

DATE

%

$

CUSIP
20

Registered Owner:
The City of Chicago (Ihe 'City") hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for! value,
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as'
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date identified above, the Maturity Amount identified
above. The amount of interest payable on this Bond on the Maturity Date hereof is the amount
of interest accrued from the Dated Dale hereof at a semiannual compounding rate necessary to
produce the Yield to Maturity set forth above, compounded semiannually on each January 1 and
July 1, commencing
1, 20 . The Maturity Amount of this Bond is payable
in lawful money of the United Stales of America'upon presentation and surrender of this Bond al
the designated corporate trust office of
, Chicago, Illinois, or its
successor, as bond registrar and paying agent (the "Bond Registrar"). The Compound Accreted
Value of this Bond per $
.000 Maturity Amount on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
commencing
1, 20 . determined by the semiannual compounding described in
this paragraph shall be as set forth in the Table of Compound Accreted Value Per $
.000
of Compound Accreted Value at Maturity contained herein.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21721

Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth at
this place.
,
It is hereby certified and recited that all conditions, acts and things required by law to
exist or to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and diie fonm and tihie as required by law; that the
indebtedness of ttie City, including the issue of Bonds of which this is one, does'not exceed any
limitation imposed by law; and that provision has been made for the collection of a direct annual
lax sufficient to pay the Maturity Amount hereof at maturity.
This Bond shall not be valid or tiecome obligatory.for any purpose until the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Bond Registrar.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by the. City Council has caused its corporate
seal to be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Bond to be signed by the duly aulhorized
facsimile signature bf the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Clerk, all as
of the Dated Dale identified above.

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature)
CityClerit
City of Chicago
{SEAL)

Date of Authentication:
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Bond is one of the Bonds descritied in the within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of the General Obligation Bonds, Series
, of the City of Chicago.

(Manual Signature)
Aulhorized Officer

 21722

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

IForm of Capital Appreciation Bond — Reverse Side]
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION B O N D
SERIES

For the prompt payment o f t h e Maturity Amount of this Bond as the same becomes due.
and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full faith, credit and resources of the City
are hereby inevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the original principal amount of
•
issued pursuant to the constitutional home rule powers of the City, for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of Ihe Refunding Purposes described in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described in the Bond Ordinance, and
(iii) paying expenses incidental to the issuance of the Bonds, and was authorized by an
Ordinance adopted by the City Coundl of the City on
, 20
(the 'Bond
Ordinance").
The Bonds maturing on or after January 1,
, are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the City, in whole or in part on any date on or after
.
1,
. and if
less than all of the outstanding Bonds are to' be redeemed, the Bonds to be called shall be
called from such'maturities as shall be determined by the City,, and if less than all of the Bonds
of the same maturity and yield to maturity are to tie redeemed, then [by lot] (pro-rata] for the
Bonds of the same maturity and yield to. maturity in Ihe manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds
to be redeemed at the redemption prices (being expressed as a percentage of the Compound
Accreted Value of the Bonds to be redeemed) set forth below:
DATES OF REDEMPTION

REDEMPTION PRICE

(Redemption by lot] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and yield to maturity, the aggregate Maturity Amount thereof to tie redeemed shall be
$
.000 or an integral multiple thereof, and the Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of
such maturity and yield to maturity a distinctive number for each $
.000 Maturity Amount of
such Bond and shall select by tot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as. at
$
,000 for each number, shall equal the Maturity Amount of such Bonds to be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so selected;
provided that only so much of the Maturity Amount of each.Bond shall tie redeemed as shall
eqijal $
,000 for each numtier assigned to it and so selected.
[Redemption pro-rata] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and yield to maturity, the Bonds to be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
determined pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21723

Notice of any such redemption shall be sent by first class mail not fewer than 30 days
nor more than 60 days prior to the dale fixed for redemption to Ihe Registered Owner of each
Bond to be redeemed at the address shown on the registration books ofthe City maintained by
the Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner
to the Bond Registrar; provided that the failure to mail any such notice or any defect therein as
to any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Bond:
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease lo accrue interest on the specified
redemption date; provided that funds for redemption are on deposit at the place of payment at
that time, and shall not be deemed to tie outstanding.
This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly authorized iri writing at the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago. Illinois, but only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment of Ihe
charges provided in the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon such transfer a new Bond or Bonds of authorized denominations, bf the same maturity
and yield to maturity and for the same aggregate Original Principal Amount will be issued to the
transferee iri exchange therefor. The Bond Registrar shall not be required to transfer or
exchange this Bond (A) after notice calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of .15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.
"The Bonds are issued in fully registered form in Original Principal Ariiounts represenfing
$
,000 Maturity Amount or any integral multiple thereof .This Bond may be exchanged at
the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate Original Prindpal
Amount b f Bonds of the same-series and Hfi'aturity, upon the terms set forth in the Bond
Ordinance.
.
• \.
•The City and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving" payment of or on account of the Maturity
Amount hereof and redemption premium, if any. hereon and for ..all other purposes and neither
the City nor the Bond Registrar shall be affected by any notice lo the contrary.

TABLE OF COMPOUND AccRE"rED VALUE
PER $

"

. .000 OF COMPOUND A C C R E T E D VALUE A T MATURITY

(ASSIGNMENT)

FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)
the within Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said "Bond on the books kept for registration thereof with full power of
substitution in the premises.

 JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

21724

3/14/2012

Dated;
Signature guaranteed:
NOTICE:

The signature to this assignment must correspond with the name of the Registered
Owner as it appears upon the face of the within Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.
(Fom of Current Interest Bond — Front Side]

REGISTERED

NO.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF ILLINOIS
.CITY OF CHICAGO "
GENERAL OBUGATION B O N D
SERIES

Sec Reverse Side for
A d d i t i o n a l Provisions

Interest
Rate:

Maturity Dale:
January 1,20

Dated Date:
20

CUSIP:

Registered Owner:
Principal Amount:
TTie City of Chicago (the 'Cit/") hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for value
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date identified above, the Principal Amount identified
above-and'to pay interest (computed on the basis of a 360-day year'of twelve 30-day months)
on such Principal Amount from the later of the date of this Bond or the most recent interest
payment date to which interest has been paid at the Interest Rate per annurri set forth above on
January A and July A of each year commcndng
1. 20 . until said Principal
Amount is paid. Principal of Ihis Bond and redemption premium, if any, shall be payable in
lawful money of the United Stales of America upon presentation and surrerideir at the
designated corporate tnjst office of
•
Chicago. Illinois, as bond
registrar and paying agent (the 'Bond Registrar"). Payment of the installments of interest shall
be made to the Registered Owner hereof as shown on the registration books of the City
maintained by the Bond,Registrar al the close of business on the 15th day of the month next
preceding each interest payment date and shall lie paid by check or draft of Ihe Bond Registrar
mailed to the address of such Registered Owner as it appears on such registration books or at
such other address fumished in writing by such Registered Owner to the Bond Registrar or, at
Ihe 9ption of any Registered Owner of $1,000,000 or more in aggregate principal amount of the
Bonds, by wire transfer of immediately available funds to such bank in the continental United
States of America as the Registered Owner hereof shall request in writing to (he Bond Registrar.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21725

Reference is hereby made lo the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth al
this place.
It is hereby certified and recited that all conditions, acts and things required by law to
exist or to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and due form and time as required by law; that the
indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Bonds of which this is one. does not exceed any
limitation imposed by law; and that provision has t>eeri made for the collection.of a direct annual
tax sufficient to pay Ihe interest hereon as it falls due and also" to pay and discharge the
principal hereof at maturity.
This Bond shall not be valid or become obligatory for any purpose until the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Bond Registrar.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by the City Council has caused its corporate
seal to be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Bond" lo be signed' by the duly authorized
facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Clerk, all as
of the Dated Date identified above.

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature)

City Clerk
City of Chicago
(SEAL]

Date of Authentication:
C E R T I F I C A T E . O F AUTHENTICATION

This Bond is one of the Bonds described in (he within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of the General Obligalion Bonds. Series
, of the Cily of Chicago.

By:

(Manual Signature)
Aulhorized Officer

 21726

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(Form of Current Interest Bond — Reverse Side]
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION B O N D
SERIES

For the prornpt payment of this Bond, both principal and interest, as aforesaid, as the
same become due, and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that piirpose. the full failh, credit and
resources of the City are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the principal amount of
$
issued pursuant to the constitutional home rule powisrs of the City for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Purposes described in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs bf the Project described in Ihe Bond Ordinance, and
(iii) paying expenses incidental to the issuance of the Bonds, and. was authorized by an
Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on
20
(the 'Sofjd
Ordinance").
'
The Bonds maturing on or afler January .1.
, are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the City, in whole or in part on any date on or after
1,
. and if less
than all of the outstanding Bonds are to be redeemed, the Bonds to be called shall be called
from such maturities and interest rates as shall be determined by the Crty and if less than all of
the Bonds of a single maturity and the same interest rate are to be redeemed then (by lot]
.[pro-rata] within such maturity and interest rate in the manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds to
be redeemed at the redemption prices (being expressed as a percentage of the principal
arhount) set forth below, plus accrued interest to the date of redemption:
DATES OF REDEMPTION

REDEMPTION PRICE

The Bonds maturing on January 1,
. are subject to mandatory redemption prior to
maturity on January 1 of the 'years
to
. inclusive, and the Bonds maturing on
January 1,
, are subject to mandatory redemption prior to maturity on January 1 of the
years
lo
, inclusive, in each case at par and accrued interest to the dale fixed for
redemption.
^
(Redemption by lot) tn the event of Ihe redemption of less than all the Bonds, of like
maturity and interest rate, the aggregate principal amount thereof to be redeemed shall be
$
,000 or an integral multiple thereof, and the Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of
such maturity and interest rate a distinctive numtier for each $
.000 principal ariiount of
such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as, at
$
.000 for each number, shall equal the principal amount of such Bonds to be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so selected;
provided that only so much of the principal amount of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall
equal $
,000 for each numtier assigned to it and so selected.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21727

(Redemption pro-rata] In the event of the redemption of less than all of the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the Bonds to be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
determined pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.

Notice of any such redemption shall be sent by first class mail not less than 30 days nor
more than 60 days prior lo the date fixed for redemption to the Registered Owner of each Bond
to be redeemed at the address shown on the registration books of the City maintained by the
Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to
the Bond Registrar; provided that the failure to mail any such notice or any defect therein as lo
any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Bond.
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease to bear interest on the specified
redemption date, provided that funds for redemption are on deposit at the place of payment at
that time, and shall not tie deemed to be outstanding.

This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly authorized in writing at the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago, Illinois, but only in the manner, subject to the. limitations and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellafion of this Bond.
Upon siich transfer a new Bond or Bonds of authorized denominations, of the same interest
rate, series and maturity and for the same aggregate principal amount will be issued to the
transferee in exchange therefor. The Bond Registrar shall not be required to transfer or
exchange this Bond (A) after notice calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed', or
(B) during a period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.

The Bonds are issued in fully registered form in the denomination of $_
,000 each or
authorized integral multiples thereof This Bond may be exchanged at the designated corporate
trust office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate principal amount of Bonds of the same
interest rate, series and maturity of other authorized denominations, upon the terms set forth in
the Bond Ordinance.

The City and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payrnent of or on account of principal
hereof and interest due hereon and redemption premium, if any. and for all other purposes and
neither the City nor the Bond Registrar shall be affected by any notice to the contrary.

 21728

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(ASSIGNMENT)

FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)
the within Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Bond on the books kept for registration thereof with full power of
substitution in the premises.
Dated:
Signature guaranteed:
NOTICE:

The signature lo this assignment must correspond with the name of the Registered
Owner as it appears upon the face of the within Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

. )
. Section 6.
Each Bond shall be a direct and general obligation of the City for the
payment of which , (as to Compound Accreted Value, principal, interest and redemption
premium, if any. as appropriate) the. City pledges its full faith and credit. Each Bond shall be
payable (as to Compound Accreted" Value, principal, interest and redemption premium, if any,
as appropriate) from any moneys, revenues, receipts," income, assets or funds ofthe Cily legally
available-for such purpose, including but not limited to the proceeds of the Pledged. Taxes (as
defined in Section 7 hereoQ..
Seclron 7.
For the purpose of providing the funds required to pay as the same
become due (i) the principal of and interest and redemption premium, if any, on the-Bonds
(including the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds).' (ii) the purchase
price of Bonds that are subject to optional or mandatory tender for purchase by the owners
thereof, to the extent not otherwise provided for.pursuant to the terms of a Credit Facility (as
defined in Section 12 hereof), (iii) such amounts as may be payable under Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements (as defined in Section 14 hereoO from the direct annual tax described
below, (iv) amounts (other than periodic fees and expenses) payable to providers of Credit
Facilities as described in Section 12 hereof and (v) to the extent determined by an Authonzed
Officer to tie necessary or desirable, periodic fees and expenses payable to parties involved in
the provision of ongoing services relating to the Bonds, the Outstanding Indebtedness, the
Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements or Interest Rate Exchange Agreements, including"
parties such as those identified by an Authorized Officer in a notification of sale as descritied in
Section 12 hereof and parties providing similar ongoing services, such as rating agencies and
entifies providing financial market information to be used in connection with the structuring and
sale of the Bonds (the 'Ongoing Financing Services"), there is hereby levied and there shall be
collected a dired annual tax upon all taxable property'" in the City for the years and in the
amounts as follows:

 3/14/2012

21729

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

YEAR

AMOUNT

YEAR

AMOUNT

2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027.
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032

$150,000,000
150,000.000
150,000,000
150,000,000.
150,000.000
150.000,000
150,000.000
150,000.000
150.000,000
150,000.000
150.000,000
150.000,000
150.000,000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150,000,000
. 150.000.000
150,000,000
. 150.000.000
150,000,000.

2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
• 2047
204B
2049
2050
2051
2052

$150,000,000
150.000,000
150.000,000
150.000,000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150,000,000
150,000.000
150,000.000
. 150.000.000
150.000.000
150^000,000
150,000,000
150,000.000
150.000,000
150.000,000
150,000,000

; provided that collections of such levy for any year in an amount in excesis of that necessary to
make the payments described in clauses (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) above (a) may be used for any
lawful public purpose designated by the City Council or (b) may be reduced and abated by an
Authorized Officer if such reduction is deemed desirable by an Authorized Officer in connection
with the sale or sales of the Bonds, in each case as detennined from time lo fime by an
Authorized Officer as provided in Section 12 hereof
The tax levy made in this Section is not subject to the 'Aggregate Levy' limitation
contained in the Chicago Property Tax Limitation Ordinance contained in Chapter 3-92 of the
Municipal Code of Chicago (the 'Municipal Code"), and Section 3-92^20 of the Municipal Code
is hereby superseded to exclude the tax levy herein from the definition of "Aggregate Levy'
contained therein.
.
The term 'Pledged Taxes' means (i) the taxes hereinabove levied for collection for the
purpose of providing the funds necessary to make the payments described in clauses 0). ('').
(iii), (iv) and (v) of the first paragraph of this Section 7. and (ii) subject to the provisions of
Section 15 hereof the proceeds of taxes levied for the years from and after 2011 in connection
with" the issuance of the Outstanding Indebtedness to the extent such tax collections are not
necessary for the-payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein or pursuant to any other authorization, and the term 'Pledged Taxes'shall
also inclLide any amounts deposited into the hereinafter-defined Bond Fund or deposited with

 21730

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent (as hereinafter defined) by an Aulhorized Officer for the
purpose of paying principal of and interest on the Bonds and any accrued interest received and
deposited in the Bond Fund or the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Account, if established pursuant to
Section 9 hereof.
As provided in Section 12 or otherwise, the City reserves the right to abate all or a
portion of the Pledged Taxes required to be levied in any year if and to the extent on or before
March 31 of the next succeeding calendar year (or such eariier date as may tie required by law),
the City has ori hand amounts dedicated to the payments described in clauses (i); (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of the first paragraph of this Section 7 due during the one-year period commencing on
January 2 of such succeeding, calendar year. The City may, but shall not be required to, cause
the levy or extension in any year of taxes for the payment of the costs of Ongoing Financing
Services.
Section 8.
The City shall appropriate or otherwise provide amounts sufficient to pay
(i) principal of and interest on the Bonds (including the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital
Appreciation Bonds), (ii) amounts (other than periodic fees and expenses) payable to providers
bf Credit Facilities a§ described in Section 12 hereof to the payment of which the City has
pledged its full faith and credit and (iii) Interest Rate Exchange Agreements to the payment of
which the City has pledged its full faith and credit for the years such amounts are due. and the
City hereby covenants to take timely.action as required by law to carry out the provisions of this
Section, but, if for any such year it fails to do so, this Ordinance shall constitute a confinuing
appropriation ordinance of such amounts without any further action on the part of the City
Council.
.
Section 9.
Each Authorized Officer is authorized to establish one or more special
accounts, if determined to be necessary in connection with the sale of any of the Bonds,
separate and segregated from all other funds and accounts of the City, which shall either be
0) held by an Authorized Officer (each a 'Bond Fund') or (ii) maintained vvith a bank or'trust
company to be designated by an Authorized Officer (each an ' A d Valorem Tax Escrow
Account") pursua'nt to an escrow agreement (each an ' A d Valorem Tax Escmw Agreemenf),
between the City and the applicable Escrow Agent named therein (each an ' A d Valorem Tax
Escmw Agent'), and one or more of the Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer are hereby authorized to
• execute and deliver one or more Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreements in connection with the
. sale of the Bonds in such form as. the officers so execufing such agreement may deem
appropriate in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
In lieu of the proceeds of such taxes being deposited with the City Treasurer, any such
A d Valorem Tax Escrow Agreement may authorize the County Collectors of Cook and DuPage
Counties, Illinois to deposit the proceeds of such taxes directly into the applicable Ad Valorem
Tax Escrow Account, if such Accourit has been created
Section 10.
If the Pledged Taxes lo be applied lo Ihe payment of Ihe Bonds are not
available in time to make any payments of principal of or interest on the Bonds when due. then
the appropriate fiscal officers of the City are hereby directed to rriake such payments from any
other moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City that are legally available

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21731

for thai purpose in advancement of the collection of such Pledged Taxes, and when the
proceeds thereof are received, such other funds shall be replenished, all to the end that the
credit of the City may be preserved by the prompt payment of the principal of and interest on the
Bonds-as the same become due.
Section 11. A copy of this Ordinance, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed in
the respective offices of the County Clerics of Cook and DuPage Counties, Illinois (the 'County
Clerks'"), and such filing shall constitute the authority for and It shall be the duty of said County
Clerks, in each year beginning in 2013, to and including 2053, to extend the taxes levied
pursuant to Section 7 hereof for collection in such year, such taxes to be in addition to and in
excess of all other taxes heretofore or hereafter authorized to be levied by the City on its behalf.
A copy of this Ordinance, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall also be filed with.each
applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, if any. each applicable Bond Registrar, and if the
County Collectors of Cook and DuPage Counties are authorized lb deposit the proceeds of the
taxes levied pursuant to Section 7 hereof directly with an Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent
pursuant to Section 9 hereof with such County Collectors.
Section 12.
Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell all or any portion of the
Bonds, other than the Retail Bonds and the Direct Purchase Bonds which shall be sold as
provided in the following tviro paragraphs, from lime to time to or at the direction of an
iindenMiter or group of uridervyriters to be selected by such Authorized Officer (the
"Underwriters'), viWh the concurrencis of the'Chairman of the Committee on Finance of the City
Council (the 'Chairman'), on such terms as such Authorized Officer may deem to be in the best
interests of the City within the limitations set forth in this Ordinance.
Each Aulhorized Officer is hereby aulhorized to sell Retail Bonds from lime to time on
such terms as such Authorized Officer may deem lo be in the. best interests of the City within
the limitations contained in this Ordinance and,, in connection therewith, to.appoint an agent or
group of agents to be selected by such Authorized Officer (the 'Selling Agents"), with the
concurrence of the Chairman, for the purpose of soliciting purchases of the Retail Bonds by
individual investors, each sale of Retail Bonds solicited by the Selling Agents lb be made with
the concurrence of the Chairman.
The Bonds rnay be sold as Direct Purchase Bonds in a manner and containing such
terms authorized by an Authorized Officer, induding pursuant to a placenient agent
arrangement, to a purchaser or purchasers other than the Underwriters (the 'Direct
Purchasers"), such Direct Purchasers \ o be selected by an Authorized Officer and such sale
tieing permitted either at par or with a discount or premium. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer
is hereby authorized to do alt such things and to execute and deliver such additional documents,
agreements and certificates as shall be necessary in connection with -the sale of Direct
Purchase Bonds.
The principal amount of and (he interest on the Bonds (including the Compound
Accreted Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds and based on reasonable estimates of the
interest to be paid on Variable Rate Bonds) sold of each series and maturity in Ihe aggregate

 21732

JOURNAL-CITY

COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(after taking into account mandatory redemptions) shall nol exceed the amount levied therefor
as specified in Section 7 hereof The Bonds may be sold from time to lime as an Authorized
Officer shall determine lhat the proceeds of such sales are needed.
Subsequent to the sale of any series of Bonds or. in the case of the Retail Bonds,
subsequent to Ihe sale of all Bonds that are the subject of a Selling Agent Agreement (as
hereinafter defined), an Authorized Officer shall file in the office of the City Clerk a notification of
sale directed to the City Council setting forth (i) the series designation, the aggregate principal
amount and authorized denominations of, rnaturity schedule and redemption provisions for the
Bonds sold, (ii) the principal amounts of the Bonds sold as Current Interest Bonds, Capital
Appreciation Bonds, Convertible Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respectively, and whether
any of Ihe Bonds are sold as Retail Bonds, (iii) in the case of the sale of the Retail Bonds or
Direct Purchase Bonds, the principal amounts of such Bond? sold as Cun^ent Interest Bonds,
Capitalized Appreciation Bonds, Convertible. Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respectively,
(iv) in the case of Bonds sold as Capital Appreciation Bonds, (A) the Original Principal Amounts
of and Yields to Maturity on Ihe Capital Appreciation Bonds being sold and (B) a table of
• Compound Accreted Values per minimum authorized Compound Accreted Value at maturity for
any Capital Appreciation Bonds being sold, setting forth the Compound Accreted Value of each .
such Capital Appreciafion Bond on each semiannual compounding date, (v) the interest rates on
the Cuneot Interest Bonds sold or, in the case of Variable Rate. Bonds, a description of the
method of detenmining the interest rate applicable to such Variable Rate Bonds from time to
time, (vO the specific maturities, series and amounts of the Outstanding Indebtedness to tie
refunded with proceeds o f the Bonds, (vii) a description of any Existing Interest Rate Exchange
Agreements to be terminated, amended or otherwise modified in connection with the refunding
of such Outstanding Indebtedness and identifying any settlement, breakage or tiermination
amount to be paid in corinectiori with each such terinination. amendment or modification,
(viii) the date on and price at' which the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding shall.
be redeemed (if such redemption shall occur prior lo stated maturity or pursuant to mandatory
sinking fund redeniption), (ix)the disposition of the taxes levied for the years from and after
2011 for the payment-of the Outstanding Indebtedness or any Existing-Interest Rate Exchange
Agreements as authorized by Section .15 hereof, (x) the identity of the insurer or insurers issuing
the. insurance policy or poJicies.-if any, referred to below, and Ihe identity o f t h e provider'or
providers of one or more Credit Facilities, if any, for such Bonds; (xi)-the identity of the
Underwriters (or, in the case of Retail Bonds, the Selling Agents and in the case of Direct
Purchase Bonds, the Direct Purchasers) selected for- such Bonds, (xii) the identity bf the
applicable Bond Registrar and any trustee or trustees selected by an Authorized Officer for such
Bonds, (xiii) the identity of any remarketing agent retained in. connection with the issuance of
Variable Rale Bonds, if any, (xiv) the compensation paid to the Underwriters (or, in the casis of
Retail Bonds, the Selling Agents) in connection with such sale, (xv) the identity of any Refunding
Escrow Agent (as defined in Section 13(b) tiereof) appointed by an Authorized Officer in
connection with Ihe refunding of Outstanding Indebtedness, and (xvi) any other matter
aulhorized by this Ordinance to be determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale of
the Bonds of each series.
Either Authorized Officer is hereby aulhorized and directed to cause all necessary
notices of redemption of the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding as provided

 3/14/2012

R E P O R T S OF C O M M I T T E E S

21733

above to be given-in accordance with the terms of the respective ordinances or indcniures, as
applicable, authorizing the Outstanding Indebtedness.
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver a
contract ot purchase with respect to each sale of the Bonds to, or at the direction ol, the
Underwriters in substantially the form previously used for similar general obligation bonds of the
City or to the Direct Purchasers, with appropriate revisions to reflect the terms and provisions of
the Bonds and such other revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer shall determine
are necessary or desirable in connection with the sale of the Bonds. The compensation paid to
the Underwriters in connection with any sale of Bonds shall not exceed three percent of the
principal amount of the Bonds being sold. Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall limit the
sale of the Bonds or any maturity or maturities thereof at a price or prices in excess of the
principal amount thereof
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver a
contract with'Selling Agents pursuant lo which the Selling Agents shall solicit purchases of the
Retail Bonds <by individual investors \a 'Selling Agent:Agreement") substantially in the form of
the selling agent agreement "previously entered into by the City in connection with the sale of
Retail Borids, but with such revisions in text as the. Mayor or an Authorized Officer executing the
same shall determine are necessary or "desirable, the execution thereof by;the Mayor or such
Authorized Officer to evidence the City Council's'approval of all such revisions. The aggregate
compensation .paid to the Selling Agents pursuant to any Selling Agent Agreement shall not
exceed three percent of the principal amount of the Retail Bonds sold pursuant to such Selling
•Agent Agreement. The terms of any Selling Agent Agreement may provide for the delegation by
an Authorized Officer to one or more Deputy Comptrollers of authority to approve the final terms
of sale of . any Retail Bonds pursuant to such Selling Agent Agreement within parameters
established by an Authorized Officer consistent with the terms and limitations of this Ordinance.
Any Selling Agent Agreement may also;coritain provisions pursuant to which a person receiving
an ownership, interest in any Retail Bonds through the-death.of a Bondholder shall have the right
to sell such; Retail Bonds back to the City-at a'price'of hot to exceed 105 percent of par and
setting forth the terms and conditions of the exercise of such right: The Mayor or an Authorized
(Officer (or. delegate as authorized above) is hereby authorized to do all such things and to
execute and deliver such additional documents, agreerhents and certificates as shall be
necessary in connection with Ihe sale of Retail Bonds from time to time pursuant to a Selling
Agent /Agreement, including any such document, agreement or certificate necessary to describe
the terms of Retail Bonds then being sold.
'
In connection with any sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to
obtain one or more policies of bond insurance.from recognized bond insurers selected, by an
Authorized Officer, if such Authorized Officer deterriiines such bond insurance to be desirable in
connection with such sale of the Bonds. Either Authorized Officer may. on behalf of the City,
make covenants with such bond insurer that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance and are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance.
In connection with any sale of the Bonds, the Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer is hereby
aulhorized to oblairi one or more letters of credit, lines of credit, standby bond purchase

 21734

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

agreements, or similar credit or liquidity facilities (a 'Credit Facility") with one or more financial
institutions. The Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into a
reimbursement agreement and/or standby bond purchase agreement and to execute and issue
a promissory note in connection with the provisions of each Credit Facility. Any Credit Facility,
reimbursement agreement or standby bond purchase agreement shall be in substantially the
form of the credit facilities, reimbursement agreements and standby bond purchase agreements
previously entered into by the City in connection with the sale of general obligation bonds or
notes, but with such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer executing the same
shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or an Authorized
Officer lo evidence the Cily Council's approval of all such revisions. The annual fee paid to any
financial institution that provides a Credit Facility with respect to all or a portion of a series of the
Bonds shall not exceed one and one-half percent of the average principal amount of such
Bonds outstanding during such annual period. The final form of any reimbursement agreement
and/or standby bond purchase agreement entered into by the City with respect to the Bonds
shall be attached lo the notification of sale filed in the office of the Cily Clerk pursuant to this
section. Each such promissory note .shall be a general obligation of the Cily for the payment of
which, both prindpal and interest, the City pledges its full faith, credit and resources. Each
promissory note, and any Bond owned or held as collateral by any such financial institution in its
capacity as a provider of a Credit Facifity shall tiear interest at a rate not exceeding IS percent
per annum and shall mature not later than the final maturity dale of the related Bonds secured
by sucti reimbursement agreement or standby bond purchase agreement. The. Mayor or an
Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver any such reimbursement
agreement or standby bond purchase agreement, and any amendment thereto or replacement
thereof, under the seal of the City affixed arid attested by the City Clerk.
In the event that Bonds are sold so as to require the levy of taxes for any year specified
in Section 7 hereof for the purpose of making.the paiyments described in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of. the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof in an amount less than the amount specified for
such year in the firsl paragraph of Section 7 hereof, then an Authorized Officer shall, on or prjor
to March 31 of the calendar year next succeeding such year, notify the City Council of the
determination made pursuant lo clauses (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof
regarding the.applicatiori of any resulting excess levy collections, and, in addition, in connection
with a determination made pursuant lo clause (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, an
Authorized Officer shall file iri the respective offices of the County Clerks certificates of tax
abatement for such year. In the event that upon the final sale of the Bonds of all series, such
Bonds have been sold so as to require the levy of taxes in any year specified in Section 7
hereof for the purpose of making the payments described in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of the
first paragraph of Section 7 hereof in an amount less than the amount specified for such year in
Section 7 hereof, then there shall be included, in the final notification of sale to the City Council
described in the fourth (4*^) paragraph of Ihis Section 12, the determination made pursuant to
clauses (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof regarding the application of any
resulting excess levy collections for such year and any succeeding year and. in addition, in
connection with a determination made pursuant to clause (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7
hereof an Authorized Officer shall file in the respective offices of the County Clerks certificates
of tax abatement for such year or years. If any of the Bonds are not to be sold and issued as
provided herein and no levy collections are to tie applied for the purposes of paying the costs of

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF C O M M I T f E E S

21735

Ongoing Financing Services as determined by an Authorized Officer, the corresponding taxes
herein levied to pay debt service thereon shall be abated in full. Any certificate of abatement
delivered pursuant to this paragraph shall refer to the amount of taxes levied pursuant to
Section 7 hereof shall indicate the amount of reduction in Ihe amount of taxes levied by the City
resulting from the sale or sales of the Bonds or the non-issuance thereof which reduced
amount is to be abated from such taxes, and shall further indicate the remainder of such taxes
which is to be extended for collection by said County Clerks.
The preparation, use and distribution of a preliminary official statement, an official
statement or any other disclosure document relating to each sale and issuance of the Bonds are
hereby ratified and approved. The Mayor and each Aulhorized-Officer are each hereby
authorized to execute and deliver an official statemehl or other disclosure document relating lo
each sale and issuance of the Bonds on behalf of the City. The prelirriinary official statement,
official statement and other disclosure documents herein authorized shall be substantially
similar to thosis previously used for general obligation bonds of the City.'and shall contain the
temns and provisions of the Bonds, the manner in which the Bonds shall be sold, the use of
proceeds bf the Bonds, financial information for the City, and such other information as the
Mayor or any Authorized Officer determines lb tie advisable under Ihe.circumstances.
In connection with any sale of the Bonds; an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to
execute and deliver one or- more Continuing Disclosure Undertakings (each a 'Coritinuing
Disclosure L/nder/aWng') evidencing the City's agrecrhent to'comply with the requirements of
Sectibn (b)(5) .of Rule 15c2-12, adopted by • the' Securities and Exchange Commission (the
' S E C ) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, in a form approved by, the Corporation
Counsiel. Upon its execution and delivery on behalf of the City as herein provided, each
Continuing Disclosure Undertaking will be binding on the ,City, and the officers, employees arid
agents of the City are hereby authbrized lo do all .such acts and things and lo execute all such
documents as may tie necessary to carry out and comply with.the provisions of each Confinuirig
Disclosure Undertaking as executed. Either Authorized Officer is hereby-further authorized lo
ariiend each Continuing Disclosure Undertaking in accordance with its. respective terms from
time to lime following its eikeculFon and delivery as said officer shall deem necessary. In
addifion, an Authorized: Officer is authorized, to rnake all future filings with the Electronic
Municipal Market Access system operated by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board or
such other municipal securities information repository as shall be designated by the SEC, all in
accordance vvith the provisions of Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 15c2-12(b)(5)
promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act' of 1934. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this Ordinance, the sole remedies for any failure by the City to corhply with any Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking shall be the ability of the Ijeneficial owner of any applicable Borid to
seek rnandamus or specific performance by court order to cause the City to comply with its
obligations under such Continuing Disclosure Undertaking.
The Bonds shall be duly prepared and executed in the form and manner provided herein
and delivered to the purchasers in accordance vvith the applicable terms of sale.
The Mayor, each Authorized Officer, the City Treasurer and the City Cleric are each
hereby authorized to execute and deliver such other documents and agreements (including

 21736

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

such conlracts, such intergovernmental agreements or such grant agreements with not-for-profit
organizations, educational or cultural institutions or for-profit organizations or to assist the State
of Illinois, the United States of America, or other municipal corporations, units of local
government or school districts in the State of Illinois, receiving proceeds of the Bonds as an
Authorized Officer shall deem necessary and appropriate) and perfomi such other acts prior lo
or following Ihe issuance of the Bonds as may be necessary or desirable in connection with Ihe
issuance of the Bonds and any transactions contemplated herein related to the application of
the proceeds of the Bonds or collections or application of taxes levied for the payment of the
Bonds or the Outstanding Indebtedness or other purposes hereunder, but subject lo any
limilafions on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth, and any such actions
heretofore taken by the Mayor, an Authorized Officer, the City Treasurer or the City Clerk in
- accordance with the provisions hereof are hereby ratified and approved. With respect to each
grant of Bond proceeds, each Authorized Officer is hereby aulhorized to designate in writing,
with the written concurrence of the Budget Director of the City (the 'Budget Directed), (i) one or
more City departments or agencies to administer such .grant, and (ii) the head of the City
department br agency who shall be authprized to execute a grant agreement and such other
documents, agreements or instruments as shall be deemed necessary or desirable by such City
departrnent o r agency head. Upon any such written designation by an Authorized Officer with
respect to a grant of Bond proceeds, such City department or agency shall tie authorized to
administer such grant and the head of such City department or agency shall be aulhorized lo
execute a grant agreerrienl and such other documents, agreements or instruments as such
official shall deem necessary or desirable.
.
Section 13.
follows:

The proceeds from the sale of any series of the Bonds shall be used as

(a) • The sum representing the accrued interest received; if any, shall be used
to pay the first interest becoming due on the Bonds sold, and to that end, shall be
deposited in the applicable Bond Fund or the applicable "Ad" Valorem. Tax Escrow
Account, if established.
(b)
From, the sale proceeds derived from any such sale of a series of the
Bonds', (i) such sum as may be determined by ah Authorized Officer to be necessary to
pay not more than three years of interest on the Bonds i.ssued to pay costs of the Project
may be Used to pay such interest, and to that end. may be deposited in the applicable
Bond Fund or the applicable Ad Valorern Tax Escrow Account. , if established; (ii) the
sum determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary lo pay the costs of the Project
shall be set aside, held and invested at the direction of an Authorized. Officer, as
separate funds of the City pending such payment, provided that proceeds of the Bonds
issued to finance the Pension Contributions shall be paid into the Pension Funds as and
when required by lavv; (iii) Ihe sum determined by an Authorized Officer to capitalize br
fund interest on Outstanding Indebtedness shall be deposited into the respective debt
service funds established for the Outstanding Indebtedness; (iv) the sum determined by
an Authorized Officer to be sufficient lb pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being
refunded at or prior to their respective maturities, at a price of par. the applicable
redemption premium and accrued interest thereon up to and including said redemption

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21737

or maturity dates shall be deposited into the respective debt service funds established
for the Outstanding Indebtedness or into one or more "Refunded Bonds Escrow
Accounts' to be held by one or more banks or trust companies to tie designated by an
Authorized Officer (each a 'Refunding Escrow Agent'), each pursuant to the terms of an
escrow agreement (each a 'Refunding Escrow Agreement), and the Mayor, an
Authorized Officer and Ihe City Clerk, or any of them, are hereby authorized to execute
and deliver each Refunding Escrow Agreement, and any amendmehl thereto, in such
form as the officer so executing shall deem appropriate to effect the refunding or
refundings described in this paragraph and (v) the sum determined by an Authorized
Officer lo be sufficient to provide for the payment ot any settlement, breakage or
tenmination amount payable in. connection with the terminailon, amendment or
-. modification of an Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreement shall be paid to the City's
counterparty or counterparties thereunder.
Notwithstanding any provision of the
Municipal Code, investments acquired with prpceeds of the Bonds or investment income
thereon may matirre beyond ten years firom the date of acquisition, and may include but
are .hot limited to agreements entered into tietween the City and providers of securities
under which agreements such providers agreie to purchase frohi or sell to the Cily
specified Securities on specific dates at predetermined prices, all as established at the
firhe of execution of any such' agreerhent and as set forth in such agreement, and
guaranteed investment contracts, forward purchase agreernents and other similar
investment vehicles'.
Such guaranteed' investment contracts, fonward purchase
agreements and other similar investment vehicles'may. to the extent permitted by
operative authorizing documents and by applicable law, tie assigned'or transferred from
one tiond transaction to another or apply to the proceeds of more than one bqnd'transaction on a commingled or non-commingled basis, as determined by an Authorized
Officer: The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into any
amendments to or restatements of existing documents or to execute new documents, to
consent to actions being taken by others or to'obtain the consent of other parties, as
may be necessary or desirable in this respect. Investment income derived from Bond
proceeds may be (w) expended for the same purposes for which Bond proceeds may be
expended, (x) used for the payment or prepayment of City debt obligations, (y) deposited
in the Corporate Fund of the'City or (z) rebated to the United States of America as
provided in Section 16 hereof, all as determined By an Authorized Officer'or the Budget
Director; Any commingled investment income from guaranteed investment contracts,
fqnvard purchase agreements and other similar investment vehicles shall be apportioned
among bond transactions as determined by an Authorized Officer or as otherwise
required by operaitive authorizirig documents and applicable law.'
(c)
Frorn the sale proceeds of a series of the Bonds not applied as provided
in paragraphs (a) and (b), above, the amount deemed necessary by an Authorized
Officer shall tie applied to the payment of the costs of issuance of such Bonds, induding
the premium or fee for bond insurance or other predit or liquidity enhancement, if any.
and any unexpended portion of the sale proceeds shall be paid to the Cily.
The costs of the Project may be paid directly by the City oi" may be financed by the
making of grants for the implementation of the Project to (i) not-for-profit organizations.

 21738

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

educational or cultural institutions or for-profil organizalions, (ii) the United States of America,
(iii) the State of Illinois or (iv) other units of local government, political subdivisions, municipal
corporations or school districts in the State of Illinois, including any operating division (hereof all
as determined by an Authorized Officer.
An Authorized Officer shall report to the City Council with respect to the expenditure of
the proceeds of each series of the Bonds issued hereunder to pay the costs of the Project.
Such reports shall be made no later than August 1 of each year, commencing August 1. 2013,
with respect to expenditures.made during the preceding calendar year. No report shall be
• required hereunder following any calendar year in which no proceeds of any series of the Bonds
are expended to pay costs of the Project.
Sec/ion 14. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby" authorized to execute and
deliver, w^ith respect to all or any portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness, the Bonds, and any
Gerieral Obligation Indebtedness (as defined below) that may be issued in the fu(ure
(collectively, 'City 'Indebtedness'), from time to time one or more agreements, or options to
enter into such agreements, with counterparties selected by an Authorized Officer, the purpose
of which'is lo provide lb the Cily (i) an interesl rate basis, cash flow basis, or other basis
differeiit from that provided in the related City Indebtedness for the payment of interest or
(ii) wilh respect lo a future delivery of general obligation bonds, notes or commercial paper
(collectively. 'General Obligation Indebtedness'), one or more of a guaranteed interest rate,
interest rate basis, cash flow basis, or purchase price (such agreements or options to enter into
such agreements being .'coUecWvely referred to as 'Interest Rate Exchange Agreements').
Interest Rate Exchange Agreements Include without limitation- agreements or contracts
commonly known as iriterest rale exchange, swaps, including forward starting syvaps, collar,
caps; or derivative agreements., forward payment conversion agreernents, interest rate locks,
forward bond • purchase agreements, bond warrant agreements, or bond purchase option
agreements and also include agreements granting to the City or a counterparty an option to
enter into any of the foregoing and agreements or contracts providing for payments based on
levels of or changes in interest rates, including a change in an interest rate index, to exchange
cash flows or a series of payments, or lb hedge payment, rate spread, or similar exposure. The
slated aggregate notional amount (net of .offsetting transactions) under all Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements related to certain City Indebtedness shall not exceed the principal
amount of such City Indebtedness to which such Interest Rate Exchange Agreenients relate.
For purposes of the immediately preceding sentence, "offsetting transactions" shall, include any
transaction which is intended to hedge, modify or otherwise affect another outstanding
transaction or its economic results. The offsetting transaction need not lie based on the same
index or rate option as the related City Indebtedness or the transaction being offset and need
not be wilh the same counterparty as'the transaction being offset. Examples of offsetting
transactions include, without limitation, a floaling-to-fixed rate interest rate swap tieing offset by
a fixed-to-fioating rate interest rate swap, and a fixed-to-floating rate interest rate swap being
offset by a fioating-to-fixed rale interest rate swap or an interest rate cap or floor or a
floating-to-fioaling interest rate swap.
Any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement to the extent practicable shall be in substantially
the form of either the 2002 ISDA Master Agreement or the Local Currency — Single Jurisdiction

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21739

version or the Multicurrency— Cross Border version of the 1992 ISDA Master Agreement
(including a Schedule and/or a Credit Support Annex to such Schedule, if applicable) published
by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association. Inc. {'ISDA') or any successor form to^
either published by ISDA. and in the appropriate confirmations of transactions governed by the
applicable agreement, with such insertions, completions and modifications thereof as shall be
approved by Ihe officer of the City executing the same, his or her execution to constitute
conclusive evidence of the C'ty Council's approval of such insertions, complefions and
modifications thereof Should any ISDA form not be the appropriate form to accomplish the
objectives of the City under this Section 14, then such other agreement as may tie appropriate
is hereby approved, the execution by the Mayor or an Authorized Officer being conclusive
evidence of the City Council's approval of such insertions, completions and modifications
thereof. Amounts payable by the City under any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement shall
(i) constitute a general obligation of the City for which is pledged its full faith and crediL (ii) be
payable from a tax unliriiited as to rate or amount that may have heretofore or shall be hereafter
levied by the City Council (including, with respect only to an Interest Rate Exchange Agreement
relating to the Bonds, the tax levy described in Section 7 hereof), (iii) constitute operating
expenses of the City payable from any monies, revenues, income, assets or funds of the City
available for such purpose, or (iv) constitute any combination of (i). (ii), and (iii), all as shall be
determined by an Authorized Officer. Nothing contained in this Section 14. shall limit or restrict
the. authority of the Mayor or an Authorized Officer to enter into similar agreements pursuant lo
prior or subsequent authorization of the City Council:The.Mayor and an Authorized Officer are hereby authorized to take all actions necessary
to assign, terminate, amend or modify all or a portion of any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement
upon a determination that, such assignment, termination, amendment or modification is in the
best financial interest of the City. Any settlement, breakage or termination amount payable as a
result of such assignment, termination,! .amendment or modification may lie paid from proceeds
of sale-of the Bonds or General Obligatiori Indebtedness or from any :lawfully available funds of
the City.
" Any ,amounts received, by the City pursuant to any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement
(other than regulariy scheduled payment ariiounts) are hereby authorized to be expended for
any purpose for which the proceeds of the related City Indebtedness are authorized to be
expended and for the payment or prepayment of any City Indebtedness, all as determined by an
Aulhorized Officer.
In addition to the foregoing, the Mayor and an Authorized Officer are hereby authorized
to take all actions necessary to assign, terminate, amend or modify all or a portion of any
agreement of the type described herein as an Interest Rate Exchange /Agreement with respect
to any Outstanding • Revenue Indebtedness upon a determination that such assignnrienl.
termination, amendment or modification is in the best financial interest of the City. Any
settlerrient. breakage or termination amount payable as a result of such assignment,
tenminatiort. amendment or modification may be paid from the sources provided for the payment
of such agreements in the proceedings authorizing the .Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness to
which such agreements relate or from any other lawfully available funds of the City.

 21740

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

Section 15
The taxes levied for the years from and afler 2011 for the payment of the
Outstanding Indebtedness or amounts due under any Existing Interest Rate Exchange
Agreement, to the extent the collection of such taxes is not necessary for the payment of all or a
portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof or for the payment of
- amounts due under an Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreement due to the termination of
such Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreement as authorized herein or pursuant lo any other
authorization, may, al the direction of an Authorized Officer, be applied (A) as set forth in the
next paragraph or (B) lo any other lawful public purpose of the Cily designated by the City
Council including (i) the purposes set forth in clauses (i), (ii). (iii) and (iv) of the first paragraph of.
Section 7 of this Ordinance, (ii) the payment of the costs of any capital projects for which funds
have been lawfully appropriated or (iii) the abatement of such taxes. There shall be prepared b y '
an Aulhorized Officer and filed with the County Clerks.a certificate of reduction of taxes
heretofore levied for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding by an
Authorized Officer as provided in Sections 12 and 13 hereof and directing the abateme.nt of the
taxes heretofore levied to pay the Outstanding Indebtedness bemg refunded, including the taxes
levied for the years from and after 2012, if so determined by an Authorized Officer as provided
in the. preceding sentence.X In addition, any proceeds of the Outstanding Indebtedness being
held for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness, to the extent such proceeds are not
necessary for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein or pursuant to any other authorization, may, at the direction of an Authorized
Officer, be applied lo any lawful public purpose of the Cily designated by the City Council,
including the payment of the Bonds (but in the case of Bonds the interest on which is excluded
from gross income for federal income tax purposes, only upon receipt by the City of an opinion
. of Bond Counsel to Ihe effect that such will not adversely affect the tax-exempt status of the
Bonds)."
Furthermore, notwithstanding any other proyisio'n hereof taxes levied for the years 2011
to 2013, inclusive, for the payment of Outstanding Indebtedness, to the extent the collection of
isuch taxes is nol necessary for the payment of all or a portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness
due to the refunding thereof with the proceeds of the Bonds may, in addition to the other
purposes set forth above, be applied to the payment of the principal of and interest due on
general obligation commercial paper notes dOe .on or before January 31, 2016. at the direction
of an Authorized Officer. Any directions or determinations by an Aulhorized Officer pursuant to
this paragraph shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than the date a levy is applied to the
payment of commercial paper as provided herein.
Section 16.
The City covenants that it will lake no action in the investment of the
proceeds of the Bonds (other than Bonds issued as bonds the interest on which is not
excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal income lax purposes) which
would result in making the interest payable on any of such Bonds subject to federal income
taxes by reason of such Bonds being classified as 'arbitrage bonds' within the meaning of
Section 148 of the Code.
The City further covenants that it will act with respect to the proceeds of Bonds (other
than Bonds issued as bonds the interest on which is not excludable from the gross income of
the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes), the earnings on the proceeds of such Bonds

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21741

and any other moneys on deposit in any fund or account maintained in respect of such Bonds,
including, if necessary, a rebate of such earnings to the United States of America, in a manner
which would cause Ihe interest on such Bonds to continue to be exempt from federal income
taxation under Section 103(a) of the Code.
Each Aulhorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute such certifications, tax returns,
covenants and agreements as shall be necessary, in the opinion of nationally recognized bond
counsel, or in the best interest of the City, as determined by an Authorized Officer, to evidence
the City's compliance with the covenants contained in this section. Each Authorized Officer is
hereby authorized to execute one or more declarations of intent to reimburse costs of the
Project in accordance with the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder.
Section 17. This Ordinance is prepared in accordance with the powers of the City as a
home rule unit under Article Vll of the 1970 Illinois Cpnstijution. The appropriate officers of the
City are hereby authorized to take such actions and do such things as shall be necessary to
. perform, carry out. give effect to and consurnmate the transactions contemplated by this
Ordinance and the Bonds, induding, but not limited lo, the exercise followirig the delivery date
of any of the Bonds of any power or authority delegated to such official of Ihe City under Ihis"
Ordinance with respect to the Bonds upon the initial issuance Ihereof, but subject to any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authority, as herein set forth, and any actions
heretofore taken by such officers of the City in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby ..ratified and approved.
Section 18. The Mayor and each Authorized Officer may each designate another to act
as their respective proxy and, as applicable, to affix.'their respective signatures lo the Bonds
whether in temporary or definitive form, and any other instrument, certificate or document
required to tie signed by the Mayor or .ari Authorized Officer pursuant lb this .Ordinance-and any
instrument; certificate or document.required thereby. In such case, each shall.send to the City
Council written notice of the person so designated by each, such notice stating the name of the
•person so selected and identifying the instruments, certificates and documents which such
person shall be aulhorized lo sign as. proxy for the Mayor and each Aulhorized Officer,
respectively. .A written signature of the Mayor or of an Authorized Officer, respectively,
executed by the perison so designated underneath, shall be attached to each notice. Each
notice, with the signatures attached, shall be recorded in. the Journal of Proceedings of the City
Council for such date and filed in the office of the Cily Cleric. When the signature of the Mayor
is placed on an instrument, certificate or document at Ihe direction of the Mayor in the specified
manner, the same, in all respecls, shall be .as binding on the City as if signed by the Mayor in
person. When the signature of an Aulhorized Officer is so affixed to an instrument, certificate or
document at the direction of such Authorized Officer, the same, in all respects, shall be as
binding on the City as if signed by such Authorized Officer in person.
Section 19.
If requested by Ihe Bond Registrar, the Mayor, each Aulhorized Officer and
the City Cleric are each authorized to execute the standard forrh of agreement between the Cily
and the Bond Registrar with respect to the obligations and duties thereof

 21742

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

Section 20.
If payment or provision for payment is made, to or for the registered
owners of all or a portion of the Bonds, of the Compound Accreted Value of any CapitaL.
Appreciation Bond and the principal of and interest due and lo become due on any Current
Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond at the times and in the manner stipulated therein, and there
is paid or caused to be paid to the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax
Escrow Agent as provided in Section 9 hereof or such bank or trusl company as shall tie
designated by an Authorized Officer (such bank or trust company hereinafter referred to as a
'Defeasance Escrow Agent'), all sums of money due and to become due according to the
provisions hereof then these presents and the estate and rights hereby granted shall cease..,
terminate and be void as lo those Bonds or portions thereof except for purposes of registration,
transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations. Any
Bond shall be deemed to be paid within the meaning of this section when payment of the
Compound Accreted Value of any such Capital Appreciation Bond or the principal of any such
Current Interest Bond, plus interest thereon to the due dale thereof (whether such due date be
by reason of maturity or upon redemption as provided in this Ordinance or otherwise), either
(a) shall have been rfiade or caused to have been made in accordance with the terms thereof,
or (b) shall have been provided for by irrevocably depositing with the applicable Bond Registrar,
the applicable A d Valorem Tax Escrow Agent as provided "in Section 9 hereof or a Defeasance
Escrow Agent, in trust and exclusively for such payment, (1) moneys sufficient lo make such
payment or (2)(A) direct obligations of the United Stales of America; (B) obligations of agencies
of the United States of America, the timely payment of principal of and interest on which are
guaranteed by the United Stales of America; (C) obligations of the following agencies: Federal
Home Loan Mortgage'Corp. (FHLMC) debt obligations. Farm Credit System (formeriy: Federal
Land Banks. Federal Intermediate Credit Banks, and Banks for Cooperatives) debt obligations.
Federal Home Loan Banks (FHL Banks) debt obligations, Fannie" Mae debt'Obligations,
Financing Corp. (FICO) - debt' obligations. Resolution Funding Corp. (REFCORP) debt
obligations, and U.S. Agency for International Developnient (U.S. A.l.p.) Guaranteed notes;
(D) pre-refunded municipal obligations defined as follows: any bonds or other obligations of any
. stale of the United States of America or of any agency, instrumentality or local governmental
unit of any such state which are nol callable at the option of the obligor prior to maturity or as to
. which irrevocable instmclions have been given by the obligor lo call on the dale specified in the
notice; or (E) instruments evidencing an ownership interest in obligations described in the
preceding clauses (A), (B) and (C), or (3) a combination of the investments. described in
clauses (1) and (2) above, such amounts so deposited being available or maturing as to
principal and interest in such amounts and at such times, without consideration of any
reinvestment thereof as will insure the availability of sufficient moneys to make such payment
(all as confirmed by a nationally recognized firm of independent public accountants). At such
times as a Bond shall be .deemed to tie paid hereunder, as aforesaid, it shall no longer be
secured by or entitled lo the benefits of this Ordinance, except for the purposes of registration,
transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations.
No such deposit under this section shall be made or accepted hereunder and no iise
made of any such deposit unless, in the case of Bonds (other than Bonds issued as bonds the
interest on which is not excludable from the gross income of the owner Ihereof for federal
income tax purposes), the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Agent or the applicable Defeasance Escrow Agent, as the case may lie. shall have received an

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21743

opinion of nationally recognized municipal bond counsel to the effect thai such deposit and use
would not cause any of such Bonds to be treated as 'arbitrage bonds' within the meaning of
Section 148 of the Code or any successor provision thereto.
Nothing in Ihis Ordinance shall prohibit a defeasance deposit of escrow securities as
provided in this section or a defeasance deposit with respect to the Outstanding Indebtedness
pursuant to any Refunding Escrow Agreement authorized by Section 13(b) hereof, from being
subject to a subsequent sale of such escrow securities and reinvestment of all or a portion of
the proceeds of that sale in escrow securities which, together with money to remain so held in
trust, shall be sufficient to provide for payment of principal, redemption premium, if any, and
interest on any of the defeased Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness, as appropriate. Amounts
held by the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, any
Defeasance Escrow Agent or any Refunding Escrow Agent in excess of the amounts needed so
to provide for payment of the defeased Bonds or Outstanding Indebtisdriess, as. appropriate,
may be subject to withdravval by the City. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver from time lo time one or more agreements (iand amendments
thei"eto) with counterparties selected by an Authorized Officer, with respect lo the investment
and use of such excess amounts held by the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad
Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, a Defeasance Escrow Agent or a Refunding Escrow Agent.
Section 21. • Notwithstanding any other provisions of this'iOrdinarice, the terms and
provisions of the trust indenture securing a series bf Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in
Section 2 hereof with respect to (a) the authentication, registration; transfer and destruction or
loss of such Variable Rate Borids, (b) subject to the limitation on redemption price set forth in
Section 3(d) hereof tfie redemption of such Variable Rate Bonds, oi- (c)the method.of payment
or defeasance of such Variable Rate Bonds, shall apply lo such Variable Rate Bonds issued
pursuant to this Ordinance. With respect to the' Direct Purchase Bonds, an"Authorized Officer is
authorized to negotiate the terms and provisions of such Direct Purchase Bonds in addition, to or
as an alternative to the lemis and provisions of the trust indenture securing a series of Variable
Rate Bonds.
Section 22.
Any series of the Bonds," the Outstanding' Indebtedness or the Outstanding
Revenue Indebtedness chay be restructured in a manner authorized by the Mayor or an
Authorized Officer, including but not limited to (a) terminating credit enhanceriient or liquidity
facilities for. a series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness, (b) repladng credit enhancement or liquidity facilities for a series of Bonds,
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indeblednesis with similar credit
enhancement or liquidity from a different provider, (c) replacing credit enhancement or liquidity
facilities for a series of Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness with different forms of credit enhancement or liquidity from the same or a different
provider, (d) adding additional credit enhancemenl or liquidity supplemental to that securing a
series of Borids, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness,
(e) removing or amending provisions for a series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness, or in financing documents related thereto, to or for the
benefit of credit enhancers or liquidity providers or adding provisions for the benefit of new or
replacement credit enhancers or liquidity providers, (0 replacing an existing rertiartceting agent

 21744

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

or remarketing agents for Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness with a remarketing agent or remarketing agents selected by an Authorized Officer
or assigning an existing remarketing agreement to a remarketing agent or remart<eting agents
selected by an Aulhorized Officer, (g) converting to or adding a different interest rate mode or
modes under the documents pursuant to which such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness were issued, (h) adding a floating rate note (FRN) mode to
any document pursuant to vvhich such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding
Revenue Indebtedness were issued or refunding such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness using an FRN structure, or (i) selling or remarketing
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness pursuant to a direct purchase
arrangement to one or more purchasers selected by an Authorized Officer either at par or with a
discount or premium, subject to any limitations or restrictions with respect to such actions being
taken contained in this Ordinance with respect to the Bonds or an oidinance pursuant to which
such Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued, but.
provided, that if determined by an Authorized Officer to lie necessary to achieve the financial
interests of the City, such limitations or restrictions contained in an ordinance pursuant lo which
such Outstanding Indebtedness."or Outstariding Revenue Indebtedness was issued may be
exceeded; but not in excess of the comparable limitations set forth in this Ordinance. The
Mayor br an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into any amendriienls to or
restatements o f existing documents or to execute new documents, to consent to actions being
taken by others or lo obtain the consent of other parties, and to cause to tie prepared such
remarketing documents, including disdosure documents, as may be necessary or desirable to
effed any such debt restruduring and facilitate the remari<eting. of the Bonds, Outstanding
Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness, and lo pay the fees, costs arid expenses
relating thereto, as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer executing the same determines is
necessary and desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or an Authorized Officer to
evidence the City Council's approval bf all such amendments.
Section 23.
Any furids heretofore or hereafter received by the City, pursujant to any
Interest Rate Exchange Agreemeril and in connection with Outstanding Indebtedness, are
hereby authorized to be expended for the payment or prepayment of any City Indebtedness;
provided however, notwithstanding the foregoing, such authorization "shall not apply to any
funds the expenditure of which shall fiave been heretofore authorized by other applicable law.
Section 24.
For purposes of Treasury Regulation Section 1.160-2, the CKy Council
hereby states its intent to finance, or to reimburse the City for the. payment of the costs
described in Exhibit A attached hereto by the issuance of tax-exempt obligations in an amount
nol to exceed $200,000,000. No funds from sources other than such obligations are, or are
expected to be. reserved or allocated, or otherwise set "aside; for the payrnent of such costs,
except as permitted by the Code. This declaration is consistent with the budgetary practices of
the City.
Section 25.
read as follows:

A. Section 3 of the 2002 Ordinance is hereby amended in its entirety to

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITFEES

21745

Section 3. Maximum Amount and Term. Without further authorization of this City
Council, the maximum aggregate princijial amount of all Aulhorized Debt outstanding
under this ordinance at any" time shall not exceed Five Hundred Million Dollars
($500,000,000) (exclusive of unpaid interest and fees). All Authorized Debt shall mature
on or prior to January 1, 2030.
B.

Section 18 of the 2002 Ordinance is hereby amended in its entirety to read

as follows:
Section 18. The Line of Credit Program, (a) The Mayor or the City's Chief
Finaricial Officer or the City Comptroller (the Chief Financial Officer and the City
Cornptroller each being hereinafter referred to as an "Authorized Officer") is hereby
authorized lo execute and deliver one (1) or more line of credit agreements (each, a
"Line of Credit Agreement") with one (1) or rnore commercial banks and .other finandal
institutions and in the form customarily used to provide governmental borrowers with a
revolving line of credit lo meet their need for working, capital or interim financing for
capital projects and. with sucti terms and provisions as an Authorized Officer shall
determine to be in the best interest of the City. The City Cleil< is authorized to attest the
same and affix thereto the,corporate seal of the City or a facsimile.thereof, the execution
and delivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval.of
each s u d i Line of Credit Agreement.
(b) To evidence borrowings under each Line of Credit Agreement, the" City is
authorized lo "issue from lirrie to time . one. (1) or more Line of Credit Notes, each to be
designated "Line of Credit Note". Each Line of Credit Note shall bear interest from its
date at a rate or rales not in excess of eighteen percent (18%) per annum. As
determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of issuance of each-Line of Credit Note,
the Line of Credit Notes may be issued as notes the interest on which is either indudible
or excludable from gross income for federal income tax purposes under Section 103 of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (Ihe,"Code").
(c) The Line of Credit Notes shall be executed on behalf of the Cily with the
manual or fac:simile signature of ihe Mayor of the City, and shall lie attested with the
manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk of the City, and shall have impressed or
imprinted thereon the official seal of the City (or a facsimile thereoQ In case any officer
of the City whose signature or facsimile signature shall appear on the Line of Credit
Notes shall cease to be such officer befpre the delivery of such Line of Credit Notes,
such signature or facsimile signature thereof shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for
all purposes the same as if such officer had remained in office until delivery.
(d) Subjed to Ihe limitations contained in Ihis ordinance, authority is-hereby
delegated to the Mayor or an Aulhorized Officer to determine (i) the aggregate principal
amount of each Line of Credit Note to be issued, (ii) the date or dates thereof, (iii) the
maturities thereof, (iv) the rate or rates of interest payable thereon or the method for
determining such rate or rates, and (v) the one (1) or more commercial banks and other
financial institutions lo provide the credit under each Line of Credit Agreement.

 21746

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(e) To evidence the exercise of the authority delegated to the Mayor or an
Authorized Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or an Authorized Officer, as the case
may be. is hereby directed to execute and file with the City Clerk a copy of each Line of
Credit Agreement, each Line of Credit Note issued in connection with each borrowing
under any Line of Credit Agreement, and a certificate setting forth the determinations
made pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate shall constitute
conclusive evidence of the proper exercise by them of such authority. Upon the filing of
such Line of Credit Agreement, Line of Credit Note and. such certificate, the City Clerk
shall direct a copy of such filing lo the City Council.

Section 26.
To the extent that any ordinance, resolution, rule, order or provision of the
Municipal Code, or part thereof is in conflict wilh the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions
of this.Ordinance shall be controlling. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity, of such sedion, paragraph,- dause or provision
shall nol affed any of the other provisions of this Ordinance. No provision of the Municipal
Code or violation of any provision of the Municipal Code shall be deemed to render voidable al
the option of the City any document, instrument or agreemeril authorized hereunder or to impair
the validity of this Ordinance or the instruments aulhorized by this Ordinance or. to impair the
rights of the owners of the Bonds to receive payment of the principal of or interest on the Bonds
or lo impair the security for the Bonds; provided further that the fotegoing shall not be deemed
. to affed the availability of any other remedy or penalty for any violation of any provision of the
Municipal Code.
Section 27.
This Ordinance shall be published by the City Clerk,, by causing to lie
printed in'spedal pamphlet form at least five copies hereof which copies are to be made
available in her office for public inspection and distribution to members of the public who may
wish lo avail themselves of a copy of this Ordinance.

Sedion 28.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption,
approval by the Mayor and publication as provided herein.

Exhibit "A" referred to in this ordinance reads as follows:

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21747

Exhibit "A".
(To Ordinance)
Section 24 Costs.

1. Public right-of-way infrastructure improvements in City neighborhoods, including street
and alley construction and improvements, lighting improvements, sidewalk improvements and
replacement, and curb and gutter repairs and repla(;ement.
2. Infrastructure improvements to enhance the development of economic activity, including
industrial street construction and improvements, streetscaplng, median landscaping,
demolition of hazardous, vacant or dilapidated buildings that pose a threat to public safety
and welfare, shoreline reconstruction, riverbank stabilization, residential and commercial
infrastructure redevelopment and railroad viaduct clearance improvements.
3. Transportation improvements (to City facilities and to facilities located within the City
limits which are owned by other governmental entities), including street resurfacing, bridge
and freight tunnel rehabilitation-, traffic signal modernization-.- new traffic signal installation,
intersection safety improvements and transit facility improvements.
4. Grants or loans to assist not-for-profit organizations or educational or cultural
institutions, or to assist other municipal corporations, units of local, government, school
districts, the State of Illinois or the United Slates of America.
5. Cash fiow needs of the City.
6. The acquisition of personal property, induding, but not limited to, computer hardware
and software, vehicles or other capital items useful or necessary for City purposes.
7. The duly authorized acquisition of improved and unimproved real property within the City
for municipal, industrial, commercial or r^esidential purposes, or any combination thereof and
the Improvement, demolition and/or remediation of any such property.
8. Constructing, equipping, altering and repairing various municipal facilities including fire
stations, police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and other municipal tacililies.
9. The enhancement of economic development within the City by making direct grants or
loans to, or deposits to funds or accounts to secure the obligations of, not-for-profit or
for-profit organizations doing business or seeking to do business in the City.
10. The funding of (a) judgments entered against the City, (b) certain settlements or other
payments required to be made by the Cily as a condition to the resolution of litigation or
threatened litigation and (c) such escrow accounts or other reserves as shall be deemed
necessary for any of said purposes.

 21748

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

11. The payment of certain contributions lo the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund, the
Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund, the Municipal Employees'. Officers' and Officials'
Annuity and Benefit Fund, and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and
Benefit Fund.
12. The provision of facilities, services and equipment lo protect and enhance public safety,
including, but not limited to, increased costs for police and fire protection services, emergency
medical services, staffing at the City's emergency call center and other City facilities, and
enhanced security measures at airports and other City facilities.

ESTABLISHMENT OF VACANT BUILDING TAX INCREMENT FINANCING
PURCHASE AND REHABILITATION PROGRAM FOR CHlCAGO/CENTFiAL PARK
AREA AND EXECUTION OF AGREEMENT WITH NEIGHBORHOOD HOUSING
SERVICES OF CHICAGO, INC. FOR ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAM.
[02012-647]
The Committee on Finance submitted the following report:
CHICAGO, March 14, 2012.

To the President and Members of the City Council:
Your Committee on Finance, having had under consideration an ordinance authorizing the
creation of the Chicago/Central Park Area Neighborhood Purchase and Rehabilitation
Program, having had the same under advisement, begs leave to report and recommend that
Your Honorable Body Pass the proposed ordinance transmitted herewith.
This recommendation was concurred in by a viva voce vote of the members of the
Committee.

Respectfully submitted,
(Signed)

EDWARD M. BURKE.
Chairman.

  

 

Mew 27;  

*7
(film?! JV

