City of Chicago
F2014-26
Office ofthe City Clerk
Document Tracking Sheet

Meeting Date:

4/2/2014

Sponsor(s):

Dept./Agency

Type:

Communication

Title:

Notification of Sale regarding General Obligation Bonds
Project and Refunding Bonds Series 2014A and Series
2014B, Associated Amendment regarding Commercial
Paper Debt and Amendment of Municipal Code Section 232-031 regarding Debt Management Policies

Committee(s) Assignment:

 DEPARTMENT OF F I N A N C E
CITY OF

CHICAGO

March 24 ,2014

Susana Mendoza
City Clerk
121 North LaSalle Street
Room 107
Chicago, Illinois 60602
RE:

City of Chicago, Illinois
General Obligation Bonds Project and Refunding Bonds
Series 2014 A $432,630,000 and General ObHgation Bonds Project and Refunding
Bonds Series 2014B $450,790,000

Dear Ms. Mendoza:
Attached is the Notification of Sale which is required to be filed with your office
pursuant to Section I lof the ordinance authorizing of the issuance of General
Obligation and Refunding Bonds and Associated Amendment regarding
Commercial Paper Debt and Amendment of Municipal Code Section 2-32-031
regarding Debt Management Policies, which was passed by the City Council on
February 5, 2014.

Please direct this filing to the City Council.

Very Truly Yours,

Chief Financial Officer

121 N O R T H L A S A L L E STREET. R O O M 700, C H I C A G O , . I L L I N O I S 60602

 BOND PURCHASE AGREEMENT

$883,420,000
CITY OF CHICAGO
$432,630,000
^
mllf
.
^
, ^J^- 1- n J
General Obhgation Bonds,
General Obhgation Bonds,
,„ . , « • ^ i « r J - C •
« • .1 j r . r J- e • int .4 * Taxable Projcct and Refunding Serics
Project and Refunding Senes 2014A
^ 2014B
March 13,2014
City of Chicago
Office of the City Comptroller
121 North LaSalle Street, 7* Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602
Attention: Chief Financial Officer
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The undersigned. Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (the "Representative"),
on behalf of itself and the other underwriters listed below (collectively, the "Underwriters"),
hereby offers to enter into this Bond Purchase Agreement (the "Agreement") with the City
of Chicago (the "City"), for the purchase by the Underwriters, and sale by the City, of all but
not less than all of the City's General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refiinding Series
2014A (die "Series 2014A Bonds") and the City's General Obhgation Bonds, Taxable
Project and Refiinding Series 2014B (the "Series 2014B Bonds" and, together with the
Series 2014A Bonds, the "Bonds"). This offer is made subject to the acceptance by the
City, evidenced by the signature of a duly authorized officer of the City in the space
provided below, on or before 5:00 P.M., Chicago time on the date hereof, and upon such
acceptance this Agreement shall be in fiill force and effect in accordance with its terms and
shall be binding on the City and the Underwriters.
The Representative is authorized, and hereby represents and warrants that it is
authorized, to act as Representative of the Underwriters and to execute this Agreement and
has full authority to take such action as it may deem advisable with respect to all matters
pertaining to this Agreement. Each Underwriter hereby severally represents to the City that
it is registered and in good standing under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(the "1934 Act"), as a municipal securities dealer.
The primary role of the Underwriters is to purchase the Bonds, for resale to
investors, in an arm's-length commercial transaction between the City and the
Underwriters. The Underwriters have financial and other interests that differ from those
ofthe City.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed
thereto in the Preliminary Official Statement, as defmed herein.

 1.

Agreement to Sell and Purchase.

(a)
Upon the terms and conditions and based upon the representations,
warranties and covenants herein set forth, the Underwriters, jointly and severally, hereby
agree to purchase fi-om the City and the City hereby agrees to sell to the Underwriters: the
Series 2014A Bonds at a price equal to $435,549,851.04 (which represents the aggregate
principal amount of the Series 2014A Bonds less an Underwriters' discount of
$2,287,917.51 and plus a net re-offering premium of $5,207,768.55), and the Series 2014B
Bonds at a price equal to $448,135,142.01 (which represents the aggregate principal amount
of the Series 2014B Bonds less an Underwriters' discount of $2,654,857.99).
(b)
It shall be a condition to the City's obligation to sell and deliver the Bonds
that all the Bonds be purchased and paid for by the Underwriters at the Closing (as defined
in Section 7 hereof) and a condition to the Underwriters' obligation to purchase and pay for
the Bonds that all Bonds be issued, sold and delivered by the City at the Closing.
2.
The Ordinance. The Bonds are authorized by an ordinance of the City
adopted by the City Council of the City (the "City Council") on February 5, 2014 (the
"Ordinance"), and will be issued and secured as provided thereunder. The Bonds will
mature, bear interest and have such other terms and conditions as are set forth on Schedule I
hereto.
3. -, The Preliminary Official Statement. Attached hereto as Exhibit A is a copy
of the Preliminary Official Statement of the City, dated March 3, 2014, relating to the Bonds
(the "Preliminary Official Statement"). For purposes of Rule 15c2-12 ("Rule 15c2-12")
adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") under the 1934 Act, the
Preliminary Official Statement is "deemed fmal" by the City as of its date except for the
omission of such infonnation as is permitted by Rule 15c2-12(b)(1).
4.
Public Offering Price. The Underwriters have agreed to make a bona fide
pubhc offering of the Bonds at the initial offering prices set forth on Schedule I . The
Representative will provide the City and Co-Bond Counsel (as defmed herein) with a
closing certificate confirming the reoffering yields and prices of the Series 2014A Bonds
and the Underwriters acknowledge that the City and Co-Bond Counsel will rely on such
certificate to establish the yield on the Series 2014A Bonds and that such reliance is material
to the City in entering into this Agreement and in connection with the delivery ofthe Bonds.
5.

The Official Statement.

(a)
The City shall provide, or cause to be provided, at its expense, to the
Underwriters no later than the earlier of (i) seven (7) business days after the date of this
Agreement or (ii) the Closing, three copies of the Official Statement of the City, dated the
date hereof, relating to the Bonds (the "Official Statemenf), signed on behalf of the City by
the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer and the Official Statement so delivered shall be
"final" for purposes of Rule 15c2-12. Such delivery of the Official Statement shall occur in
sufficient time to accompany any confirmation that requests payment fi-om any customer
and in sufficient quantity to comply with the mles of the SEC and the Municipal Securities

 Rulemaking Board (the "MSRB").
(b)
I f on or prior to the Closing or within twenty-five (25) days after the "end of
the underwriting period" (as hereinafter defmed) any event known to the City relating to or
affecting the City, the Ordinance or the Bonds, shall occur which would cause any statement
of a material fact contained in the Official Statement to be materially incorrect or materially
incomplete, the City will promptly notify the Representative in writing of the circumstances
and details of such event. If, as a result of such event, it is necessary, in the joint opinion of
the City and the Representative to amend or supplement the Official Statement by stating or
restating any material fact necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in light
of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading, the City will forthwith
prepare and fumish to the Underwriters a reasonable number of copies of an amendment of
or a supplement to such Official Statement in form and substance satisfactory to the City
and the Representative, at the City's sole cost and expense, which will so amend or.
supplement such Official Statement so that, as amended or supplemented, the Official
Statement will not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any
material fact necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading. For purposes of this
Agreement, the term "end of the underwriting period" shall mean the later of the date of
Closing or the date on which an Underwriter no longer retains an unsold balance of the
Bonds for sale to the public. The Underwriters agree that the date on which the end of the
underwriting period shall occur shall be the date of the Closing, unless the Underwriters
otherwise notify the City in writing prior to twenty-five (25) days after the date of the
Closing that, to fhe best of their knowledge, the Underwriters retain for sale to the public an
unsold balance of the Bonds, in which case the end of the underwriting period shall be
extended for additional periods of thirty (30) days each upon receipt of additional written
notification from the Underwriters that, to the best of their knowledge, there exists an unsold
balance of the Bonds, but in no event shall the end of the underwriting period be extended
longer than sixty (60) days after the date of Closing.
The Official Statement shall be provided for distribution, at the expense of the
City, in such quantity as may be requested by the Underwriters as set forth above in order
to permit the Underwriters to comply with Rule 15c2-12, and the applicable rules of the
MSRB, with respect to distribution of the Official Statement. The City shall prepare the
Official Statement, including any amendments thereto, in word-searchable PDF format as
described in the MSRB Rule G-32 and shall provide the electronic copy of the wordsearchable PDF format ofthe Official Statement to the Underwriters no later than one (1)
business day prior to March 24, 2014, to enable the Underwriters to comply with MSRB
Rule G-32.
The City further agrees to provide the Underwriters with any advance refiinding
documents (as defined in MSRB Rule G-32) in a word-searchable PDF format as
described in the MSRB's Rule G-32 and shall provide such electronic copy of the wordsearchable PDF format of the advance refunding documents to the Underwriters no later
than four (4) business days after March 24, 2014, to enable the Underwriter(s) to comply
with MSRB Rule G-32.

 (c)
At or prior to the Closing, the Representative shall file, or cause to be filed,
the Official Statement with the MSRB in compliance with the rules of the SEC and the
MSRB. Promptly after the date after which the Underwriters are no longer obligated under
Rule 15c2-12(b)(4) to deliver to potential customers the Official Statement, the
Representative shall notify the City of such date.
6.
Representations, Warranties and Covenants of the Citv. The City represents
and warrants to the Underwriters as of the date hereof that:
(a)
The City is a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local govemment,
existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois (the "State").
(b)
The City Council has: (i) duly adopted the Ordinance, which remains in full
force and effect; (ii) duly authorized the use of the Preliminary Official Statement prior to
the date hereof in connection with the public offering and sale of the Bonds and duly
authorized the execution, delivery and distribution of the Official Statement in connection
with the public offering and sale of the Bonds; and (iii) duly authorized and approved the
execution and delivery of the Bonds, the escrow agreements to be executed and delivered by
the City (collectively referred to herein as the "Escrow Agreements") in connection with the
refunding of the general obligation bonds of the City identified in Appendix G to the
Official Statement (the "Refunded Bonds"), this Agreement and a continuing disclosure
undertaking pursuant to the provisions of Section (b)(5) of Rule 15c2-12 (the
"Undertaking").
(c)
With the exception of the disclosure described in the Preliminary Official
Statement in the section titled "SECONDARY MARJCET DISCLOSURE - Corrective
Action Related to Certain Bond Disclosure Requirements", the City has not failed during
the previous five years to comply in all material respects with any previous undertakings
in a written continuing disclosure contract or agreement under Rule 15c2-12.
(d)
The City has fiill legal right, power and authority to: (i) adopt the Ordinance;
(ii) execute and deliver this Agreement, the Escrow Agreements, the Undertaking and the
Official Statement; (iii) issue, sell and deliver the Bonds to the Underwriters pursuant to the
Ordinance and as provided in this Agreement; and (iv) pay for the Bonds from the sources
pledged under the Ordinance for their payment.
(e)
The adoption of the Ordinance and compliance with the provisions thereof
do not, and the execution and delivery of this Agreement, the Escrow Agreements, the
Undertaking and the Official Statement will not, in any material manner, violate any
applicable law or administrative regulation of the State or any department, division, agency
or instmmentality thereof or ofthe United States of America (the "United States") or of any
department, division, agency or instrumentality thereof, or any applicable judgment or
decree to which the City is subject, or conflict with, in a material manner, or constitute a
material breach of, or a material default under, any ordinance, agreement or other instrument
to which the City is a party or is otherwise bound.
(f)

All approvals, consents and orders of, and filings (except, i f any, under

 applicable state "blue sky" laws) with, any govemmental authority, board, agency or
commission having jurisdiction which would constitute a condition precedent to the
performance by the City of its obligations under this Agreement, the Escrow Agreements,
the Undertaking, the Ordinance and the Bonds have been obtained or made.
(g)
The financial statements of the City contained in the Official Statement fairly
present the financial position and results of operations of the City as of the date and for the
periods therein set forth and the City has no reason to believe that such financial statements
have not been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as
applied to govemmental units, consistently applied except as otherwise noted therein.
(h)
The Official Statement (excluding any description of The Depository
Trust Company ("DTC"), information under the captions "THE BONDS - Book-Entry
System," "BOND INSURANCE", "RATINGS," "CERTAIN VERIFICATIONS,"
"UNDERWRITING," and "TAX MATTERS," APPENDIX D — "ECONOMIC,
DEMOGRAPHIC AND SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION (with respect to the
information under the headings "— Economy," "— Percentage of Total Non-Farm
Employment by Major Industry Sector" and "and "— Housing Market," and information
relating to population, per capita personal income and employment, and unemployment
rate with respect to the United States, the State of Illinois, Cook County and the Chicago
MSA), Tables 1-10 included in APPENDIX E — "RETIREMENT FUNDS AND
OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS," APPENDIX F — "FORMS OF
OPINIONS OF CO-BOND COUNSEL," any informafion in or omitted from the Official
Statement relating to the Insurer and the Policy (both hereinafter defined), and
information fumished by the Underwriters for use in the Official Statement) as of its date
does not, and at the Closing will not, contain any untrue statement of a material fact or
omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements therein, in light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading in any material respect.
(i)
Information in the Third Party Sourced Retirement Fund Tables is sourced
from documents published by the Retirement Funds and the City takes no responsibility
for the accuracy and completeness of such information; however, nothing has come to the
attention of the City which would lead the City to believe that the Third Party Sourced
Retirement Fund Tables are not true and correct in all material respects;
(j)
The Ordinance, this Agreement, the Escrow Agreements, and the
Undertaking, when duly executed and delivered by the parties thereto, as appropriate, will
constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of the City enforceable in accordance with
their terms (except to the extent that enforceability may be limited by bankruptcy,
insolvency and other laws affecting creditors' rights or remedies and the availability of
equitable remedies generally).
(k)
When delivered to the Representative, and paid for by the Underwriters at
the Closing in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, the Bonds will be duly
authorized, executed and delivered and will constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of
the City enforceable in accordance with their terms (except to the extent that enforceability
may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency and other laws affecting creditors' rights or

 remedies and the availability of equitable remedies generally).
(I)
Except as disclosed in the Official Statement, there is no action, suit or
proceeding, at law or in equity, or before or by a court, public board or body, pending or, to
the City's knowledge, threatened, against the City wherein an unfavorable decision, ruling
or fmding would materially adversely affect (i) the validity or enforceability of the Bonds,
the Ordinance, this Agreement, the Escrow Agreements, or the Undertaking or (ii) the
excludability from federal income taxation of the interest on the Series 2014A Bonds under
the Intemal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code").
(m)
The City has not taken, or omitted taking, and will not take or omit to take,
any action, which action or omission would adversely affect the excludability from federal
income taxation of the interest on the Series 2014A Bonds under the Code.
(n)
Any certificate signed by any Authorized Officer of the City and delivered to
the Representative at the Closing in connection with the issuance or sale ofthe Bonds shall
be deemed to be a representation and warranty by the City to the Underwriters as to the
statements made therein as of the date so delivered.
(o)
The City will make available such information, execute such instruments and
take such other action in cooperation with the Underwriters as the Representative may
reasonably request to qualify the Bonds for offering and sale imder the "blue sky" or other
securities laws and regulations of such states and other jurisdictions of the United States as
the Underwriters may designate in writing; provided, however, that nothing in this Section
6(n) shall require the City to consent to general service of process in any state or jurisdiction
other than the State.
(p)
Ordinance.

The City will apply the proceeds of the Bonds in accordance with the

(q)
The City acknowledges and agrees that: (i) the transaction contemplated by
this Agreement is an arm's length, commercial transaction between the City and the
Underwriters in which the Underwriters are acting solely as a principal and not acting as a
municipal advisor, financial advisor or fiduciary to fhe City; (ii) the Underwriters have not
assumed any advisory or fiduciary responsibility to the City with respect to the transaction
contemplated hereby and the discussions, undertakings and procedures leading thereto
(irrespective of whether any Underwriter has provided other services or is currently
providing other services to the City on other matters); (iii) the Underwriters have financial
and other interests that differ from those of the City; and (iv) the City has consulted its
own legal, account, tax, financial and other advisors, as applicable, to the extent it has
deemed appropriate.
7.
Closing. Subject to the conditions set forth in this Agreement, the closing
(the "Closing") of the sale of the Bonds by the City and the purchase of the Bonds by the
Underwriters, shall take place at approximately 9:00 am., Chicago time, on March 24,
2014, at the offices of Chapman and Cutler LLP, I I I W. Monroe Street, Chicago, Illinois
(or at such other time, date and place as the City and the Representafive mutually agree).

 (a)
At the Closing, the City shall deliver or cause to be delivered to DTC, as
securities depository, for the account of the Underwriters one fiilly registered certificate for
each series, interest rate and maturity of the Bonds in the aggregate principal amount
thereof, registered in the name of Cede & Co., as nominee for DTC.
(b)
Upon delivery of the Bonds to the Representative at the Closing, the City
will deliver to the Representative the closing documents as set forth in Section 10 hereof
(c)
The Representative will accept delivery of the Bonds and pay the purchase
price therefor at the Closing by delivering federal funds checks or making federalfiindswire
transfers or otherwise confirming deposits of same day funds, as the City shall direct, to the
City's account at a bank specified by the City, in an aggregate amount equal to the purchase
price ofthe Bonds pursuant to Section 1 hereof.
8.
Reliance and Further Conditions of the Underwriters. The Underwriters
have entered into this Agreement in reliance upon the representations, warranties and
agreements of the City herein and the performance by the City of its obligations hereunder,
both as ofthe date hereof and as of the date of the Closing. The Underwriters' obligations
under this Agreement are and shall be subject to the following further condition that at the
time of the Closing, the Ordinance, the Undertaking, the Escrow Agreements, and this
Agreement shall be in fiill force and effect and the Ordinance and the Official Statement
shall not have been amended, modified or supplemented except as may have been agreed to
with respect to the Official Statement pursuant to Section 5 hereof, and the City shall have
duly adopted and there shall be in full force and effect such ordinances as, in the opinion of
Chapman and Cutler LLP, Chicago, Illinois and Sanchez Daniels & Hoffinan LLP, Chicago,
Illinois, as co-bond counsel ("Co-Bond Counsel") shall be necessary in connection with the
transactions contemplated hereby and thereby.
9.

Termination of Agreement.

(a)
The Underwriters shall have the right to cancel their obligations to purchase
the Bonds and have the fiirther right to terminate this Agreement, without liability therefor,
by written notice to the City from the Representative, if, between the date hereof and the
Closing:
(i)
legislation shall be introduced in or enacted by the Congress of the
United States or adopted by either House thereof or shall have been introduced
and favorably reported for passage to either House by any committee of such
House to which such legislation had been referred for consideration, or a decision
shall have been rendered by or adopted by either House or a decision by a court of
the United States or the United States Tax Court or an order, ruling or regulation
shall have been issued or proposed by or on behalf of the Trea.sury Department of
the United States or the Intemal Revenue Service, with respect to federal income
taxation upon interest received on obligations of the general character of the
Series 2014A Bonds which, in the Representative's reasonable opinion, does
materially adversely affect the market price or marketability of the Series 2014A
Bonds, or

 (ii)
legislation shall have been enacted by the Congress of the United
States to become effective on or prior to the Closing, or a decision of a court of
the United States shall be rendered, or a stop order, ruling, regulation or proposed
regulation by or on behalf of the SEC or other agency having jurisdiction over the
subject matter shall be issued or made, to the effect that the issuance, sale and
delivery of the Bonds, or any similar obligations of any similar public body of the
general character of the City, is in violation of, or has the effect of requiring the
contemplated offering, sale and distribution of the Bonds to be registered under
the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the enactment of the Ordinance or any
ordinance of similar character is in violation of the Trust Indenture Act of 1939,
as amended, or with the purpose or effect of otherwise prohibiting the issuance,
sale or delivery of the Bonds as contemplated hereby or by the Official Statement
or of obligations of the general character of the Bonds which, in the
Representative's reasonable opinion, does materially adversely affect the market
price or marketability of the Bonds, or
(iii)
there shall have occurred any event which in the Representative's
reasonable opinion, after consultation with its legal counsel, makes the Official
Statement either (A) contain an untrue statement of a material fact or (B) omit to
state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the
statements contained therein not misleading in any material respect, and the City
fails to prepare or ftirnish or fails to cause to be prepared or fumished to the
Underwriters an amendment or supplement to the Official Statement, pursuant to
Section 5 hereof, which will amend or supplement the Official Statement so that,
as amended or supplemented, the Official Statement will not contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated
therein or necessary to make the statements contained therein not misleading in a
material respect, or
(iv)
there shall be in force a general suspension of trading on The New
York Stock Exchange, Inc., or minimum or maximum prices for trading shall
have been fixed and be in force, or maximum ranges for prices for securities shall
have been required and be in force on The New York Stock Exchange, Inc.,
whether by virtue of a determination by that Exchange or by order of the SEC or
any other govemmental authority having jurisdiction, or
(v)
a general banking moratorium shall have been declared by either
federal, State or New York authorities having jurisdiction and be in force, or.
(vi)
any legislation, ordinance, mle or regulation shall be enacted by the
City or State, or any department or agency thereof, or a decision by any court of
competent jurisdiction within the State shall be rendered which, in the reasonable
opinion of the Representative, would have a material adverse effect on the market
price or marketability of the Bonds, or
(vii)
a war involving the United States, an outbreak or escalation of or
adverse development in hostilities or terrorist activities or other national or

 intemational calamity or crisis shall have occurred which, in the reasonable
opinion of the Representative, materially adversely affects the market price or
marketability ofthe Bonds, or
(viii)
there shall be any proceeding or threatened proceeding by the SEC
against the City and such proceeding or threatened proceeding, in the reasonable
opinion of the Representative, materially adversely affects the market price or
marketability of the Bonds.
(b)
I f the City shall be unable to satisfy the conditions contained in this
Agreement or if the Underwriters' obligations shall be terminated for any reason permitted
by this Agreement, this Agreement shall terminate and neither the City nor the Underwriters
shall have any fiirther obligations hereunder.
10.

Closing Conditions.

(a)
The Underwriters' obligations to purchase, to accept delivery of and to pay
for the Bonds at the Closing shall be conditioned upon the City's performance of its
obligations under Sections 6, 7 and 8 hereof and the Underwriters' receipt of the following
documents:
(i)
three copies of the Official Statement manually executed by the
Chief Financial Officer;
(ii)
the approving opinions, dated the date of the Closing, of Co-Bond
Counsel to the City, substantially in the form attached to the Official Statement as
Appendix F;
(iii)
the opinions, dated the date of the Closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters and to the City, of Co-Bond Counsel,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit B-1;
(iv)
a letter dated the date of the closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters and to the City, of Co-Bond Counsel,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit B-2:
(v)
a letter dated the date of the closing and addressed to the City of
Chapman and Cutier LLP, Special Disclosure Counsel to the City in connection
with certain pension matters described in the Official Statement, substantially in
the form attached hereto as Exhibit B-3, which letter shall also either be addressed
to or accompanied by a reliance letter to the Representative on behalf of the
Underwriters;
(vi)
an opinion, dated the date of the Closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, of the Corporation Counsel of the
City, substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit C;
(vii)

an opinion or opinions, dated the date of the Closing and addressed

 to the Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, of Peck, Shaffer & Williams, a
division of Dinsmore & Shohl LLP, Chicago, Illinois, as counsel for the
Underwriters ("Underwriters' Counsel"), in form and substance satisfactory to the
Representative;
(viii)
an opinion or opinions, dated the date of the Closing and addressed
to the Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, of Duane Morris LLP,
Chicago, Illinois, and Shanahan & Shanahan LLP, Chicago, Illinois, CoDisclosure Counsel to the City, substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit
D;
(ix)
a certificate, dated the date of the Closing, signed by the Chief
Financial Officer, to the effect that (A) the representations and warranties of the
City herein are correct in all material respects as of the date of the Closing; and
(B) there has been no material adverse change in the financial condition of the
City since December 31, 2012, as reflected in Appendix C to the Official
Statement, except as set forth in the Official Statement;
(x)
a certificate of Amalgamated Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
as bond registrar and paying agent ("Bond Registrar"), to the effect that the Bond
Registrar has full legal right, power and authority to act as the Bond Registrar
under the Ordinance;
(xi)
a certificate, dated the date of the Closing, signed by the
Representative, in form and substance satisfactory to the City and Co-Bond'
Counsel;
(xii)
an executed copy of the Undertaking substantially in the form
summarized in the Official Statement under the heading "SECONDARY
MARKET DISCLOSURE";
(xiii)
a copy of an agreement between the City and DTC relating to the
safekeeping and book-entry form of the Bonds;
(xiv)
a copy, duly certified by the City Clerk of the City, of the
Ordinance, as passed by the City Council and approved by the Mayor;
(xv)
evidence satisfactory to the Representative that the Bonds have
ratings of "Baal (Negative Outlook)" by Moody's Investors Service, Inc., " A + "
(Negative Outiook) by Standard & Poor's, a division of The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc., and "A-" (Negative Outlook) by Fitch;
(xvi)
evidence satisfactory to the Representative that the Bonds maturing
on January 1, 2031 (the "Insured Bonds"), have ratings of at least "A2 (Stable
Outlook)" from Moody's Investors Service, Inc., and "AA- (Stable Outlook)"
from Standard & Poor's, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., all
based upon the Municipal Bond Insurance Policy (the "Policy") issued by
Assured Guaranty Corp., New York, New York (the "Insurer");
10

 (xvii)
the Policy of the Insurer insuring payment of the Insured Bonds in
the form of the specimen policy attached as Appendix H to the Official Statement
which Policy shall be in full force and effect as of the Closing and noncancelable;
(xviii)
a certificate from the Insurer and an opinion from counsel to the
Insurer addressed to the City and to the Representative, both dated the date of
Closing, in form and substance satisfactory to the City and to the Representative,
with respect to the valid issuance and effectiveness of the Policy and to the
accuracy and completeness of the Official Statement as to the Insurer and the
Policy;
(xix)

an executed copy of each of the Escrow Agreements;

(xx)
a certificate from each escrow agent (collectively, the "Escrow
Agents") to the effect that such Escrow Agent has full legal right, power and
authority to act as Escrow Agent under the related Escrow Agreement;
(xxi)
a verification report of Robert Thomas, CPA, LLC, dated the date of
the closing, as to the accuracy of certain calculations with respect to the Bonds and
the Refunded Bonds; and
(xxii)
such additional closing certificates and agreements related to the
Series 2014A Bonds, including such tax certifications and agreements relating to
the Bonds, as Co-Bond Counsel shall reasonably determine to be necessary to
deliver their opinions as provided hereinabove.
(b)
All of the opinions, letters, certificates, instruments and other documents
mentioned above or elsewhere in this Agreement will be deemed to be in compliance with
the provisions hereof if, but only if, they are in form and substance satisfactory to the
Representative, in its reasonable judgment. Payment for the Bonds and acceptance of the
Bonds by the Underwriters shall constitute acknowledgment by the Underwriters of the
City's llill performance hereunder.
11.
Expenses. The Underwriters shall be under no obligation to pay, and the
City shall pay, any and all expenses incident to the performance of the City's obligations
hereunder, including but not limited to: (a) the cost of the preparation and printing or other
reproduction of the Ordinance, the Preliminary Official Statement and the Official
Statement, as well as the cost of shipping the Official Statement; (b) the cost of the
preparation and printing of the Bonds; (c) the fees and disbursements of Co-Bond Counsel
and Co-Disclosure Counsel; (d) the fees and disbursements of any experts or consultants
retained by the City; (e) the fees ofthe Escrow Agents, DTC and the Bond Registrar; (f) the
fees for the municipal bond ratings on the Bonds; and (g) the premium for the Policy. The
Underwriters will pay the expenses incurred by them or any of them in connection wnth their
public offering and distribution of the Bonds, including, but not limited to, tlie CUSIP
Service Bureau charges, the fees and expenses of Underwriters' Counsel and advertising
expenses directly incurred by the Underwriters.

11

 The City shall pay for any expenses (included in the expense component of the
Underwriters' discount) incurred by the Underwriters on behalf of the City in connection
with the marketing, issuance and delivery of the Bonds, including, but not limited to,
meals, transportation, lodging, and entertainment of the City's employees and
representatives.
12.
Notices. Any notice or other communication to be given to the City under
this Agreement shall be given by delivering the same in writing at the address set forth
above, and any such notice or other communication to be given to the Underwriters shall be
given by delivering the same in writing to the Representative at the following address:
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
10 South Wacker Drive, Floor 15
Chicago, Illinois 60606
Attention: Lawrence J. Richardson
13.
No Third Party Beneficiaries. Survival, Etc. This Agreement is made solely
for the benefit of the City and the Underwriters (including the successors or assigns of any
Underwriter), and no other person, partnership, association or corporation including any
purchaser ofthe Bonds shall acquire or have any right hereunder or by virtue hereof All of
the representations and agreements by the City in this Agreement shall remain operative and
in full force and effect regardless of any investigation made by or on behalf of the
Underwriters and shall survive the delivery of and payment for the Bonds.
14.
Goveming Law. The rights and obligations of the parties to this Agreement
shall be govemed by, construed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the State,
without giving effect to the conflict of laws provisions thereof.
15.
Representations and Warranties of the Underwriters. The Underwriters
represent and warrant that:
(a)
They have heretofore authorized the Representative to execute any
document on behalf of or exercise any authority of and otherwise to act for, the
Underwriters in all matters under or pertaining to this Agreement. Each Underwriter has
warranted and confirmed to the Representative, and the Representative warrants and
confirms to the City that: (i) it is duly registered under the 1934 Act, as a broker/dealer or
municipal securities dealer and has duly paid the fee prescribed by MSRB Rule A-12 or
is exempt from such requirements, (ii) it is (a) a member in good standing of the
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority ("FINRA") or (b) otherwise eligible under
FINRA rules to receive underwriting discounts and concessions available to such
members with respect to underwriters of municipal securities, and (iii) it has complied
with the dealer regisfration requirements, i f any, of the various jurisdictions in which it
offers Bonds for sale. The Underwriters represent, warrant and covenant that they are and
will be in compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations in connection with
the offering, issuance and sale ofthe Bonds.
(b)

To the knowledge of the Underwriters, no person holding office of the

12

 City, either by election or appointment, is in any manner financially interested, either
directly in the officer's own name or indirectly in the name of any other person,
association, trust or corporation, in any contract being entered into or the performance of
any work to be carried out in connection with the issuance and sale of the Bonds upon
which said officer may be called upon to act or vote.
(c)
Each Underwriter severally represents to the City that neither the
Underwriter, nor any Affiliate thereof is listed on any of the following lists maintained by
the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States Department of the Treasury, the
Bureau of Industry and Security of the United States Department of Commerce, the
United States Department of State or their successors, or on any other list of persons or
entities with which the City may not do business under any applicable law, rule,
regulation, order or judgment: the Specially Designated Nationals List, the Denied
Persons List, the Unverified List, the Entity List, the List of Statutorily Debarred Parties
and the Excluded Parties List. Such representation shall be provided to the City in the
form attached hereto as Exhibit E.
For purposes of this representation, "Affiliate," when used to indicate a
relationship with a specified person or entity, means a person or entity that, directly or
indirectly, through one or more intermediaries,, controls, is controlled by or is under
common control with such specified person or entity, and a person or entity shall be
deemed to be controlled by another person or entity, if controlled in any manner
whatsoever that results in control in fact by that other person or entity (or that other
person or entity and any persons or entities with whom that other person or entity is
acting jointly or in concert), whether directly or indirectly and whether through share
ownership, a trust, a contract or otherwise.
(d)
The Underwriters may enter into distribution agreements with certain
financial institutions for the retail distribution of municipal securities, including the
Bonds, at the initial public offering price. In accordance with such arrangements, the
Underwriters may share a portion of its underwriting compensation.
16.
Approval. The approval of the Underwriters when required hereunder or
the determination of their satisfaction as to any document referred to herein shall be in
writing signed by the Representative and delivered to the City.
17.
Successors and Assigns. This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be
binding upon the parties and their successors and assigns, and will not confer any rights
upon any other person. The terms "successors" and "assigns" shall not include any
purchaser of any Bond or Bonds from the Underwriters merely because of such purchase.
18.
Enforceability. I f any provision of this Agreement shall be held or deemed
to be or shall, in fact, be invalid, inoperative or unenforceable as applied in any particular
case in any jurisdiction or jurisdictions, or in all jurisdictions, because it conflicts with any
provisions of any constitution, statute, mle or public policy, or for any other reason, such
circumstances shall not have the effect of rendering the provision in question invalid,
inoperative or unenforceable in any other case or circumstances, or of rendering any other

13

 provision or provisions of this Agreement invalid, inoperative or unenforceable to any
extent whatsoever.
19.
Counteroarts. This Agreement may be executed in several counterparts,
each of which shall be regarded as the original and all of which shall constitute one and the
same document.
20.
Business Relationships with Citv Elected Officials. Each Underwriter
understands and agrees that it is required to and will comply with the provisions of Chapter
2-56 and 2-156 of the Municipal Code of Chicago (the "Municipal Code"). Pursuant to
Section 2-156-030(b) of the Municipal Code, it is illegal for any elected official of the City,
or any person acting at the direction of such official, to contact, either orally or in writing,
any other City official or employee with respect to any matter involving any person with
whom the elected official has a business relationship, or to participate in any discussion in
any City Council committee hearing or in any City Council meeting or to vote on any matter
involving the person vAth whom an elected official has a business relationship. Violation of
Section 2-156-030(b) of the Municipal Code by any elected official with respect to this
Agreement shall be grounds for termination of this Agreement. The term "business
relationship" shall be defined as set forth in Section 2-156-080 of the Municipal Code.
21.
Entire Agreement. This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between
the parties hereto with respect to the matters covered hereby, and supersedes all prior
agreements and understandings between the parties. This Agreement shall only be
amended, supplemented or modified in a writing signed by both of the parties hereto.

14

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Bond Purchase
Agreement in connection with the City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Project and
Refundii^g Series 2014A, and the Ci\y of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Taxable
Project and Refunding Series 2014B, to be executed by their duly authorized representatives
as of the date first above written.
Very truly yours,
THE UNDERWRITERS
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
BMO Capital Markets GKST, Inc.
Cabrera Capital Markets, LLC
Loop Capital Markets LLC
William Blair & Company
Blaylock, Beal, Van LLC
Estrada Hinojosa & Company, Inc.
George K. Baiim & Company
Goldman Sachs & Co.
Mischler Financial Group, Inc.
North South Capital LLC
Ramirez & Co., Inc.
The Williams Capital Group, L.P.
By: WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
As Representative

Iwafa M. tJurKe
lairman, Committee on
Finance ofthe City Council

 SCHEDULE I
T E R M S O F BONDS

1.

Aggregate Principal Amount: $883,420,000

2.

Dated; Date of Issuance (Expected to be March 24, 2014)

3.

Maturities, Principal Amounts, Interest Rates, Prices and CUSIP Numbers:
$432,630,000 General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Scries 2014A
Maturity
fJanuarv 1)

Principal Amount
$ 2,735,000
2,850,000
3,700,000
4,950,000
5,075.000
4,920,000
625,000
4,500,000
5,000,000
4,000,000
10,675,000
23.055,000
30,270,000
3.710,000
36,950,000
15,425,000*
42,615,000
44,875,000
49.700,000
69,000,000
68,000,000

2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036

Interest
Rate
4.00%
4.00%
4.00%
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%
4.00%
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%
5.25%
5.25%
5.00%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%

Price

CUSIP

108.935
109.338
108.289
112.361
110.911
109.262
100.397
108.436
106.598
104.716
103.351
104.580
103.706
100.000
102.918
103.864
101.673
101.134
98.511
98.217
97.658

167486SE0
167486SF7
167486SG5
167486SH3
167486SJ9
167486SK6
167486SL4
167486TA7
167486SM2
167486SN0
167486SP5
167486SW0
167486SQ3
167486SR1
167486SZ3
167486SY6
167486SS9.
167486ST7
167486SU4
167486SV2
167486SX8

* Insured Bonds
$450,790,000 General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding Series
2014B

4.

Maturity
FJanuarv 1)

Principal Amount

2044

450,790,000

Interest
Rate
6.314%

Price

CUSIP

100.000

167486SD2

Redemption.

The Bonds are subject to botli optional and mandatory redemption prior to maturity, as
described below. The Bonds shall be redeemed only in principal amounts of $5,000 and integral
multiples thereof.

 Optional Redemption. The Series 2014A Bonds maturing on and after January 1, 2025,
are subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole or in part, on any
date on or after January 1, 2024, and i f less than all ofthe outstanding Series 2014A Bonds, a
single maturity and interest rate are to be redeemed, the Series 2014A Bonds called shall be
called by lot, at a redemption price equal to the principal amount of the Series 2014A Bonds
being redeemed plus accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call any of the
Series 2014A Bonds for optional redemption, in whole or in part; provided, that such sale or
waiver will not adversely affect the excludability of interest on the Series 2014A Bonds from
gross income for federal income tax purposes.
Optional Redemption of the Series 2014B Bonds with Make Whole Payment. The Series
20I4B Bonds shall be subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole
or in part, on any Business Day (as defined below) at a redemption price equal to the greater of:
(A) the principal amount of Bonds to be redeemed, or (B) the sum of the present values of the
remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on such Bonds to be redeemed, not
including any portion of those payments of interest accrued and unpaid as of the date such Bonds
are to be redeemed, discounted to the date of redemption of such Bonds to be redeemed on a
semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury
Rate (defined below) plus 40 basis points plus accrued interest on such Bonds being redeemed to
the date fixed for redemption.
The make whole optional redemption price of the Series 2014B Bonds to be redeemed
will be calculated by an independent accounting firm, Lavestment banking firm or financial
advisor (the "Calculation Agent") retained by the City at the City's expense. The Bond Registrar
and the City may rely on the Calculation Agent's determination of the make whole optional
redemption price and will not be liable for such reliance. An authorized officer of the City shall
confirm and transmit the redemption price as so calculated on such dates and to such parties as
shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.
The "Treasury Rate" is, as of any redemption date, the yield to maturity as of such
redemption dale of U.S. Treasury securities with a constant maturity (as compiled and published
in the most recent Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.15 (519) that has become publicly
available four Business Days (as defmed below) prior to the redemption date (excluding inflation
indexed securities) (or, i f such Statistical Release is no longer published, any publicly available
source of similar market data)) most nearly equal to the period from the redemption date to the
maturity date of the Series 2014B Bonds to be redeemed; provided, however, that i f the period
from the redemption date to such maturity date is less than one year, the weekly average yield on
actually traded U.S. Treasury securities adjusted to a constant maturity of one year will be used.
"Business Day" means any day other tlian a day on which banks in New York, New York,
Chicago, Illinois, or the city in which the Bond Registrar maintains its designated office are
required or authorized to close. The Treasury Rate will be determined by an independent
accounting firm, investment banking firm or financial advisor retained by the City at the City's
expense.

 The City is authorized to sell or waive any right tlie City may have to call the Series
2014B Bonds for optional redemption.
Mandatory Redemption of the Bonds. The Series 2014B Bonds due January 1, 2044, are
subject to mandatory redemption prior to maturity, at par and accrued interest to the date fixed for
redemption, on January 1 of the following years and in the following principal amounts:
Year

Princinal Amount

2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043.
2044

$ 37,770,000
50,625,000
57,670,000
28,255,000
32,255,000
34,300,000
101,745,000
108,170,000*

Final Maturity

  A

PRELIMINARY OFFICIAL STATEMENT

EXHIBIT

B-1

SUPPLEMENTAL OPINION OF C O - B O N D COUNSEL

March 24,2014

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
Chicago, Illinois
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement
described below

City of Chicago
121 North LaSalle Street, 7th Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602

Re:
City of Chicago
$432,630,000 General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series
2014A
$450,790,000 General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2014B
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This opinion is being delivered to you in connection with the authorization and
sale of the above-referenced obligations (collectively, the "Bonds"). The Bonds have
been delivered this date to the underwriters named in the Bond Purchase Agreement
dated March 13, 2014 (the "Purchase Agreement"), between the City of Chicago (the
"Czf>'"), and the Underwriters named in the Purchase Agreement acting through the
Representative (as defined in the I'urchase Agreement), relating to the sale and purchase
of the Bonds. Terms used and not defmed herein shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in the Purchase Agreement.
Based upon our examination of a certified copy of a record of the proceedings of
the City Council of the City (the "City Council") related to the issuance ofthe Bonds, we
are of the opinion that:
1.
Pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the City Council on the 5th
day of February, 2014, authorizing the issuance of the Bonds (as supplemented by
a Notification of Sale, the "Bond Ordinance"), the City has duly authorized,
executed and delivered. the Purchase Agreement and the Undertaking (together
with the Purchase Agreement, the "City Documents"), and, assuming the due
authorization, execution, delivery and the binding effect on the other parties

 thereto, each of the City Documents constitutes a legal, valid and binding
obligation of the City, enforceable against the City in accordance with its
respective terms, except that the enforceability of the City Documents may be
limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, moratorium, reorganization and other similar
laws affecting creditors' rights and by equitable principles, whether considered at
law or in equity, including the exercise of judicial discretion.
2.
Based upon our examination of such documents and questions of
law as we have deemed relevant in connection with the offering and sale of the
Bonds under the circumstances described in the Official Statement, we are of the
opinion that, under existing law, the Bonds are not required to be registered under
the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and the Bond Ordinance is not required to
be qualified under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended.
In rendering this opinion, we have relied upon certifications of the City with
respect to certain material facts within the knowledge of the City. Our opinion represents
our legal judgment based upon our review of the law and the facts that we deem relevant
to render such opinion, and is not a guarantee of a result. This opinion is given as of the
date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or supplement this opinion to reflect
any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to our attention or any changes in law
that may hereafter occur.
This opinion is fumished by us as Co-Bond Counsel to the City. No attorneyclient relationship has existed or exists between our firm and the Underwriters in
connection with the Bonds or by virtue of this opinion. This opinion is solely for the
benefit of the Underwriters and the City and may not be used, quoted, relied upon or
otherwise referred to for any other purpose or by any other person (including any person
purchasing any of the Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written consent.
Very truly yours,

 EXHIBIT

B-2

L E T T E R OF CO-BOND COUNSEL

March 24,2014

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
Chicago, Illinois
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement
described below
Re:

City of Chicago
121 North LaSalle Street, 7th Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602

City of Chicago
$432,630,000 General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series
2014A
$450,790,000 General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2014B

Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have acted as Co-Bond Counsel in connection with the sale and issuance by
the City of Chicago (the "City") of the above-referenced obligations (collectively, the
"Bonds"). We have rendered our separate opinions, dated the date hereof, as to the
validity, enforceability and tax status of interest on the Bonds. The Bonds have been
delivered this date to the underwriters named in the Bond Purchase Agreement dated
March 13, 2014, between the City and such underwriters (the "Underwriters"), relating
to the sale and purchase of the Bonds.
We have not been engaged nor have we undertaken to review or verify the
accuracy, completeness or sufficiency of the information contained in or appended to the
Official Statement dated March 13, 2014 (the "Official Statement") or other offering
material relating to the Bonds, except that in our capacity as Co-Bond Counsel in
connection with the issuance of the Bonds we have reviewed the information contained in
the Official Statement under the captions: "The BONDS" (except for the information
relating to The Depository Trust Company and its book-entry system and operations) and
"SECURITY FOR THE BONDS" (except for any information contained (i) in Appendix B
referenced under such caption and (ii) under the subcaption "Bankruptcy") solely to
determine whether such information and summaries conform to the Bonds and the
ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on the 5th day of February, 2014,
authorizing the issuance of the Bonds (as supplemented by the Notification of Sale
delivered by the Chief Financial Officer of the City, the "Bond Ordinance"). The

 purpose of our professional engagement was not to establish or confirm factual matters in
the Official Statement, and we have not undertaken any obligation to verify
independentiy any of the factual matters set forth under these captions and reviewed by
us. Subject to the foregoing, the summary descriptions in the Official Statement under
such captions excepting those matters set forth above, as of the date of the Official
Statement and as of the date hereof, insofar as such descriptions purport to describe or
summarize certain provisions of the Bonds and the Bond Ordinance, are accurate
summaries of such provisions in all material respects. Further, we confirm the opinions
attributed to us in the Official Statement and consent to the references to such opinions
contained therein, s In addition, the information in the Official Statement under the
caption " T A X MATTERS" purporting to describe or summarize our opinions conceming
certain federal tax matters relating to the Bonds has been reviewed by us and is an
accurate summary in all material respects. Except as specifically described in this
paragraph, we express no opinion herein with respect to and have not undertaken to
determine independentiy the accuracy, faimess or completeness of any statements
contained, appended or incorporated by reference in the Official Statement.
By acceptance of this letter you recognize and acknowledge that: (i) the
preceding paragraph is not a legal opinion but is rather in the nature of observations
based on certain limited activities performed by specific lawyers in our firm in our role as
Co-Bond Counsel to the City; (ii) the scope of those activities performed by us for
purposes of delivering this letter was inherentiy limited and does not purport to
encompass all activities necessary for compliance with applicable securities laws;
(iii) those activities performed by us rely on third party representations, warranties,
certifications, statements and opinions, including and primarily, representations,
warranties and certifications made by the City, and are otherwise subject to the conditions
set forth herein; (iv) we have not been engaged to act, and have not acted, as counsel to
the Underwriters for any purpose in connection with the issuance of the Bonds; (v) no
attorney-client relationship exists or has at any time existed between us and the
Underwriters in connection with the Bonds or by virtue of this letter; and (vi) this letter is
based upon our review of proceedings and other documents undertaken as part of our
engagement with the City, and in order to deliver this letter we neither undertook any
duties or responsibilities to the Underwriters nor conducted any activities in addition to
those undertaken or conducted for the benefit of, and requested by, the City.
Consequentiy, we make no representation that our review has been adequate for the
Underwriters' purposes.
This letter is given as of the date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or
supplement this letter to reflect any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to our
attention. This letter is furnished by us as Co-Bond Counsel to the City. No attorneyclient relationship has existed or exists between our firm and the Underwriters in
connection with the Bonds or by virtue of this letter. This letter is solely for the benefit
of the Underwriters and die City and may not be used, quoted, relied upon or otherwise
referred to for any other purpose or by any other person (including any person purchasing
any ofthe Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written consent.

  cm 

E X H I B I T B-3
L E T T E R S OF SPECIAL DISCLOSURE COUNSEL

March 24,2014

City of Chicago
121 North LaSalle Street, 7th Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602
Re:

City of Chicago
$432,630,000 General Obligation Bonds, Project
and Refunding Series 2014A
$450,790,000 General Obligation Bonds,Taxable Project
and Refunding Series 2014B
(collectively, the "Bonds")

Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have acted as special disclosure counsel to you, the City of Chicago (the
"City"), solely in connection with the information contained in Appendix E —
"RETIREMENT FUNDS AND OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEHTS"

(the "Pension

Section") of the Official Statement dated March 13, 2014 (the "Official Statement")
relating to the Bonds issued by the City on this date.
In accordance with our understanding with the City, we have reviewed the
Pension Section, certificates of officers of the City and other appropriate persons, and
such other records, reports, opinions and documents, and we have made such
investigations of law, as we have deemed appropriate as a basis for the conclusion
hereinafter expressed. As to facts material to the views expressed herein, we have, with
your consent, relied upon oral or written statements or representations of officers or other
representatives or agents of or consultants to the City and of or to the Municipal
Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit
Fund of Chicago, the Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, and the Laborers'
and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago (collectively,
the "Retirement Funds"), including the representations and warranties of the City in the
Contract of Purchase dated March 13, 2014, between die City and Wells Fargo Bank,
National Association, on behalf of itself and the other underwriters named therein
(collectively, the "Underwriters"). We have not independentiy verified such matters.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed thereto
in the Official Statement.

 In arriving at the conclusion hereinafter expressed, we are not expressing any
opinion or view on, and with your permission are assuming and relying on, the validity,
accuracy and sufficiency of the records, reports, documents, certificates and opinions
referred to above (including the accuracy of all factual matters represented and legal
conclusions contained therein, including, without limitation, any representations and legal
conclusions regarding the due authorization, issuance, delivery", vaUdity and
enforceability of the Bonds, the tax treatment of interest on the Bonds for federal income
tax purposes, and the application of Bond proceeds in accordance with the authorization
therefor). We have assumed that all records, reports, documents, certificates and
opinions that we have reviewed, and the signatures thereto, are genuine.
We are not passing upon, and do not assume any responsibility for, the accuracy,
completeness or fairness of any of the statements contained in the Pension Section and
make no representation that we have independentiy verified the accuracy, completeness
or faimess of any such statements. In our capacity as disclosure counsel to the City, to
assist you in discharging your responsibility with respect to the Pension Section, we
participated in conferences and correspondence with representatives of the City, the
City's attorneys, the Underwriters, co-counsel to the Underwriters, and other persons
involved in the preparation of information for the Pension Section, during which the
contents of the Pension Section and related matters were discussed and revised. The
purpose of our professional engagement was not to establish or confirm factual matters
set forth in the Pension Section, and we have not undertaken any obligation to verify
independently any of the factual matters set forth therein. Moreover, many of the
determinations required to be made in the preparation of the Pension Section involve
matters of a non-legal nature. Based on our participation in the above-mentioned
conferences and correspondence, and in reliance thereon and on our limited review of the
records, reports, documents, certificates, statements, representations, warranties, opinions
and matters mentioned above, without independent verification, we advise you as a
matter of fact and not opinion that, during our engagement as disclosure counsel to the
City in connection with the Pension Section, no facts came to the attention of the
attorneys in our firm rendering legal services in connection with such limited role which
caused us to believe that the Pension Section (apart from the financial statements or other
financial, operating, numerical, accounting or statistical data or forecasts, estimates,
projections, assumptions or expressions of opinion, or matters of litigation contained or
incorporated therein, as to which we do not express any conclusion or belief) contained
as of its date or contains as of the date hereof any untrue statement of a material fact or
omitted or omits to state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order
to make the statements made therein, in the light of the circumstances under which they
were made, not misleading. No responsibility is undertaken or statement rendered herein
with respect to any other portions of the Official Statement or any other disclosure
document, materials or activity, or as to any information from another document or
source referred to by or incorporated by reference in the Official Statement.
By acceptance of this letter you recognize and acknowledge that: (i) the preceding
paragraph is not a legal opinion but is rather in the nature of negative observations based
on certain limited activities performed by specific lawyers in our firm during our

 engagement to the City as disclosure counsel in connection with the Pension Section;
(ii) the scope of those activities performed by us for purposes of delivering this letter was
inherentiy limited and does not purport to encompass all activities necessary for
compliance with applicable securities laws; and (iii) those activities performed by us rely
on third party representations, warranties, certifications, statements and opinions,
including and primarily, representations, warranties and certifications made by the City,
and are otherwise subject to the conditions set forth herein.
We express herein no opinion or belief with respect to the validity of the Bonds or
the taxation thereof or of the interest thereon, and our expression of belief with respect to
the Pension Section assumes the validity of the Bonds and the tax treatment of the
interest payable thereon for federal income tax purposes, all as set forth in the opinions of
Co-Bond Counsel.
This letter is furnished by us in our limited capacity as disclosure counsel to the
City in connection with the Pension Section. This letter may not be used, quoted, relied
upon or otherwise referred to for any other purpose or by any other person (including any
person purchasing any of the Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written
consent. This letter is given as of the date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise
or supplement this letter to reflect any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to
our attention.
Respectfully submitted.

 March 24,2014

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association,
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Contract of Purchase
described below
Re:

City of Chicago
$432,630,000 General Obligation Bonds, Project
and Refunding Series 2014A
$450,790,000 General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project
and Refunding Series 2014B
(collectively, the "Bonds")

Ladies and Gentiemen:
We have acted as special disclosure counsel to the City of Chicago (the "City"),
solely in connection with the information contained in Appendix E — "RETIREMENT
FtJNDS AND OTHER POST-EMI^LOYMENT BENEHTS" (the "Pension Section") of the
Official Statement dated March 13, 2014 (the "Official Statement") relating to the Bonds
issued by the City on this date.
In accordance with our understanding with the City, we have reviewed the
Pension Section, certificates of officers of the City and other appropriate persons, and
such other records, reports, opinions and documents, and we have made such
investigations of law, as we have deemed appropriate as a basis for the conclusion
hereinafter expressed. As to facts material to the views expressed herein, we have, with
your consent, relied upon oral or written statements or representations of officers or other
representatives or agents of or consultants to the City and of or to the Municipal
Employees' Annuity and-Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit
Fund of Chicago, the Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, and the Laborers'
and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago (collectively,
the "Retirement Funds"), including the representations and warranties of the City in the
Contract of Purchase dated March 13, 2014 between the City and Wells Fargo Bank,
National Association, on behalf of itself and the other underwriters named therein
(collectively, the "Underwriters"). We have not independently verified such matters.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed thereto
in the Official Statement.
In arriving at the conclusion hereinafter expressed, we are not expressing any
opinion or view on, and with your permission are assuming and relying on, the validity.

 accuracy and sufficiency of the records, reports, documents, certificates and opinions
referred to above (including the accuracy of all factual matters represented and legal
conclusions contained therein). We have assumed that all records, reports, documents,
certificates and opinions that we have reviewed, and the signatures thereto, are genuine.
We are not passing upon, and do not assume any responsibility for, the accuracy,
completeness or faimess of any of the statements contained in the Pension Section and
make no representation that we have independently verified the accuracy, completeness
or faimess of any such statements. In our capacity as disclosure counsel to the City, to
assist it in discharging its responsibility with respect to the Pension Section, we
participated in conferences and correspondence with your representatives, representatives
of the City, the City's attorneys, co-counsel to the Underwriters, and other persons
involved in the preparation of information for the Pension Section, during which the
contents of the Pension Section and related matters were discussed and revised. The
purpose of our professional engagement was not to establish or confirm factual matters
set forth in the Pension Section, and we have not undertaken any obligation to verify
independently any of the factual matters set forth therein. Moreover, many of the
determinations required to be made in the preparation of the Pension Section involve
matters of a non-legal nature. Based on our participation in the above-mentioned
conferences and correspondence, and in reliance thereon and on our limited review of the
records, reports, documents, certificates, statements, representations, warranties, opinions
and matters mentioned above, without independent verification, we advise you as a
matter of fact and not opinion that, during our engagement as disclosure counsel to the
City in connection with the Pension Section, no facts came to the attention of the
attorneys in our firm rendering legal services in connection with such limited role which
caused us to believe that the Pension Section (apart from the financial statements or other
fmancial, operating, numerical, accounting or statistical data or forecasts, estimates,
projections, assumptions or expressions of opinion, or matters of litigation contained or
incorporated therein, as to which we do not express any conclusion or belief) contained
as of its date or contains as of the date hereof any untrue statement of a material fact or
omitted or omits to state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order
to make the statements made therein, in the light of the circumstances under which they
were made, not misleading. No responsibility is undertaken or statement rendered herein
with respect to any other portions of the Official Statement or any other disclosure
document, materials or activity, or as to any information from another document or
source referred to by or incorporated by reference in the Official Statement.
By acceptance of this letter you recognize and acknowledge that: (i) the preceding
paragraph is not a legal opinion but is rather in the nature of negative observations based
on certain limited activities performed by specific lawyers in our firm during our
engagement to the City as disclosure counsel in connection with the Pension Section;
(ii) the scope of those activities performed by us for purposes of delivering this letter was
inherentiy limited and does not purport to encompass all activities necessary for
compliance with applicable securities laws; (iii) those activities performed by us rely on
third party representations, warranties, certifications, statements and opinions, including
and primarily, representations, warranties and certifications made by the City, and are

 otherwise subject to the conditions set forth herein; (iv) we have not been engaged to act,
and have not acted, as your counsel for any purpose in connection with the issuance of
the Bonds; (v) no attorney-client relationship exists or has at any time existed between us
in connection with the Bonds or by virtue of this letter; and (vi) this letter is based upon
our review of proceedings and other documents undertaken as part of our engagement
with the City, and in order to deliver this letter we neither undertook any duties or
responsibilities to you nor conducted any activities in addition to those undertaken or
conducted for the benefit of, and requested by, the City. Consequently, we make no
representation that our review has been adequate for your purposes.
We express herein no opinion or belief with respect to the validity of the Bonds or
the taxation thereof or of the interest thereon, and our expression of belief with respect to
the Pension Section assumes the validity of the Bonds and the tax treatment of the
interest payable thereon for federal income tax purposes, all as set forth in the opinions of
Co-Bond Counsel.
This letter is furnished by us in our limited capacity as disclosure counsel to the
City in connection with the Pension Section and is solely for the benefit of the
Underwriters. This letter may not be used, quoted, relied upon or otherwise referred to
for any other purpose or by any other person (including any person purchasing any of the
Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written consent. This letter is given as of
the date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or supplement this letter to reflect
any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to our attention.

Respectfully submitted,

 EXHIBIT C
OPINION OF CORPORATION COUNSEL OF THE C I T Y

March 24, 2014

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement,
dated March 13, 2014 between such
Underwriters and the City of Chicago
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This opinion is given to you pursuant to Section 10(a)(v) of
that certain contract dated March 13, 2014 (the "Bond Purchase
Agreement") between die City of Chicago (the "City") and Wells
Fargo Bank, National Association, as representative of a group of
Underwriters, respecting the purchase of City of Chicago
$432,630,000 General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refiinding Series
2014A and $450,790,000 General Obligation Bonds Taxable Project
and Refunding Series 2014B (collectively, the "Bonds") which are
being issued pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the City Council of
the City on February 5, 2014 (the "Ordinance"). Unless otherwise
defined herein, capitalized terms used herein shall have the meanings
assigned to them in the Bond Purchase Agreement.
- In connection with the issuance of the Bonds, I have caused
to be examined a certified copy of the record of proceedings of the
City Council ofthe City pertaining to the issuance of the Bonds by the
City, the Official Statement dated March 13, 2014, relating to the
Bonds (the "Official Statement"), and executed counterparts, where
applicable, ofthe following documents:
(a)

the Ordinance;

(b)

the Bond Purchase Agreement;

(c)

that certain Continuing Disclosure Undertaking dated
the date hereof pursuant to the requirements of

Section
(b) (5) of Rule 15c-12 of the Securities and
Exchange Commission (the "Undertaking"); and

 (d)

Escrow Agreements dated the date hereof between '
the City and Amalgamated Bank of Chicago (the
"Escrow Agreement").

On the basis of such examination and review of such other information, records
and documents as was deemed necessary or advisable, I am of the opinion that:
1.
The City is a home rule unit of local govemment duly organized and
existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois with full power and
authority, among other things, to adopt the Ordinance, to authorize, issue and sell the
Bonds, and to execute and deliver the Bond Purchase Agreement, the Escrow
Agreements and the Undertaking.
2.
The Bond Purchase Agreement, the Escrow Agreements and the
Undertaking have been duly authorized, executed and delivered by, and the Ordinance
has been duly adopted by, the City, and, assuming the due execution and delivery by the
other parties thereto, as appropriate, such instruments constitute legal and valid
obligations of the City in each case enforceable in accordance with their respective terms
except as may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency and other laws affecting creditors'
rights or remedies and the availability of equitable remedies generally.
3.
To my knowledge, compliance with the provisions of the Bonds, the
Ordinance, the Bond Purchase Agreement, the Escrow Agreements and the Undertaking
does not conflict in a material manner witii, or constitute a material breach of or material
default under, any applicable law, administrative regulation, court order or consent decree
of the State of Illinois, or any department, division, agency or instrumentality thereof or
ofthe Uruted States of America or any ordinance, agreement or other instrument to which
the City is a pcirty or is otherwise subject.
4.
To my knowledge, all approvals, consents and orders of and filings (except
with respect to state "blue sky" or securities laws) with any govemmental authority,
board, agency or commission having jurisdiction which would constitute conditions
precedent to the performance by the City of its obligations under the Ordinance, the Bond
Purchase Agreement, the Escrow Agreements, the Undertaking and the Bonds have been
obtained.
5.
There is no litigation or proceeding pending, or to my knowledge,
threatened, materially affecting the existence of the City or seeking to restrain or enjoin the
issuance, sale or delivery of the Bonds, or contesting the validity or enforceability of the
Bonds, the Ordinance, the Bond Purchase Agreement, the Escrow Agreements or the
Undertaking, or the completeness or accuracy of the Official Statement, or the powers of
the City or its authority with respect to the Bonds, the Ordinance, the Bond Purchase
Agreement, the Escrow Agreements or the Undertaking.
Nothing has come to my attention which would lead me to believe that the
Official Statement (excluding information under the caption "THE BONDS - Book-Entry

 System," relating to The Depository Trust Company, "RATINGS," "CERTAIN
VERIFICATIONS," "UNDERWRITING," and "TAX MATTERS," Appendices C and
F, infonnation sourced in Appendices A, B, D, and E to sources other than the City or
departments thereof, any infomiation in or omitted from the Official Statement relating to
DTC, any information in or omitted from the Official Statement relating to any
information fiimished by the Underwriters for use in the Official Statement, the financial
statements and all otiier financial and statistical data contained in the Official Statement,
including the Appendices thereto) contains an untrue statement of a material fact or omits '
to state a material fact necessary to make the statements therein, in the light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading in any. material respect.
No opinion is expressed as to any "blue sky" or other securities laws or as to the
laws regarding taxation of any state or the United States of America, or any disclosure or
compliance related thereto.
The statements contained herein are made in an official capacity and not
personally and no personal responsibility shall derive from them. Further, the only
opinions that are expressed are the opinions specifically set forth herein, and no opinion
is implied or should be inferred as to any other matter or transaction.
No one other than you shall be entitled to rely on this opinion.
Very tmly yours,

Stephen R. Patton
Corporation Counsel

 EXHIBIT D
OPINION OF C O - D I S C L O S U R E COUNSEL

March 24, 2014

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
as Representative of the Underwriters named in
the Bond Purchase Agreement, dated March 13,
2014, between such Underwriters and the City
of Chicago

$432,630,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Project and Refunding Series
2014A

$450,790,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project and Refunding
Scries 2014B

Dear Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have acted as Co-Disclosure Counsel to the City of Chicago (the "City") in
connection with the issuance of $883,420,000 aggregate original principal amount of the City's
General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refiinding Series 2014A (the "Series 2014A Bonds") and
the City's General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2014B (the "Series
2014B Bonds" and, together with the Series 2014 A Bonds, the "Bonds"). This opinion is being
rendered at die request of Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as Representative of the Underwriters (the
"Underwriters") named in the Bond Purchase Agreement, dated March 13, 2014 (the "Bond
Purchase Agreement") between the City and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as
Representative of the Underwriters (the "Representative") pursuant to Section .10(a)(vii) ofthe
Bond Purchase Agreement. Capitalized terms used and not otherwise defined herein have the
meanings as defined in the Bond Purchase Agreement.
For purposes of rendering this opinion, we have examined originals or executed copies
of: (i) the Bond Purchase Agreement, (ii) the Ordinance, (iii) the Undertaking, and (iv) tlie legal
opinions, agreements and certificates delivered pursuant to Section 10(a) of the Bond Purchase
Agreement (collectively, the "Documents"). We have also participated in tiie preparation of the
Preliminary Official Statement dated March 3, 2014 (the " Preliminary Official Statement") and
the Official Statement dated March 13, 2014 (the "Official Statement") relating to the issuance of
the Bonds. In our examinations, we have assumed the legal capacity of natural persons, the
genuineness of signatures on, and the authenticity of, all documents so examined, the conformity

 to originals of all documents submitted to us as copies, and that all records and other information
made available to us, and on which we have relied, are complete in all respects.
Based upon and subject to our examination as described above and subject to the
qualifications set forth herein, we are of the opinion that:
1.
No registration is required under the Securities Act o f 1933, as
amended, with respect to the issuance of the Bonds, and no ordinance or indenture
in respect of the Bonds is required to be qualified under the Trust Indenture Act o f
1939, as amended.
2.
The Undertaking comphes with the requirements o f paragraph
(b)(5) o f Regulation §240.15c2-12 (Rule 15c2-l2) adopted by the Securities and
Exchange Commission under the Securities Exchange Act o f 1934, as in effect as
of the date o f the Closing.
3.
The statements contained in the Official Statement under the
captions "UNDERWRITING" and "SECONDARY M A R K E T DISCLOSURE"
insofar as such statements purport to summarize certain provisions o f or describe
certain legal matters related to the Bond Purchase Agreement or the Undertaking,
as the case may be, constitute a fair and accurate summary o f such provisions or
legal matters.
We are not expressing (and cannot express) any opinion or view with respect to the
authorization, issuance, delivery or validity of the Bonds, the tax exemption of the Bonds or the
interest paid on the Bonds. Because the purpose of our professional engagement was not to
establish factual matters and because of the wholly or partially nonlegal character of many of the
determinations involved in the preparation ofthe Official Statement, except as stated in paragraph
3 of this letter, we are not passing upon and do not assume responsibility for the accuracy,
completeness or fairness of the statements contained in the Official Statement and make no
representation that we have independently verified the accuracy, completeness or faimess of such
statements. Without limiting the foregoing, we assume no responsibility for, .and have not
independently verified, the accuracy, completeness or faimess of the fmancial statements, notes
to financial statements, tables and other financial, economic, market and statistical data included
or incorporated by reference in the Official Statement and the appendices to the Official
Statement, and we have not reviewed the accounting, fmancial or statistical records from which
such financial statements, schedules, appendices and data are derived. We note that we are not
experts within the meaning of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, with respect to such
fmancial statements or schedules or the other financial, economic, market, or statistical data
included or incorporated by reference therein. During the preparation of the Official Statement,
however, we participated in conferences with you, Co-Bond Counsel, Underwriters' Counsel,
Corporation Counsel for the City and officials, employees and agents of the City, at which
conferences the contents of the Official Statement and related matters were discussed. On the
basis of the foregoing, but without independent verification of factual matters, nothing has come
to our attention which would lead us to believe that the Official Statement and the Appendices
thereto contain any statement which, at the time and in the light ofthe circumstances under which
it is made, is false or misleading with respect to any material fact or omits to state a material fact
necessary to make the statements therein, at the time and in fhe light of the circumstances under
which they are made, not false or misleading; provided that we express no view as to: (i) any
fmancial or statistical information included in the Official Statement or the Appendices thereto.

 (ii) any information included in Appendix B, Appendix C; Appendix D, Appendix E, Appendix F
and Appendix G thereto, and (ii) the description pf DTC in the Official Statement and the
infoirnation included in the Official Statement under the caption "TITE BONDS — Book-Entiy
System."
Our opinions and advice expressed herein are limited to the matters expressly stated
herein and no opinion is implied or may be inferred beyond the matters expressly stated.
Our opinions and advice expressed herein are rendered as of the date hereof and are
based on existing law which is subject to change. We do not undertake to advise you of any
changes in the opinions and advice expressed herein from matters that may hereafter arise or be
brought to our attention or to revise or supplement such opinions and advice should the present
laws of any jurisdiction be changed by legislative action, judicial decision, or otherwise.
This opinion and advice are solely for the information of the addressees hereof and are
not to be quoted in whole or in part or otherwise referred to (except- in a Hst of closing
documents), nor are they to be filed with any govemmental agency or other person, without our
prior written consent. Other than tlie addressees hereof, no one is entitled to rely on this opinion
and advice.
Very truly yours,

 EXHIBIT E
REPRESENTATION L E T T E R

City of Chicago
Department of Finance
121 North LaSalle Street, 7**^ Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602
Attn.: Deputy Comptroller of Financial Policy

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement,
dated March 13, 2014, between such
Underwriters and the City of Chicago

Pursuant to the Bond Purchase Agreement dated March 13, 2014 (the "Purchase
Agreemenf'), among the City of Chicago (the "City") and Wells Fargo Bank, Nafional
Association, as representative (the "Representative") of the underwriters named therein
(each an "Underwriter") relating to the City's General Obligation Bonds, Project and
Refunding Series 2014A (tiie "Series 2014A Bonds"), and die General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2014B (the "Series 2014B Bonds" and, together with
the Series 2014A Bonds, the "Bonds"), each of the undersigned Underwriters severally
represents to the City that:
(1)
Neither the Underwriter, nor any Affiliate tiiereof is listed on any of the
following lists maintained by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S.
Department of the Treasury, the Bureau of Industry and Security of the U.S. Department
of Commerce, the U.S. Department of State or their successors, or on any other list of
persons or entities with which the City may not do business under any applicable law,
mle, regulation, order or judgment: the Specially Designated Nationals List, the Denied
Persons List, the Unverified List, the Entity List, the List of Statutorily Debarred Parties
and the Excluded Parties List.
For purposes of this representation, "Affiliate," when used to indicate a
relationship with a specified person or entity, means a person or entity that, directly or
indirectly, through one or more intermediaries, controls, is conti'olled by or is under
common control wilh such specified person or entity, and a person or entity shall be
deemed to be controlled by another person or entity,, if controlled in any manner
whatsoever that results in control in fact by that other person or entity (or that other
person or entity and any persons or entities with whom that other person or entity is
acting jointly or in concert), whether directly or indirectly and whether through share
ownership, a trust, a contract or otherwise.
(2)
The undersigned Underwriters agree that in the event that any Underwriter
or any of its Affiliates appears on any of the lists described in paragraph (1) above, at any
time prior to the Closing (as defmed in the Purchase Agreement) with respect to the
Bonds, that Underwriter shall be deemed lo have submitted to the Representative its
Withdrawal From Agreement Among Underwriters.

 f N WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation
Letter in connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized
representatives as of the date written below.
Dated:

,2014

WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION
By:
Its: Managing Director

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST, INC.
By:
Its:

CABRERA CAPITAL MARKETS, LLC

LOOP CAPITAL MARKETS LLC

By:
Its:

By:.
Its:

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

BLAYLOCK, BEAL, V A N LLC

By:
Its:'

By:
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC..

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

GOLDMAN SACHS & CO.

MISCHLER FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC

RAMIREZ & CO., INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

THE WILLIAMS CAPITAL GROUP, L.P.
By:
Its:

 STATE OF ILLINOIS

)

) ss
COUNTY OF COOK

)
NOTIFICATION O F S A L E

$432,630,000
G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS, P R O J E C T AND REFUNDING S E R I E S

2014A

$450,790,000
G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS, T A X A B L E P R O J E C T AND REFUNDING S E R I E S

2014B

B E I N G ISSUED BY T H E C I T Y O F C H I C A G O

To: The City Council of the City of Chicago
Please be advised that responsive to authority contained in an Ordinance (the
"Ordinance") adopted by the City Council (the "City Council") of the City of Chicago (the
"City") on February 5,2014, authorizing the issuance of up to $900,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of general obligation bonds of the City, plus original issue discount, a Bond Purchase
Agreement dated March 13, 2014 (the "Bond Purchase Agreement"), providing for the sale of
$432,630,000 aggregate principal amount of General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding
Series 2014A (the "Series 2014A Bonds"), and $450,790,000 aggregate principal amount of
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2014B (the "Taxable
Series 2014B Bonds" and together with the Series 2014A Bonds, the "Bonds"), was entered into
by me as the Chief Financial Officer of the City, with the concurrence of the Chairman of the
Committee on Finance of the City Council, and the purchasers thereof named below (the
"Underwriters").
The Series 2014A Bonds were sold at a purchase price of $435,549,851.04 (representing
the aggregate principal amount of the Series 2014A Bonds plus original issue premium of
$5,207,768.55, less an underwriters' discount of $2,287,917.51); and the Taxable Series 2014B
Bonds were sold at the purchase price of $448,135,142.01 (representing the aggregate principal
amount of the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds less an underwriters' discount of $2,654,857.99).
The aggregate purchase price for the Bonds is equal to $883,684,993.05 (which represents the
aggregate principal amount of the Bonds plus an original issue premium of $5,207,768.55, less
an aggregate underwriters' discount of $4,942,775.50). The Underwriters for the Bonds are
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, BMO Capital Markets GKST Inc., Cabrera Capital
Markets, LLC, Loop Capital Markets LLC, William Blair & Company, L.L.C., Blaylock, Beal,
Van LLC, Estrada Hinojosa & Company, Inc., George K. Baum & Company, Goldman Sachs &
Co., Mischler Financial Group, Inc., North South Capital LLC, Ramirez & Co., Inc., and The
Williams Capital Group, L.P. The compensation (including all fees) of $4,942,775.50 being paid
to the Underwriters in connection with the sale of the Bonds represents less than 3% of the
aggregate principal amount of the Bonds.

3547503.01.16,doc
2205201

 Capitalized terms used herein without definition shall have the meanings assigned to such
terms in the Ordinance.
The Series 2014A Bonds are being issued for the purpose of: (i) paying a portion of the
costs of the Project; (ii) refunding certain Outstanding Indebtedness, (iii) funding capitalized
interest on the Series 2014A Bonds through January 1, 2016; and (iv) paying the costs of
issuance of the Series 2014A Bonds (including the Underwriters' discount).
The Taxable Series 2014B Bonds are being issued for the purpose of: (i) paying a
portion of the costs ofthe Project; (ii) refunding certain Outstanding Indebtedness, (iii) funding
capitalized interest on the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds through July 1, 2015; and (iv) paying the
costs of issuance of the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds (including the Underwriters' discount).
Attached hereto as Exhibits 1 and 2, respectively, are executed copies of the Bond
Purchase Agreement and the Official Statement dated March 13, 2014, as supplemented by the
Supplement to the Official Statement dated March 18,2014.
Pursuant to Section 12 of the Ordinance, the undersigned hereby makes the following
determinations: (a) the principal amount of the Bonds is $883,420,000 and the designation of the
Bonds and principal amount of the Series 2014A Bonds and the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds are
set forth in the first paragraph hereof, (b) the Bonds are issued as Current Interest Bonds in
denominations of $5,000 or any integral multiple thereof, none of which are sold as Retail
Bonds, (c) the Bonds mature and are subject to redemption as set forth in Schedules lA and IB
attached hereto, (d) the principal amounts and interest rates on the Current Interest Bonds are set
forth in Schedules lA and IB attached hereto, (e) a portion of the proceeds of the Series 2014A
and Taxable Series 2014B Bonds have been used for the refunding of Outstanding Indebtedness
described in Schedule IC, and, in connection therewith, none of the proceeds of the Bonds have
been used for a payment under any Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreement, (f) Assured
Guaranty Corp., New York, New York, is issuing an insurance policy for the January 1, 2031
maturity of the Series 2014A Bonds, (g) the Bonds are issued in book-entry form; the book entry
depository is The Depository Trust Company, (h) the sale price of the Bonds is as set forth in the
second paragraph of this Notification of Sale, (i) the Underwriters of the Bonds and the
compensation paid thereto are as set forth above, and (j) the Bond Registrar for the Bonds is
Amalgamated Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois and the refunding Escrow Agents arc those
described in Schedule IC.
Pursuant to Section 7 of the Bond Ordinance, the amount of taxes to be levied for the
Bonds , in each year will be less than the levy of taxes specified in Section 7 of the Bond
Ordinance and I have determined, pursuant to the Ordinance, to abate the excess levy of taxes
not necessary for the purpose of payment of the principal of and interest on the Bonds, as
specified, together with the annual tax levy requirements for the payment of the principal and
interest on the Bonds, in the Notification of Tax Abatement filed concurrentiy with the City
Clerk, a copy of which is attached hereto as Schedule I I .

 Pursuant to Sections 12 and 15 of the Ordinance, I have determined that the taxes levied
for the years 2013 through 2053 for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness refunded with
proceeds of the Bonds in the amounts shown in Schedule III, shall be abated as specified,
pursuant to a certificate of reduction of taxes heretofore levied with respect to each series of the
refunded Outstanding Indebtedness, to be filed within 30 days of the date of this Notification of
Sale as provided in such certificate attached hereto as Schedule III.

 Respectfully su'bmitted as of this lbw/hay of 2014.

    

Chief Financial Officer

EXHIBIT 1

BOND PURCHASE AGREEMENT

BOND PURCHASE AGREEMENT

$883,420,000
CITY OF CfflCAGO
<CA-n citi nnn
$432,630,000
1 <-wLi- i.- T. J
General Obhgation Bonds,
n • i J
f J- c • i n i . 4 i
Project and Keiunamg Senes 2014A

$450,790,000
'
'.
General Obugation Bonds,
_
ui » • * J T. r J- e •
Taxable Project and Refundmg Series
2014B

March 13, 2014
City of Chicago
Office of the City Comptroller
121 North LaSalle Street, 7"" Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602
Attention: Chief Financial Officer
Ladies and Gentiemen:
The undersigned. Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (fhe "Representative"),
on behalf of itself and the other underwriters listed below (collectively, the "Underwriters"),
hereby offers to enter into this Bond Purchase Agreement (the "Agreemenf) with the City
of Chicago (the "City"), for the purchase by the Underwriters, and sale by the City, of all but
not less than all of fhe City's General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series
2014A (the "Series 2014A Bonds") and the City's General Obhgation Bonds, Taxable
Project and Refunding Series 2014B (the "Series 2014B Bonds" and, together witii the
Series 2014A Bonds, the "Bonds"). This offer is made subject to the acceptance by the
City, evidenced by the signature of a duly authorized officer of the City in the space
provided below, on or before 5:00 P.M., Chicago time on the date hereof, and upon such
acceptance this Agreement shall be in fiill force and effect in accordance with its terms and
shall be binding on the City and the Underwriters.
'The Representative is authorized, and hereby represents and warrants that it is
authorized, to act as Representative of the Underwriters and to execute this Agreement and
has fijJl authority to take such action as it may deem advisable with respect to all matters
pertaining to this Agreement. Each Underwriter hereby severally represents to the City that
it is registered and in good standing under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(the "1934 Act"), as a municipal securities dealer.
The primary role of the Underwriters is to purchase the Bonds, for resale to
investors, in an arm's-length commercial transaction between the City and the
Underwriters. The Underwriters have financial and other interests that differ from those
of the City.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed
thereto in the Preliminary Official Statement, as defmed herein.

 1.

Agreement to Sell and Purchase.

(a)
Upon the terms and conditions and based upon the representations,
warranties and covenants herein set forth, the Underwriters, jointiy and severally, hereby
agree to purchase fi-om the City and the City hereby agrees to sell to the Underwriters: the
Series 2014A Bonds at a price equal to $435,549,851.04 (which represents the aggregate
principal amount of the Series 2014A Bonds less an Underwriters' discount of
$2,287,917.51 and plus a net re-offering premium of $5,207,768.55), and the Series 2014B
Bonds at a price equal to $448,135,142.01 (which represents the aggregate principal amount
ofthe Series 2014B Bonds less an Underwriters' discount of $2,654,857.99).
(b)
It shall be a condition to the City's obligation to sell and dehver the Bonds
that all the Bonds be purchased and paid for by the Underwriters at the Closing (as defmed
in Section 7 hereof) and a condition to the Underwriters' obligation to purchase and pay for
the Bonds that all Bonds be issued, sold and delivered by the City at the Closing.
2.
The Ordmance. The Bonds are authorized by an ordinance of the City
adopted by the City Council of the City (die "City Council") on February 5, 2014 (the
"Ordinance"), and wiU be issued and secured as provided thereunder. The Bonds wiU
mature, bear interest and have such other terms and conditions as are set forth on Schedule I
hereto.
3.
The Preliminary Official Statement. Attached hereto as Exhibit A is a copy
of the Preliminary Official Statement of the City, dated March 3, 2014, relating to the Bonds
(ihe "Prehnunaiy Official Statemenf). For purposes of Rule 15c2-12 ("Rule 15c2-12")
adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") under the 1934 Act, the
Preliminary Official Statement is "deemed fmal" by the City as of its date except for the
omission of such information as is permitted by Rule 15c2-12(b)(l).
4.
Pubhc Offering Price. The Underwriters have agreed to make a bona fide
public offering of the Bonds at fhe initial offering prices set forth on Schedule I. The
Representative wiU provide the City and Co-Bond Counsel (as defmed herein) with a
closing certificate confirming fhe reoffering yields and prices of the Series 2014A Bonds
and the Underwriters acknowledge that the City and Co-Bond Counsel wiU rely on such
certificate to estabUsh the yield on the Series 2014A Bonds and that such reliance is material
to the City in entering into this Agreement and in connection with the delivery of the Bonds.
5.

The Official Statement.

(a)
The City shall provide, or cause to be provided, at its expense, to the
Underwriters no later than the earlier of (i) seven (7) business days after the date of this
Agreement or (ii) the Closing, three copies of the Official Statement of the City, dated the
date hereof, relating to the Bonds (the "Official Statemenf), signed on behalf of the City by
the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer and the Official Statement so dehvered shall be
"final" for purposes of Rule 15c2-12. Such dehveiy of the Official Statement shall occur in
sufficient time to accompany any confirmation that requests payment from any customer
and in sufficient quantity to comply with the rules of the SEC and the Municipal Securities

 Rulemaking Board (the "MSRB").
(b)
I f on or prior to tiie Closing or within twenty-five (25) days after the "end of
the underwriting period" (as hereinafter defmed) any event known to the City relating to or
affecting the City, the Ordinance or the Bonds, shall occur which would cause any statement
of a material fact contained in the Official Statement to be materially incorrect or materially
incomplete, the City will promptiy notify the Representative in writing of the circumstances
and details of such event. If, as a result of such event, it is necessary, in the joint opinion of
the City and the Representative to amend or supplement the Official Statement by stating or
restating any material fact necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in light
of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading, the City wiU forthwith
prepare and fiimish to the Underwriters a reasonable number of copies of an amendment of
or a supplement to such Official Statement in form and substance satisfactory to the City
and the Representative, at the City's sole cost and expense, which will so amend or
supplement such Official Statement so that, as amended or supplemented, the Official
Statement will not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any
material fact necessary in order to make fhe statements made therein, in hght of the
circirmstances under which they were made, not misleading. For purposes of this
Agreement, the term "end of the underwriting period" shall mean the later of the date of
Closing or the date on which an Underwriter no longer retains an unsold balance of the
Bonds for sale to the public. The Underwriters agree tiiat the date on which the end of the
underwriting period shall occur shall be the date of fhe Closing, unless the Underwriters
otherwise notify the City in writing prior to twenty-five (25) days after the date of the
Closing that, to the best of their knowledge, the Underwriters retain for sale to the public an
unsold balance of the Bonds, in which case the end of the underwriting period shall be
extended for additional periods of thirty (30) days each upon receipt of additional written
notification from the Underwriters that, to the best of their knowledge, there exists an unsold
balance of the Bonds, but in no event shall the end of the underwriting period be extended
longer than sixty (60) days after the date of Closing.
The Official Statement shall be provided for distribution, at the expense of the
City, in such quantity as may be requested by the Underwriters as set forth above in order
to permit the Underwriters to comply with Rule 15c2-12, and the applicable rules of the
MSRB, with respect to distribution of the Official Statement. The City shall prepare the
Official Statement, including any amendments thereto, in word-searchable PDF format as
described in the MSRB Rule G-32 and .shall provide the electronic copy of the wordsearchable PDF format ofthe Official Statement to the Underwriters no later than one (1)
business day prior to March 24, 2014, to enable the Underwriters to comply with MSRB
Rule G-32.
The City further agrees to provide the Underwriters with any advance refiinding
documents (as defined in MSRB Rule G-32) in a word-searchable PDF format as
described in the MSRB's Rule G-32 and shall provide such electronic copy ofthe wordsearchable PDF format of the advance refiinding documents to the Underwriters no later
than four (4) business days after March 24, 2014, to enable the Underwriter(s) to comply
witii MSRB Rule G-32.

 (c)
At or prior to the Closing, the Representative shall file, or cause to be filed,
the Official Statement with fhe MSRB in compliance with fhe rules of fhe SEC and the
MSRB. Promptiy after the date after which the Underwriters are no longer obligated under
Rule 15c2-12(b)(4) to deliver to potential customers the Official Statement, the
Representative shall notify the City of such date.
6.
Representations, Warranties and Covenants of the City. The City represents
and warrants to the Underwriters as of the date hereof that:
(a)
The City is a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local govemment,
existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of IlUnois (the "State").
(b)
The City Council has: (i) duly adopted fhe Ordinance, which remains in full
force and effect; (ii) duly authorized the use of fhe Prelinunary Official Statement prior to
the date hereof in connection with the public offering and sale of the Bonds and duly
authorized the execution, deUvery and distribution of the Official Statement in connection
with the public offering and sale of the Bonds; and (iii) duly authorized and approved the
execution and deHvery ofthe Bonds, the escrow agreements to be executed and delivered by
the City (collectively referred to herein as the "Escrow Agreements") in cormection with the
'refunding of the general obhgation bonds of the City identified in Appendix G to the
Official Statement (the "Refiinded Bonds"), this Agreement and a continuing disclosure
undertaking pursuant to the provisions of Section (b)(5) of Rule 15c2-12 (the
"Undertaking").
(c)
WitJh the exception of the disclosure described in the Preliminary Official
Statement in tiie section tided "SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE - Corrective
Action Related to Certain Bond Disclosure Requirements", the City has not failed during
the previous five years to comply ia all material respects with any previous undertakings
in a written continuing disclosure contract or agreement under Rule 15c2-12.
(d)
The City has full legal right, power and authority to: (i) adopt the Ordinance;
(ii) execute and dehver this Agreement, the Escrow Agreements, the Undertaking and the
Official Statement; (iii) issue, sell and deliver the Bonds to the Underwriters pursuant to the
Ordinance and as provided in this Agreement; and (iv) pay for the Bonds from the sources
pledged under the Ordinance for their payment.
(e)
The adoption of the Ordinance and compUance with the provisions thereof
do not, .and the execution and deUvery of this Agreement, the Escrow Agreements, the
Undertaking and the Official Statement will not, in any material manner, violate any
applicable law or administrative regulation of the State or any department, division, agency
or instrumentality thereof or of the LTnited States of America (the "LInited States") or of any
department, division, agency or instmmentality thereof, or any appUcable judgment or
decree to which the City is subject, or conflict with, in a material manner, or constitute a
material breach of, or a material default under, any ordinance, agreement or other instrument
to which fhe City is a party or is otherwise bound.
(f)

AU approvals, consents and orders of, and fihngs (except, i f any, under

 applicable state "blue sky" laws) with, any govemmental authority, board, agency or
commission having jurisdiction which would constitute a condition precedent to the
performance by the City of its obligations under this Agreement, the Escrow Agreements,
the Undertaking, the Ordinance and the Bonds have been obtained or made.
(g)
Thefinancialstatements of the City contained in the Official Statement fairly
present the financial position and results of operations of the City as of the date and for the
periods therein set forth and the City has no reason to believe that such financial statements
have not been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as
apphed to govemmental units, consistentiy applied except as otherwise noted therein.
(h)
The Official Statement (excluding any description of The Depository
Trust Company ("DTC"), information under the captions "THE BONDS - Book-Entry
System," "BOND INSURANCE", "RATINGS," "CERTAIN VERIFICATIONS,"
"UNDERWRITING," and "TAX MATTERS," APPENDIX D — "ECONOMIC,
DEMOGRAPHIC AND SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION (with respect to tiie
information under the headings "— Economy," "— Percentage of Total Non-Farm
Employment by Major Industry Sector" and "and "— Housing Market," and information
relating to population, per capita personal income and employment, and unemployment
rate with respect to the United States, the State of Illinois, Cook County and the Chicago
MSA), Tables 1-10 included in APPENDIX E — "RETIREMENT FUNDS AND
OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS," APPENDIX F — "FORMS OF
OPINIONS OF CO-BOND COUNSEL," any information in or omitted from the Official
Statement relating to the Insurer and the Policy (both hereinafter defined), and
information fumished by the Underwriters for use in the Official Statement) as of its date
does not, and at the Closing will not, contain any untme statement of a material fact or
omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements therein, in light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading in any material respect.
(i)
Information in the Third Party Sourced Retirement Fund Tables is sourced
from documents published by the Retirement Funds and the City takes no responsibility
for the accuracy and completeness of such information; however, nothing has come to the
attention of the City which would lead the City to believe that the Third Party Sourced
Retirement Fund Tables are not true and correct in all material respects;
(j)
The Ordinance, this Agreement, the Escrow Agreements, and the
Undertaking, when duly executed and dehvered by the parties thereto, as appropriate, will
constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of the City enforceable in accordance with
their terms (except to the extent that enforceability may be limited by bankruptcy,
insolvency and other laws affecting creditors' rights or remedies and the availability of
equitable remedies generally).
(k)
When delivered to die Representative, and paid for by the Underwriters at
the Closing in accordance with the provisions of tiiis Agreement, the Bonds will be duly
authorized, executed and dehvered and will constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of
the City enforceable in accordance with their terms (except to the extent that enforceability
may be limited by bankmptcy, insolvency and other laws affecting creditors' rights or

 remedies and the availabihty of equitable remedies generally).
(1)
Except as disclosed in the Official Statement, there is no action, suit or
proceeding, at law or in equity, or before or by a court, pubhc board or body, pending or, to
the City's knowledge, threatened, against the City wherein an unfavorable decision, ruling
or finding would materially adversely affect (i) the vahdity or enforceability of the Bonds,
the Ordinance, this Agreement, the Escrow Agreements, or the Undertaking or (ii) fhe
excludability from federal income taxation of the interest on the Series 2014A Bonds under
the Intemal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code").
(m)
The City has not taken, or omitted taking, and will not take or omit to take,
any action, which action or omission would adversely affect the excludability from federal
income taxation of the interest on the Series 2014A Bonds under the Code.
(n)
Any certificate signed by any Authorized Officer ofthe City and delivered to
the Representative at the Closing in connection with the issuance or sale of the Bonds shall
be deemed to be a representation and warranty by the City to the Underwriters as to the
statements made therein as of the date so delivered.
(o)
The City will make available such information, execute such instruments and
take such other action in cooperation with the Underwriters as the Representative may
reasonably request to qualify the Bonds for offering and sale under the "blue sky" or other
securities laws and regulations of such states and other jurisdictions of the United States as
the Underwriters may designate in writing; provided, however, that nothing in this Section
6(n) shall require the City to consent to general service of process in any state or jurisdiction
other than the State.
(p)
Ordinance.

The City will apply the proceeds of the Bonds in accordance vrith the

(q)
The City acknowledges and agrees that: (i) the transaction contemplated by
this Agreement is an arm's length, commercial transaction between the City and the
Underwriters in which the Underwriters are acting solely as a principal and not acting as a
municipal advisor, financial advisor or fiduciary to the City; (ii) the Underwriters have not
assumed any advisory or fiduciary responsibility to the City with respect to the transaction
contemplated hereby and the discussions, undertakings and procedures leading thereto
(irrespective of whether any Underwriter has provided other services or is currentiy
providing other services to the City on other matters); (iii) the Underwriters have financial
and other interests that differ from those of the City; and (iv) the City has consulted its
own legal, account, tax, financial and other advisors, as applicable, to the extent it has
deemed appropriate.
7.
Closing. Subject to the conditions set forth in this Agreement, the closing
(the "Closing") of the sale of the Bonds by the City and the purchase of the Bonds by the
Underwriters, shall take place at approximately 9:00 aum., Chicago time, on March 24,
2014, at the offices of Chapman and Cutier LLP, 111 W. Monroe Street, Chicago, Ilhnois
(or at such other time, date and place as the City and the Representative mutually agree).

 (a)
At the Closing, the City shall deliver or cause to be delivered to DTC, as
securities depository, for the account of the Underwriters one fully registered certiBcate for
each series, interest rate and maturity of the Bonds in the aggregate principal amount
thereof, registered in the name of Cede & Co., as nominee for DTC.
(b)
Upon dehvery of the Bonds to the Representative at the Closing, the City.
win deliver to the Representative the closing documents as set forth in Section 10 hereof
(c)
The Representative will accept delivery of the Bonds and pay the purchase
price therefor at the Closuig by delivering federalfimdschecks or making federal fiinds wire
transfers or otherwise confirming deposits of same day funds, as the City shall direct, to the
City's account at a bank specified by the City, in au aggregate amount equal to the purchase
price of the Bonds pursuant to Section 1 hereof
8.
Rehance and Further Conditions of the Underwriters. The Underwriters
have entered into this Agreement in rehance upon the representations, warranties and
agreements of the City herein and the performance by the City of its obligations hereunder,
both as of the date hereof and as of the date of the Closing. The Underwriters' obligations
under this Agreement are and shall be subject to the following further condition that at the
time of the Closuig, the Ordinance, the Undertaking, tiie Escrow Agreements, and this
Agreement shall be in fiill force and effect and the Ordinance and the Official Statement
shall not have been amended, modified or supplemented except as may have been agreed to
with respect to the Official Statement pursuant to Section 5 hereof, and the City shah have
duly adopted and there shall be in fvdl force and effect such ordinances as, in the opinion of
Chapman and Cutler LLP, Chicago, Illinois and Sanchez Daniels & Hoffinan LLP, Chicago,
Illinois, as co-bond counsel ("Co-Bond Counsel") shall be necessary in connection with the
transactions contemplated hereby and thereby.
9.

Termination of Agreement.

(a)
The Underwriters shall have the right to cancel their obligations to purchase
the Bonds and have the fiirther right to terminate this Agreement, without liability therefor,
by written notice to the City from the Representative, if, between the date hereof and the
Closing:
(i)
legislation shall be introduced in or enacted by the Congress of the
United States or adopted by either House thereof or shall have been introduced
and favorably reported for passage to either House by any committee of such
House to which such legislation had been referred for consideration, or a decision
shall have been rendered by or adopted by either House or a decision by a court of
the United States or the United States Tax Court or an order, ruling or regulation
shall have been issued or proposed by or on behalf of the Treasury Department of
the United States or the Intemal Revenue Service, with respect to federal income
taxation upon interest received on obligations of the general character of the
Series 2014A Bonds which, in the Representative's reasonable opinion, does
materially adversely affect the market price or marketability ofthe Series 2014A
Bonds, or

 (ii)
legislation shall have been enacted by the Congress of the United
States to become effective on or prior to the Closing, or a decision of a court of
the United States shall be rendered, or a stop order, ruling, regulation or proposed
regulation by or on behalf of the SEC or other agency having jurisdiction over the
subject matter shall be issued or made, to the effect that the issuance, sale and
delivery ofthe Bonds, or any similar obhgations of any similar public body of the
general character of the City, is in violation of, or has the effect of requiring the
contemplated offering, sale and distribution of the Bonds to be registered under
the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the enactment of the Ordinance or any
ordinance of sunilar character is in violation of the Trust Indenture Act of 1939,
as amended, or with fhe purpose or effect of otherwise prohibiting the issuance,
sale or delivery of the Bonds as contemplated hereby or by the Official Statement
or of obligations of the general character of the Bonds which, in the
Representative's reasonable opinion, does materially adversely affect the market
price or marketability of the Bonds, or
(iii)
there shall have occurred any event which in the Representative's
reasonable opuiion, after consultation with its legal counsel, makes the Official
Statement either (A) contain an untme statement of a material fact or (B) omit to
state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the
statements contained therein not misleading in any material respect, and the City
fails to prepare or fumish or fails to cause to be prepared or fumished to the
Underwriters an amendment or supplement to the Official Statement, pursuant to
Section 5 hereof, which will amend or supplement the Official Statement so that,
as amended or supplemented, the Official Statement will not contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated
therein or necessary to make the statements contained therein not misleading in a
material respect, or
(iv)
there shall be in force a general suspension of trading on The New
York Stock Exchange, Inc., or minimum or maximum prices for trading shall
have been fixed and be in force, or maxunum ranges for prices for securities shall
have been required and be in force on The New York Stock Exchange, Inc.,
whether by virtue of a determination by that Exchange or by order of the SEC or
any other govemmental authority having jurisdiction, or
(v)
a general banking moratorium shall have been declared by either
federal, State or New York authorities having jurisdiction and be in force, or
(vi)
any legislation, ordinance, rule or regulation shall be enacted by the
City or State, or any department or agency thereof, or a decision by any court of
competent jurisdiction within the State shall be rendered which, in the reasonable
opinion of the Representative, would have a material adverse effect on the market
price or marketability ofthe Bonds, or
(vii)
a war involving the United States, an outbreak or escalation of or
adverse development in hostilities or terrorist activities or other national or

 intemational calamity or crisis shall have occurred which, in the reasonable
opinion of the Representative, materially adversely affects the market price or
marketability of the Bonds, or
(viii)
there shall be any proceeding or threatened proceeding by the SEC
against the City and such proceeding or threatened proceeding, in the reasonable
opinion of the Representative, materially adversely affects the market price or
marketability ofthe Bonds.
(b)
I f the City, shall be unable to satisfy the conditions contained in this
Agreement or if the Underwriters' obligations shall be terminated for any reason pennitted
by this Agreement, this Agreement shall terminate and neither the City nor the Undenvriters
shall have any further obligations hereunder.
10.

Closing Conditions.

(a)
The Underwriters' obligations to purchase, to accept delivery of and to pay
for the Bonds at fhe Closing shall be conditioned upon the City's performance of its
obligations under Sections 6, 7 and 8 hereof and the Underwriters' receipt of the followdng
documents:
(i)
three copies of the Official Statement manually executed by the
Chief Financial Officer,
(ii)
the approving opinions, dated the date of the Closing, of Co-Bond
Counsel to the City, substantially in the form attached to the Official Statement as
Appendix F;
(iii)
the opinions, dated the date of the Closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters and to the City, of Co-Bond Counsel,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit B - l ;
(iv)
a letter dated the date of the closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters and to the City, of Co-Bond Counsel,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit B-2;
(v)
a letter dated the date of the closing and addressed to the City of
Chapman and Cutler LLP, Special Disclosure Counsel to the City in connection
with certain pension matters described in the Official Statement, substantially in
the form attached hereto as Exhibit B-3, which letter shall also either be addressed
to or accompanied by a rehance letter to the Representative on behalf of the
Underwriters;
(vi)
an opinion, dated the date of the Closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, of the Corporation Counsel of the
City, substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit C;
(vii)

an opinion or opinions, dated the date of the Closing and addressed

 to the Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, of Peck, Shaffer & WiUiams, a
division of Dinsmore & Shohl LLP, Chicago, Illinois, as counsel for the
Underwriters ("Underwriters' Counsel"), in form and substance satisfactory to the
Representative;
(viii)
. an opinion or opinions, dated the date of the Closing and addressed
to the Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, of Duane Morris LLP,
Chicago, Illinois, and Shanahan & Shanahan LLP, Chicago, Illinois, CoDisclosure Counsel to the City, substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit
D;
(ix)
a certificate, dated the date of the Closing, signed by the Chief
Financial Officer, to the effect that (A) the representations and warranties of the
City herein are correct in all material respects as of the date of the Closing; and
(B) there has been no material adverse change in the financial condition of the
City since December 31, 2012, as reflected in Appendix C to the Official
Statement, except as set forth in the Official Statement;
(x)
a certificate of Amalgamated Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
as bond registirar and paying agent ("Bond Regisfrar"), to the effect that the Bond
Registrar has fiill legal right, power and authority to act as the Bond Registrar
under the Ordinance;
(xi)
a certificate, dated the date of the Closing, signed by the
Representative, in form and substance satisfactory to the City and Co-Bond
Counsel;
(xii)
an executed copy of the Undertaking substantially in the form
summarized in the Official Statement under the heading "SECONDARY
MARKET DISCLOSURE";
(xiii)
a copy of an agreement between the City and DTC relating to the
safekeeping and book-entry form of the Bonds;
(xiv)
a copy, duly certified by the City Clerk of the City, of the
Ordinance, as passed by the City Council and approved by the Mayor;
(xv)
evidence satisfactory to the Representative that the Bonds have
ratings of "Baal (Negative Outiook)" by Moody's Investors Service, Inc., "A+"
(Negative Outiook) by Standard & Poor's, a division of The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc., and "A-" (Negative Outlook) by Fitch;
(xvi)
evidence satisfactory to the Representative that the Bonds maturing
on January 1, 2031 (tiie "Insured Bonds"), have ratings of at least ""A2 (Stable
Outiook)" from Moody's Investors Service, Inc., and "AA- (Stable Outiook)"
from Standard & Poor's, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., all
based upon the Municipal Bond Insurance Policy (the "Policy") issued by
Assured Guaranty Corp., New York, New York (the "Insurer");
10

 (xvii)
the Policy of the Insurer insuring payment of the Insured Bonds in
the form of the specimen policy attached as Appendix H to the Official Statement
which Policy shall be in full force and effect as of the Closing and noncancelable;
(xviii)
a certificate from the Insurer and an opinion from counsel to the
Insurer addressed to the City' and to the Representative, both dated the date of
Closing, in form and substance satisfactory to the City and to the Representative,
with respect to the valid issuance and effectiveness of the Policy and to the
accuracy and completeness of the Official Statement as to the Insurer and the
Policy;
(xix)

an executed copy of each of the Escrow Agreements;

(xx)
a certificate from each escrow agent (collectively, the "Escrow
Agents") to the effect that such Escrow Agent has fiiU legal right, power and
authority to act as Escrow Agent under the related Escrow Agreement;
(xxi)
a verification report of Robert ITiomas, CPA, LLC, dated the date of
the closing, as to the accuracy of certain calculations with respect to the Bonds and
the Refunded Bonds; and
(xxii)
such additional closing certificates and agreements related to the
Series 2014A Bonds, including such tax certifications and agreements relating to
the Bonds, as Co-Bond Counsel shall reasonably determine to be necessary to
deliver their opinions as provided hereinabove.
(b)
A l l of the opinions, letters, certificates, instruments and other documents
mentioned above or elsewhere in this Agreement will be deemed to be in compliance with
the provisions hereof if,~but only if, they are in form and substance satisfactory to the
Representative, in its reasonable judgment. Payment for the Bonds and acceptance ofthe
Bonds by the Underwriters shall constitute acknowledgment by the Underwriters of the
City's ftiU performance hereunder.
11.
Expenses. The Underwriters shall be under no obhgation to pay, and the
City shall pay, any and all expenses incident to the performance of the City's obligations
hereunder, including but not limited to: (a) the cost ofthe preparation and printing or other
reproduction of the Ordmance, the Preliminary Official Statement and the Official
Statement, as well as the cost of shipping the Official Statement; (b) the cost of the
preparation and printing of the Bonds; (c) the fees and disbursements of Co-Bond Counsel
and Co-Disclosure Counsel; (d) the fees and disbursements of any experts or consultants
retained by the City; (c) the fees ofthe Escrow Agents, DTC and the Bond Registrar; (f) the
fees for the municipal bond ratings on the Bonds; and (g) the premium for the Pohcy. The
Underwriters wiU pay the expenses incurred by them or any of them in cormection with their
public offering and distribution of the Bonds, including, but not limited to, the CUSIP
Service Bureau charges, the fees and expenses of Underwriters' Counsel and advertising
expenses directiy incurred by the Underwriters.

11

 The City shall pay for any expenses (included in the expense component of the
Underwriters' discount) incurred by the Underwriters on behalf of the City in cormection
with the marketing, issuance and delivery of the Bonds, including, but not limited to,
meals, transportation, lodging, and entertainment of the City's employees and
representatives.
12.
Notices. Any notice or other communication to be given to the City under
this Agreement shall be given by delivering the same in writing at the address set forth
above, and any such notice or other communication to be given to the Underwriters shall be
' given by delivering the same in writing to the Representative at the following address:
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
10 Soutii Wacker Drive, Floor 15
Chicago, Illinois 60606
Attention: Lawrence J. Richardson
13.
No Third Party Beneficiaries, Survival, Etc. This Agreement is made solely
for the benefit of the City and the Underwriters (including the successors or assigns of any
Underwriter), and no other person, partnership, association or corporation including any
purchaser of the Bonds shall acquire or have any right hereunder or by virtue hereof. All of
the representations and agreements by the City in this Agreement shall remain operative and
in full force and effect regardless of any investigation made by or on behalf of the
Underwriters and shall survive the 4ehvery of and payment for the Bonds.
14.
Governing Law. The rights and obligations of the parties to this Agreement
shall be govemed by, construed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the State,
vrithout giving effect to the conflict of laws provisions thereof
15.
Representations and Warranties of the Underwriters. The Underwriters
represent and warrant that:
1

(a)
They have heretofore authorized the Representative to execute any
document on behalf of or exercise any authority of and otherwise to act for, the
Underwriters in all matters under or pertaining to this Agreement Each Underwriter has
warranted and confirmed to the Representative, and the Representative warrants and
confirms to the City that: (i) it is duly registered under the 1934 Act, as a broker/dealer or
municipal securities dealer and has duly paid the fee prescribed by MSRB Rule A-12 or
is exempt from such requirements, (ii) it is (a) a member in good standing of the
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority ("FINRA") or (b) otherwise eligible under
FINRA mles to receive underwriting discounts and concessions available to such
members with respect to undenvriters of municipal securities, and (iii) it has complied
with the dealer registration requirements, i f any, of the various jurisdictions in which it
offers Bonds for sale. The Underwriters represent, warrant and covenant that they are and
\yill be in compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations in connection with
the offering, issuance and sale of the Bonds.
(b)

To the knowledge of the Underwriters, no person holding office of the

12

 City, either by election or appointment, is in any maimer financially interested, either
directly in the officer's own name or indirectly in the name of any other person,
association, tmst or corporation, in any contract being entered into or the performance of
any work to be carried out in connection with the issuance and sale of the Bonds upon
which said officer may be called upon to act or vote.
(c)
Each Underwriter severally represents to the City that neither the
Underwriter, nor any Affiliate thereof is listed on any ofthe following lists maintained by
the Office of Foreign Assets Control ofthe United States Department ofthe Treasury, the
Bureau of Industry and Security of the United States Department of Commerce, the
United States Department of State or their successors, or on any other list of persons or
entities with which the City may not do business under any applicable law, mle,
regulation, order or judgment: the Specially Designated Nationals List, the Denied
Persons List, the Unverified List, the Entity List, the List of Statutorily Debarred Parties
and the Excluded Parties List. Such representation shall be provided to the City in the
form attached hereto as Exhibit E.
For purposes of this representation, "Affiliate, " when used to indicate a
relationship with a specified person or entity, means a person or entity that, directly or
indirectly, through one or more intermediaries, controls, is controlled by or is under
common control with such specified person or entity, and a person or entity shall be
deemed to be controlled by another person or entity, if controlled in any manner
whatsoever that results in control in fact by that other person or entity (or that other'
person or entity and any persons or entities with whom that other person or entity is
acting jointly or in concert), whether directly or indirectly and whether through share
ownership, a trust, a contract or otherwise.
(d)
The Underwriters may enter into distribution agreements with certain
financial institutions for the retail distribution of municipal securities, including the
Bonds, at the initial public offering price. In accordance with such arrangements, the
Underwriters may share a portion of its underwriting compensation.
16.
Approval. The approval of the Underwriters when required hereunder or
the determination of their satisfaction as to any document referred to herein shall be in
writing signed by the Representative and delivered to the City. .
17.
Successors and Assigns. This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be
binding upon the parties and their successors and assigns, and will not confer any rights
upon any other person. The terms "successors" and "assigns" shall not include any
purchaser of any Bond or Bonds from the Underwriters merely because of such purchase.
18.
Enforceability. I f any provision of this Agreement shall be held or deemed
to be or shall, in fact, be invahd, inoperative or unenforceable as applied in any particular
case in any jurisdiction or jurisdictions, or in all jurisdictions, because it conflicts with any
provisions of any constitution, statute, rule or public policy, or for any other reason, such
circumstances shall not have the effect of rendering the provision in question invalid,
inoperative or unenforceable in any other case or circumstances, or of rendering any other

13

 ' provision or provisions of this Agreement invahd, inoperative or unenforceable to any
extent whatsoever.
19.
Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in several counterparts,
each of which shall be regarded as the original and all of which shall constitute one and the
same document
20.
Business Relationships with Citv Elected Officials. Each Underwriter
understands and agrees that it is required to and will comply with the provisions of Chapter
2-56 and 2-156 of the Municipal Code of Chicago (the "Municipal Code"). Pursuant to
Section 2-156-030(b) of the Municipal Code, it is illegal for any elected official of tiie City,
or any person acting at the direction of such official, to contact, either orally or in writing,
any other City official or employee with respect to any matter involving any person with
whom the elected official has a business relationship, or to participate in any discussion in
any City Council committee hearing or in any City Council meeting or to vote on any matter
involvmg the person with whom an elected official has a business relationship. Violation of
Section 2-156-030(b) of the Municipal Code by any elected official witii respect to this
Agreement shall be grounds for termination of this Agreement. The term "business
relationship" shall be defined as set forth hi Section 2-156-080 of the Municipal Code.
21.
Entire Agreement This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between
the parties hereto with respect to the matters covered hereby, and supersedes all prior
agreements and understandings between the parties. This Agreement shall only be
amended, supplemented or modified in a writing signed by both of the parties hereto.

14

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused tiiis Bond Purchase
Agreement in connection with the City of Chicago General Obhgation Bonds, Project and
Refimding Series 2014A, and the City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Taxable
Project and Refimding Series 2014B, to be executed by their duly authorized representatives
as of the date first above written.
Very truly yours,
THE UNDERWRITERS
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
BMO Capital Markets GKST, Jnc.
Cabrera Capital Markets, LLC
Loop Capital Markets LLC
William Blair & Company
Blaylock, Beal, Van LLC
Estrada Hinojosa & Company, Inc.
George K. Baum & Company
Goldman Sachs & Co.
Mischler Financial Group, Inc.
North South Capital LLC
Ramirez & Co., Inc.
The Williams Capital Group, L.P.
By: WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
As Representative

Victor H. Chi
Director
Accepted by the City:
CITY OF CHICAGO

By

vara M . aurice'
I Chairman, Committee on
rFinance of the City Coimcil

 SCHEDULE I
T E R M S O F BONDS

Aggregate Principal Amount: $883,420,000
2.

Dated: Date of Issuance (Expected to be March 24, 2014)

3.

Maturities, Principal Amounts, Interest Rates, Prices and CUSIP Numbers:
$432,630,000 General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2014A
Maturity
(•January 11

Principal Amount

Interest
Rate

Price

2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036

$ 2,735,000
2,850,000
3,700,000
4,950,000
5,075,000
4,920,000
625,000
4,500,000
5,000,000
4,000,000
10.675,000
23,055,000
30,270,000
3,710,000
36,950,000
15,425,000*
42,615,000
44,875,000
49,700,000
69,000,000
68,000,000

4.00%
4.00%
4.00%
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%
4.00%
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%
5.25%
5.25%
5.00%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%

108.935
109.338
108.289
112.361
110.911
109.262
100.397
108.436
106.598
104.716
103.351
104.580
103.706
100.000
102.918
103.864
101.673
101.134
98.511
98.217
97.658

CUSEP
•

167486SE0
167486SF7
167486SG5
167486SH3
167486SJ9
167486SK6
167486SL4
167486TA7
167486SM2
• 167486SN0
167486SP5
167486SW0
167486SQ3
167486SR1
167486SZ3
167486SY6
167486SS9
. 167486ST7
167486SU4
167486SV2
167486SX8

* Insured Bonds
$450,790,000 G eneral Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project ami Refunding Series
2014B

4.

Maturity
TJanuarv 11

Principal Amount

2044

450,790.000

Interest
Rate
6.314%

Price

CUSIP

100.000

167486SD2

Redemption.

The Bonds are subject to both optional and mandatory redemption prior to maturity, as
described below. The Bonds shall be redeemed only in principal amounts of $5,000 and integral
multiples thereof.

 Optional Redemption. The Series 2014A Bonds maturing on and after January 1, 2025,
are subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole or in part, on any
date on or after .January 1, 2024, and i f less than all of the outstanding Series 2014A Bonds, a
single maturity and interest rate are to be redeemed, the Series 2014A Bonds called shall be
called by lot, at a redemption price equal to the principal amount of the Series 2014A Bonds
being redeemed plus accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call any of the
Series 2014A Bonds for optional redemption, in whole or in part; provided, that such sale or
waiver will not adversely affect the excludability of interest on the Series 2014A Bonds from
gross income for federal income tax purposes.
Optional Redemption of the Series 2014B Bonds with Make Whole Payment. The Series
2014B Bonds shall be subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole
or in part, on any Business Day (as defined below) at a redemption price equal to the greater of:
(A) the principal amount of Bonds to be redeemed, or (B) the sum of the present values of the
remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on such Bonds to be redeemed, not
including any portion of those payments of interest accrued and unpaid as ofthe date such Bonds
are to be redeemed, discounted to the date of redemption of such Bonds to be redeemed on a
semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury
Rate (defmed below) plus 40 basis points plus accrued interest on such Bonds being redeemed to
the date fixed for redemption.
The make whole optional redemption price ofthe Series 2014B Bonds to be redeemed
will be calculated by an independent accounting firm, investment banking firm or financial
advisor (the "Calculation Agent") retained by the City at the City's expense. The Bond Registrar
and the City may rely on the Calculation Agent's determination of the make whole optional
redemption price and will not be liable for such reliance. An authorized officer of the City shall
confirm and transmit the redemption price as so calculated on such dates and to such parties as
shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.
The "Treasury Rate" is, as of any redemption date, the yield to maturity as of such
redemption date of U.S. Treasury securities with a constant maturity (as compiled and published
in the most recent Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.15 (519) that has become publicly
available four Business Days (as defined below) prior to the redemption date (excluding inflation
indexed securities) (or, i f such Statistical Release is no longer published, any publicly available
source of similar market data)) most nearly equal to the period from tlie redemption date to the
maturity date of the Series 2014B Bonds to be redeemed; provided, however, that i f the period
from the redemption date to such maturity date is less than one year, the weekly average yield on
actually traded U.S. Treasury securities adjusted to a constant maturity of one year will be used.
"Business Day" means any day other than a day on which banks in New York, New York,
Chicago, Illinois, or the city in which the Bond Registrar maintains its designated office are
required or authorized to close. The Treasury Rate will be determined by an independent
accounting firm, investraent banking firm or fmancial advisor retained by the City at the City's
expense.

 The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call the Series
2014B Bonds for optional redemption.
Mandatoiy Redemption of the Bonds. The Series 2014B Bonds due January 1, 2044, are
subject to mandatory redemption prior to maturity, at par and accrued interest to the date fixed for
redemption, on January 1 of the following years and in the following principal amounts:
Year

Principal Amount

2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044

$ 37,770,000
50,625,000
57,670,000
28,255,000
32,255,000
34,300,000
101,745,000
108,170,000*

Final Maturity

 EXHIBIT A

PRELIMINARY OFFICIAL STATEMENT

EXHIBIT

B-1

SUPPLEMENTAL OPINION OF C O - B O N D COUNSEL

March 24,2014

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
Chicago, Illinois
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement
described below

City of Chicago
121 North LaSalle Street, 7th Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602

Re:
City of Chicago
$432,630,000 General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series
2014A
$450,790,000 General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2014B
Ladies and Gentiemen:
This opinion is being delivered to you in connection with the authorization and
sale of the above-referenced obligations (collectively, the "Bonds"). The Bonds have
been delivered this date to the underwriters named in the Bond Purchase Agreement
dated March 13, 2014 (the "Purchase Agreement"), between the City of Chicago (the
"City"), and the Underwriters named in the Purchase Agreement acting through the
Representative (as defined in the Purchase Agreement), relating to the sale and purchase
of the Bonds. Terms used and not defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in the Purchase Agreement.
Based upon our examination of a certified copy of a record of the proceedings of
the City Council ofthe City (the "City Council") related to the issuance of the Bonds, we
are of the opinion that:
1.
Pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the City Council on the 5th
day of February, 2014, authorizing the issuance of the Bonds (as supplemented by
a Notification of Sale, the "Bond Ordinance"), the City has duly authorized,
executed and delivered the Purchase Agreement and the Undertaking (together
with the Purchase Agreement, the "City Documents"), and, assuming the due
authorization, execution, delivery and the binding effect on the other parties

 thereto, each of the City Documents constitutes a legal, valid and binding
obhgation of the City, enforceable against the City in accordance with its
respective terms, except that the enforceability of the City Documents may be.
limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, moratorium, reorganization and other similar
laws affecting creditors' rights and by equitable principles, whether considered at
law or in equity, including the exercise of judicial discretion.
2.
Based upon our examination of such documents and questions of
law as we have deemed relevant in connection with the offering and sale of the
Bonds under the circumstances described in the Official Statement, we are of the
opinion that, under existing law, the Bonds are not required to be registered under
the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and the Bond Ordinance is not required to
be qualified under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended.
In rendering this opinion, we have relied upon certifications of the City with
respect to certain material facts within the knowledge of the City. Our opinion represents
our legal judgment based upon our review of the law and the facts that we deem relevant
to render such opinion, and is not a guarantee of a result. This opinion is given as of the
date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or supplement this opinion to reflect
any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to our attention or any changes in law
that may hereafter occur.
This opinion is furnished by us as Co-Bond Counsel to the City. No attorneyclient relationship has existed or exists between our firm and the Underwriters in
connection with the Bonds or by virtue of this opinion. This opinion is solely for the
benefit of the Underwriters and the City and may not be used, quoted, relied upon or
otherwise referred to for any other purpose or by any other person (including any person
purchasing any of the Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written consent.'
Very truly yours,

 EXHIBIT

B-2

L E T T E R OF CO-BOND COUNSEL

March 24,2014

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
Chicago, Illinois
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement
described below
Re:

City of Chicago
121 Nortii LaSalle Street, 7th Floor
Chicago, Illmois 60602

City of Chicago
$432,630,000 General Obhgation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series
2014A
$450,790,000 General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2014B

Ladies and Gentiemen:
(

We have acted as Co-Bond Counsel in connection with the sale and issuance by
the City of Chicago (the "City") of the above-referenced obligations (collectively, the
"Bonds"). We have rendered our separate opinions, dated the date hereof, as to the
validity, enforceability and tax status of interest on the Bonds. The Bonds have been
delivered this date to the underwriters named in the Bond Purchase Agreement dated
March 13, 2014, between the City and such underwriters (the "Underwriters"), relating
to the sale and purchase of the Bonds.
We have not been engaged nor have we undertaken to review or verify the
accuracy, completeness or sufficiency of the information contained in or appended to the
Official Statement dated March 13, 2014 (tiie "Official Statement") or other offering
material relating to the Bonds, except that in our capacity as Co-Bond Counsel in
cormection with the issuance of the Bonds we have reviewed the infonnation contained in
the Official Statement under the captions: "The BONDS" (except for the information
relating to The Depository Trust Company and its book-entry system and operations) and
"SECURITY FOR THE BONDS" (except for any information contained (i) in Appendix B
referenced under such caption and (ii) under the subcaption "Bankruptcy") solely to
determine whether such information and summaries conform to the Bonds and the
ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on the 5th day of February, 2014,
authorizing the issuance of the Bonds (as supplemented by the Notification of Sale
delivered by the Chief Financial Officer of the City, the "Bond Ordinance"). The

 purpose of our professional engagement was not to establish or confirm factual matters in
the Official Statement, and we have not undertaken any obligation to verify
independentiy any of the factual matters set forth under these captions and reviewed by
us. Subject to the foregoing, the summary descriptions in the Official Statement under
such captions excepting those matters set forth above, as of the date of the Official
Statement and a.s of the date hereof, insofar as such descriptions purport to describe or
summarize certain provisions of the Bonds and the Bond Ordinance, are accurate
summaries of such provisions in all material respects. Further, we confirm the opinions
attributed to us in the Official Statement and consent to the references to such opinions
contained therein, s In addition, the information in the Official Statement under the
caption "TAX MATTERS" purporting to describe or summarize our opinions concerning
certain federal tax matters relating to the Bonds has been reviewed by us and is an
accurate summary in all material respects. Except as specifically described in this
paragraph, we express no opinion herein with respect to and have not undertaken to
determine independentiy the accuracy, faimess or completeness of any statements
contained, appended or incorporated by reference in the Official Statement.
By acceptance of this letter you recognize and acknowledge that: (i) the
preceding paragraph is not a legal opinion but is rather in the namre of observations
based on certain limited activities performed by specific lawyers in our firm in our role as
Co-Bond Counsel to the City; (ii) the scope of those activities performed by us for
purposes of delivering this letter was inherentiy hmited and does not purport to
encompass all activities necessary for compliance with applicable securities laws;
(iii) those activities performed by us rely on third party representations, warranties,
certifications, statements and opinions, including and primarily, representations,
warranties and certifications made by the City, and are otherwise subject to the conditions
set forth herein; (iv) we have not been engaged to act, and have not acted, as counsel to
the Underwriters for any purpose in connection with the issuance of the Bonds; (v) no
attorney-client relationship exists or has at any time existed between us and the
Underwriters in connection with the Bonds or by virtue of this letter; and (vi) this letter is
based upon our review of proceedings and other documents undertaken as part of our
engagement with the City, and in order to dehver this letter we neither undertook any
duties or responsibilities to the Underwriters nor conducted any activities in addition to
those undertaken or conducted for the benefit of, and requested by, the City.
Consequentiy, we make no representation that our review has been adequate for the
Underwriters' purposes.
This letter is given as of the date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or
supplement this letter to reflect any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to our
attention. This letter is fumished by us as Co-Bond Counsel to the City. No attorneyclient relationship has existed or exists between our firm and the Underwriters in
connection with the Bonds or by virtue of this letter. This letter is solely for the benefit
of the Underwriters and the City and may not be used, quoted, relied upon or otherwise
referred to for any other purpose or by any other person (including any person purchasing
any of the Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written consent.

 Very truly yours,

EXHIBIT

B-3

LETTERS OF SPECIAL DISCLOSURE COUNSEL

March 24,2014

City of Chicago
121 Nortii LaSalle Sti-eet, 7th Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602
Re:

City of Chicago
$432,630,000 General Obhgation Bonds, Project
and Refunding Series 2014A
$450,790,000 General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project
and Refunding Series 2014B
(collectively, tiie "Bonds")

Ladies and Gentiemen:
We have acted as special disclosure counsel to you, the City of Chicago (the
"City"), solely in connection with the information contained in Appendix E —
"RETIREMENT FUNDS AND OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS" (the

"Pension

Section") of the Official Statement dated March 13, 2014 (the "Official Statement")
relating to the Bonds issued by the City on this date.
In accordance with our understanding with the City, we have reviewed the
Pension Section, certificates of officers of the City and other appropriate persons, and
such other records, reports, opinions and documents, and we have made such
investigations of law, as we have deemed appropriate as a basis for the conclusion
hereinafter expressed. As to facts material to the views expressed herein, we have, with
your consent, relied upon oral or written statements or representations of officers or other
representatives or agents of or consultants to the City and of or to the Municipal
Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit
Fund of Chicago, the Firemen's Atmuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, and the Laborers'
and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago (collectively,
the "Retirement Funds"), including the representations and warranties of the City in the
Contract of Purchase dated March 13, 2014, between the City and Wells Fargo Bank,
National Association, on behalf of itself and the other underwriters named therein
(collectively, the "Underwriters"). We have not independently verified such matters.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed thereto
in the Official Statement.

 In arriving at the conclusion hereinafter expressed, we are not expressing any
opinion or view on, and with your permission are assuming and relying on, the validity,
accuracy and sufficiency of the records, reports, documents, certificates and opinions
referred to above (including the accuracy of all factual matters represented and legal
conclusions contained therein, including, without limitation, any representations and legal
conclusions regarding the due authorization, issuance, delivery, vahdity and
enforceability of the Bonds, the tax treatment of interest on the Bonds for federal income
tax purposes, and the application of Bond proceeds in accordance with the authorization
therefor). We have assumed that all records, reports, documents, certificates and
opinions that we have reviewed, and the signatures thereto, are genuine.
We are not passing upon, and do not assume any responsibility for, the accuracy,
completeness or faimess of any of the statements contained in the Pension Section and
make no representation that we have independentiy verified the accuracy, completeness
or faimess of any such statements. In our capacity as disclosure counsel to the City, to
assist you in discharging your responsibility with respect to the Pension Section, we
participated in conferences and correspondence with representatives of the City, the
City's attorneys, the Underwriters, co-counsel to the Underwriters, and other persons
involved in the preparation of information for the Pension Section, during which the
contents of the Pension Section and related matters were discussed and revised. The
purpose of our professional engagement was not to establish or confirm factual matters
set forth in the Pension Section, and we have not undertaken any obligation to verify
independentiy any of the factual matters set forth therein. Moreover, many of the
determinations required to be made in the preparation of the Pension Section involve
matters of a non-legal nature. Based on our participation in the above-mentioned
conferences and correspondence, and in reliance thereon and on our limited review of the
records, reports, documents, certificates, statements, representations, warranties, opinions
and matters mentioned above, without independent verification, we advise you as a
matter of fact and not opinion that, during our engagement as disclosure counsel to the
City in connection with the Pension Section, no facts came to the attention of the
attorneys in our firm rendering legal services in connection with such limited role which
caused us to believe that the Pension Section (apart from the financial statements or other
financial, operating, numerical, accounting or statistical data or forecasts, estimates,
projections, assumptions or expressions of opinion, or matters of htigation contained or
incorporated therein, as to which we do not express any conclusion or belief) contained
as of its date or contains as of the date hereof any untrue statement of a material fact or
omitted or omits to state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order
to make the statements made therein, in the light of the circumstances under which they
were made, not misleading. No responsibility is undertaken or statement rendered herein
with respect to any other portions of the Official Statement or any other disclosure
document, materials or activity, or as to any information from anotiier document or
source referred to by or incorporated by reference in the Official Statement.
By acceptance of this letter you recognize and acknowledge that: (i) the preceding
paragraph is not a legal opinion but is rather in the nature of negative observations based
on certain limited activities performed by specific lawyers in our firm during our

 engagement to the City as disclosure counsel in comiection with the Pension Section;
(ii) the scope of those activities performed by us for purposes of delivering this letter was
inherentiy limited and does not purport to encompass all activities necessary for
compliance with applicable securities laws; and (iii) those activities performed by us rely
on third party representations, warranties, certifications, statements and opinions,
including and primarily, representations, warranties and certifications made by the City,
and are otherwise subject to the conditions set forth herein.
We express herein no opinion or belief with respect to the validity of the Bonds or
the taxation thereof or of the interest thereon, and our expression of belief with respect to
the Pension Section assumes the vahdity of the Bonds and the tax treatment of the
interest payable thereon for federal income tax purposes, all as set forth in the opinions of
Co-Bond Counsel.
This letter is fumished by us in our limited capacity as disclosure counsel to the
City in connection with the Pension Section. This letter may not be used, quoted, relied
upon or otherwise referred to for any other purpose or by any other person (including any
person purchasing any of the Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written
consent. This letter is given as of the date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise
or supplement this letter to reflect any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to
our attention.
Respectftilly submitted.

 March 24,2014

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association,
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Contract of Purchase
described below
Re:

City of Chicago
$432,630,000 General Obligation Bonds, Project
and Refunding Series 2014A
$450,790,000 General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project
and Refunding Series 2014B
(collectively, the "Bonds")

Ladies and Gentiemen:
We have acted as special disclosure counsel to the City of Chicago (the "City"),
solely in connection with the information contained in Appendix E — "RETIREMENT
FUNDS AND OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEHTS" (tiie "Pension Section") of the
Official Statement dated March 13,2014 (the "Official Statement") relating to the Bonds
issued by the City on this date.
In accordance with our understanding with the City, we have reviewed the
Pension Section, certificates of officers of the City and other appropriate persons, and
such other records, reports, opinions and documents, and we have made such
investigations of law, as we have deemed appropriate as a basis for >the conclusion
hereinafter expressed. As to facts material to the views expressed herein, we have, witii
your consent, relied upon oral or written statements or representations of officers or other
representatives or agents of or consultants to the City and of or to the Municipal
Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit
Fund of Chicago, the Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, and the Laborers'
and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago (collectively,
the "Retirement Funds"), including the representations and warranties of the City in the
Contract of Purchase dated March 13, 2014 between the City and Wells Fargo Bank,
National Association, on behalf of itself and the other underwriters named therein
(collectively, the "Underwriters"). We have not independentiy verified such matters.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed thereto
in the Official Statement.
In arriving at the conclusion hereinafter expressed, we are not expressing any
opinion or view on, and with your permission are assuming and relying on, the validity,

 accuracy and sufficiency of the records, reports, documents, certificates and opinions
referred to above (including the accuracy of all factual matters represented and legal
conclusions contained therein). We have assumed that all records, reports, documents,
certificates and opinions that we have reviewed, and the-signatures thereto, are genuine.
We are not passing upon, and do not assume any responsibility for, the accuracy,
completeness or faimess of any of the statements contained in the Pension Section and
make no representation that we have independently verified the accuracy, completeness
or faimess of any such statements. In our capacity as disclosure counsel to the City, to
assist it in discharging its responsibility with respect to the Pension Section, we
participated in conferences and correspondence with your representatives, representatives
of the City, the City's attorneys, co-counsel to the Underwriters, and other persons
involved in the preparation of information for the Pension Section, during which the
contents of the Pension Section and related matters were discussed and revised. The
purpose of our professional engagement was not to establish or confirm facmal matters
set forth in the Pension Section, and we have not undertaken any obligation to verify
independentiy any of the factual matters set forth therein. Moreover, many of the
determinations required to be made in the preparation of the Pension Section involve
matters of a non-legal nature. Based on our participation in the above-mentioned
conferences and correspondence, and in reliance thereon and on our limited review of the
records, reports, documents, certificates, statements, representations, warranties, opinions
and matters mentioned above, without independent verification, we advise you as a
matter of fact and not opinion that, during our engagement as disclosure counsel to the
City in connection with the Pension Section, no facts came to the attention of the
attomeys in our firm rendering legal services in connection with such limited role which
caused us to believe that the Pension Section (apart from the financial statements or other
financial, operating, numerical, accounting or statistical data or forecasts, estimates,
projections, assumptions or expressions of opinion, or matters of litigation contained or
incorporated therein, as to which we do not express any conclusion or belief) contained
as of its date or contains as of the date hereof any untrue statement of a material fact or
omitted or omits to state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order
to make the statements made therein, in the light of the circumstances under which they
were made, not misleading. No responsibihty is undertaken or statement rendered herein
with respect to any other portions of the Official Statement or any other disclosure
document, materials or activity, or as to any information from another document or
source referred to by or incorporated by reference in the Official Statement.
By acceptance of this letter you recognize and acknowledge that: (i) the preceding
paragraph is not a legal opinion but is rather in the nature of negative observations based
on certain limited activities performed by specific lawyers in our firm during our
engagement to the City as disclosure counsel in connection with the Pension Section;
(ii) the scope of those activities performed by us for purposes of delivering this letter was
inherentiy limited and does not purport to encompass all activities necessary for
compliance with applicable securities laws; (iii) those activities performed by us rely on
third party representations, warranties, certifications, statements and opinions, including
and primarily, representations, warranties and certifications made by tiie City, and are

 otherwise subject to the conditions set forth herein; (iv) we have not been engaged to act,
and have not acted, as your counsel for any purpose in connection with the issuance of
the Bonds; (v) no attorney-client relationship exists or has at any time existed between us
in connection with the Bonds or by virtue of this letter; and (vi) this letter is based upon
our review of proceedings and other documents undertaken as part of our engagement
with the City, and in order to deliver this letter we neither undertook any duties or
responsibilities to you nor conducted any activities in addition to those undertaken or
conducted for the benefit of, and requested by, the City. Consequentiy, we make no
representation that our review has been adequate for your purposes.
We express herein no opinion or belief with respect to the validity of the Bonds or
the taxation thereof or of the interest thereon, and our expression of belief with respect to
the Pension Section assumes the validity of the Bonds and the tax treatment of the
interest payable thereon for federal income tax purposes, all as set forth in the opinions of
Co-Bond Counsel.
This letter is furnished by us in our limited capacity as disclosure counsel to the
City in connection with the Pension Section and is solely for the benefit of the
Underwriters. This letter may not be used, quoted, relied upon or otherwise referred to
for any other purpose or by any other person (including any person purchasing any of the
Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written consent. This letter is given as of
the date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or supplement this letter to reflect
any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to our attention.

Respectftilly submitted.

 EXHIBIT C
OPINION OF CORPORATION COUNSEL O F THE C I T Y

March 24, 2014

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
as Representative ofthe Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement,
dated March 13, 2014 between such
Underwriters and the City of Chicago
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This opinion is given to you pursuant to Section 10(a)(v) of
that certain contract dated March 13, 2014 (the "Bond Purchase
Agreemenf) between the City of Chicago (the "City") and Wells
Fargo Bank, National Association, as representative of a group of
Underwriters, respecting fhe purchase of City of Chicago
$432,630,000 General Obhgation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series
2014A and $450,790,000 General Obhgation Bonds Taxable Project
and Refijnduig Series 2014B (collectively, the "Bonds") which are
being issued pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the City Council of
the City on February 5, 2014 (the "Ordinance"). Unless otherwise
defined herein, capitalized terms used herein shall have the meanings
assigned to them in the Bond Purchase Agreement.
In connection with the issuance ofthe Bonds, I have caused
to be examined a certified copy of the record of proceedings of the
City Council ofthe City pertaining to the issuance ofthe Bonds by the
City, the Official Statement dated March 13, 2014, relating to the
Bonds (the "Official Statemenf), and executed counterparts, where
applicable, of the following documents:
(a)

the Ordinance;

(b)

the Bond Purchase Agreement;

(c)

that certain Continuing Disclosure Undertaking dated
the date hereof pursuant to the requirements of
Section
(b) (5) of Rule 15c-12 of tiie Securities and
Exchange Commission (the "Undertaking"); and

 (d) '

Escrow Agreements dated the date hereof between
the City and Amalgamated Bank of Chicago (the
"Escrow Agreemenf).

On the basis of such examination and review of such other information, records
and documents as was deemed necessary or advisable, I am of the opinion that:
1.
. The City is a home mle unit of local govemment duly organized and
existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois with flill power and
authority, among other things, to adopt the Ordinance, to authorize, issue and sell the
Bonds, and to execute and deliver the Bond Purchase Agreement, the Escrow
Agreements and the Undertaking.
2.
The Bond Purchase Agreement, the Escrow Agreements and the
Undertaking have been duly authorized, executed and delivered by, and the Ordinance
has been duly adopted by, the City, and, assuming the due execution and delivery by the
other parties thereto, as appropriate, such instruments constitute legal and valid
obligations of the City in each case enforceable in accordance with their respective terms
except as may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency and other laws affecting creditors'
rights or remedies and the availability of equitable remedies generally.
3.
To my knowledge, compliance with the provisions of the Bonds, the
Ordinance, the Bond Purchase Agreement, the Escrow Agreements and the Undertaking
does not conflict in a material maimer with, or constitute a material breach of or material
default under, any apphcable law, adrriinistrative regulation, court order or consent decree
of the State of Illinois, or any department, division, agency or instrumentality thereof or
ofthe United States of America or any ordinance, agreement or other instrument to which
the City is a party or is otherwise subject.
4.
To my knowledge, all approvals, consents and orders of and filings (except
with respect to state "blue sky" or securities laws) with any govemmental authority,
board, agency or commission having jurisdiction which would constitute conditions
precedent to the performance by the City of its obligations under the Ordinance, the Bond
Purchase Agreement, the Escrow Agreements, the Undertaking and the Bonds have been
obtained.
5.
There is no litigation or proceeding pending, or to my knowledge,
threatened, materially affecting the existence of the City or seeking to restrain or enjoin the
issuance, sale or delivery of the Bonds, or contesting the validity or enforceability of the
Bonds, the Ordinance, the Bond Purchase Agreement, the Escrow Agreements or the
Undertaking, or the completeness or accuracy of the Official Statement, or the powers of
the City or its authority with respect to the Bonds, the Ordinance' the Bond Purchase
Agreement, the Escrow Agreements or the Undertaking.
Nothing has come to my attention which would lead me to believe that the
Official Statement (excluding infonnation under the caption "THE BONDS - Book-Entry

 System," relating to The Depository Trust Company, "RATINGS," "CERTAIN
VERIFICATIONS," "UNDERWRITING," and "TAX MATTERS," Appendices C and
F, information sourced in Appendices A, B, D, and E to sources other than the City or
departments thereof, any information in or omitted from the Official Statement relating to
DTC, any information in or omitted from the Official Statement relating to any
information fiimished by the Underwriters for use in the Official Statement, the financial
statements and all other financial and statistical data contained in the Official Statement,
including the Appendices thereto) contains an untme statement of a material fact or omits
to state a material fact necessary to make the statements therein, in the light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading in any material respect.
No opinion is expressed as to any "blue sky" or other securities laws or as to the
laws regarding taxation of any state or the United States of America, or any disclosure or
comphance related thereto.
The statements contained herein are made in an official capacity and not
personally and no personal responsibility shall derive from them. Further, the only
opiruons that are expressed are the opinions specifically set forth herein, and no opinion
is implied or should be inferred as to any other matter or transaction.
No one other than you shall be entitled to rely on this opinion.
Very tmly yours.

Stephen R. Patton
Corporation Counsel

 EXHIBIT D
OPINION OF C O - D I S C L O S U R E COUNSEL

March 24, 2014

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
as Representative of the Underwriters named in
the Bond Purchase Agreement, dated March 13,
2014, between such Underwriters and the City
of Chicago

$432,630,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Project and Refunding Series
2014A

$450,790,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project and Refunding
Series 2014B

Dear Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have acted as Co-Disclosure Counsel to the City of Chicago (the "City") in
connection with the issuance of $883,420,000 aggregate original principal amount ofthe City's
General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2014A (the "Series 2014A Bonds") and
the City's General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refiinding Series 2014B (the "Series
2014B Bonds" and, togetlier witii the Series 2014A Bonds, the "Bonds"). This opinion is being
rendered at the request of Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as Representative of the Underwriters (the
"Underwriters") named in the Bond Purchase Agreement, dated March 13, 2014 (the "Bond
Purchase Agreement") between the City and WeUs Fargo Bank, National Association, as
Representative of the Underwriters (the "Representative") pursuant to Section 10(a)(vii) of the
Bond Purchase Agreement. Capitalized- terms used and not otherwise defined herein have the
meanings as defined in the Bond Purchase Agreement.
For purposes of rendering this opinion, we have examined originals or executed copies
of: (i) the Bond Purchase Agreement, (ii) the Ordinance, (iii) the Undertaking, and (iv) die legal
opinions, agreements and certificates delivered pursuant to Section 10(a) of the Bond Purchase
Agreement (collectively, the "Documents"). We have also participated in fhe preparation of the
Preliminary Official Statement dated March 3, 2014 (the " Preliminary Official Statement') and
the Official Statement dated March 13, 2014 (the "Official Statement") relating to the issuance of
the Bonds. In our examinations, we have assumed the legal capacity of natural persons, the
genuineness of signatures on, and the authenticity of, all documents so examined, the conformity

 to originals of all documents submitted to us as copies, and that all records and other information
made available to us, and on which we have relied, are complete in all respects.
Based upon and subject to our examination as described above and subject to the
qualifications set forth herein, we are of tlie opiaion that:
1.
No registration is required under the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended, with respect to the issuance of the Bonds, and no ordinance or indenture
in respect ofthe Bonds is requhed to be qualified under the Trust Indenture Act of
1939, as amended.
2.
The Undertaking comphes with the requirements of paragraph
(b)(5) of Regulation §240.15c2-12 (Rule 15c2-12) adopted by tiie Securities and
Exchange Commission under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as in effect as
of the date ofthe Closing.
3.
The statements contained in the Official Statement under the
captions "UNDERWRITING" and "SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE"
insofar as such statements purport to summarize certain provisions of or describe
certain legal matters related to the Bond Purchase Agreement or the Undertaking,
as the case may be, constitute a fair and accurate summary of such provisions or
legal matters.
We are not expressing (and cannot express) any opinion or view with respect to the
authorization, issuance, delivery or validity of the Bonds, the tax exemption of the Bonds or the
interest paid on the Bonds. Because the purpose of our professional engagement was not to
establish factual matters and because of the wholly or partially nonlegal character of many ofthe
determinations involved in the preparation of the Official Statement, except as stated in paragraph
3 of this letter, we are not passing upon and do not assume responsibility for the accuracy,
completeness or fairness of the statements contained in the Official Statement and make no
representation that we have independently verified the accuracy, completeness or faimess of such
statements. Without limiting the foregoing, we assume no responsibility for, and have not
independently verified, the accuracy, completeness or fairness of the fmancial statements, notes
to fmancial statements, tables and other fmancial, economic, market and statistical data included
or incorporated by reference in the Official Statement and the appendices to the Official
Statement, and we have not reviewed the accounting, financial or statistical records from which
such financial statements, schedules, appendices and data are derived. We note that we are not
experts witliiii the meaning of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, with respect to such
fmancial statements or schedules or the other fmancial, economic, market, or statistical data
included or incorporated by reference therein. During the preparation of the Official Statement,
however, we participated in conferences with you, Co-Bond Counsel, Underwriters' Counsel,
Corporation Counsel for the City and officials, employees and agents of the City, at which
conferences the contents of die Official Statement and related matters were discussed. On the
basis ofthe foregoing, but without independent verification of factual matters, nothing has come
to our attention which would lead us to believe that the Official Statement and the Appendices
thereto contain any statement which, at the tune and in the light ofthe circumstances under which
it is made, is false or misleading witli respect to any material fact or omits to state a material fact
necessary to make the statements therein, at the time and in the light of the circumstances under
which they are made, not false or misleading; provided that we express no view as to: (i) any
financial or statistical information included in the Official Statement or the Appendices thereto.

 (ii) any information included in Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix E, Appendix F
and Appendbc G thereto, and (ii) the description pf DTC in the Official Statement and the
information included in the Official Statement under the caption "THE BONDS — Book-Entry
System."
Our opinions and advice expressed herein are limited to the matters expressly stated
herein and no opinion is implied or may be inferred beyond the matters expressly stated.
Our opinions and advice expressed herein are rendered as of the date hereof and are
based on existing law which is subject to change. We do not undertake to advise you of any
changes in the opinions and advice expressed herein from matters that may hereafter arise or be
brought to our attention or to revise or supplement such opinions and advice should the present
laws of any jurisdiction be changed by legislative action, judicial decision, or otherwise.
This opinion and advice are solely for the information of the addressees hereof and are
not to be quoted in whole or in part or otherwise referred to (except in a list of closing
documents), nor are they to be filed with any govemmental agency or other person, without our
prior written consent. Other than the addressees hereof, no one is entitied to rely on this opinion
and advice.
Very tmly yours.

 EXHIBIT E
REPRESENTATION

City of Chicago
Department of Finance
121 North LaSalle Street, 7'*'Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602
Attn.: Deputy Comptroller of Financial Policy

LETTER

'

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement,
dated March 13, 2014, between such
Underwriters and the City of Chicago

Pursuant to the Bond Purchase Agreement dated March 13, 2014 (the "Purchase
Agreemenf), among the City of Chicago (the "City") and Wells Fargo Bank, National
Association, as representative (the "Representative") of the underwriters named therein
(each an "Underwriter") relating to the City's General Obligation Bonds, Project and
Refunding Series 2014A (the "Series 2014A Bonds"), and the General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2014B (the "Series 2014B Bonds" and, together with
the Series 2014A Bonds, the "Bonds"), each of the imdersigned Underwriters severally
represents to the City that:
(1)
Neither the Underwriter, nor any Affihate thereof is listed on any of the
following fists maintained by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S.
Department ofthe Treasury, the Bureau of Industry and Security of the U.S. Department
of Commerce, the U.S. Department of State or their successors, or on any other list of
persons or entities with which the City may not do business under any applicable law,
rule, regulation, order or judgment: the Specially Designated Nationals List, the Denied
Persons List, the Unverified List, the Entity List, the List of Statutorily Debarred Parties
and the Excluded Parties List.
For purposes of this representation, "Affiliate," when used to indicate a
relationship with a specified person or entity, means a person or entity that, directly or
indirectly, through one or more intermediaries, controls, is controlled by or is under
common control with such specified person or entity, and a person or entity shall be
deemed to be controlled by another person or entity, if controlled in any manner
whatsoever that results in control in fact by that other person or entity (or that other
person or entity and any persons or entities with whom that other person or entity is
acting jointly or in concert), whether directly or indirectly and whether through share
ownership, a trust, a contract or otherwise.
(2)
The undersigned Underwriters agree that in the event that any Underwriter
or any of its Affiliates appears on any of the lists described in paragraph (1) above, at any
time prior to the Closing (as defined in the Purchase Agreement) witii respect to the
Bonds, that Underwriter shall be deemed to have submitted to the Representative its
Withdrawal From Agreement Among Underwriters.

 IK WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation
Letter in coimection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized
representatives as of the date written below.
Dated:

2014

WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAI.
ASSOCIATION
By:
Its: Managing Director

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST, INC.
By:
Its:

CABRERA CAPITAL MARKETS, LLC

LOOP CAPITAL MARKETS LLC

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

BLAYLOCK, BEAL, VAN LLC

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Its:

'

By:
Its:

GOLDMAN SACHS & CO.

MISCHLER FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC

RAMIREZ & CO., INC.

By:.
Its:

By:
Its:

THE WILLlAKf S CAPITAL GROUP, L.P.
By:
Its:

 EXHIBIT 2
OFFICIAL STATEMENT DATED MARCH 13,2014,
AS SUPPLEMENTED BY THE SUPPLEMENT TO THE OFFICIAL STATEMENT
DATED MARCH 18,2014

 S U P P L E I V I E N T D A T E D M A R C H 18,2014

to
O F F I C I A L S T A T E M E N T DATED MARCH 13, 2014

$883,420,000
C I T Y OF CHJCAGO
$432,630,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Project and Refunding Series 20I4A

$450,790,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2014B

This Supplement dated March hS, 2014 (this "Supplement") supplements and amends the Official
Statement dated March 13, 2014 (the "Ofjicial Statement") jor the above captioned hands. Capitalized
terms u.sed in this Supplement hut not otherwise defined herein shall have the meaninf^s set forth in the
Ofjicial Slalement.
The inj'ormulion set forth in this Supplement is provided only in respect ofthe $15,425,000
2014A Bonds maturing on ( and only on) January 1, 2031 (ihe "Insured Bonds").

Series

Assured Guaranty Municipal Corp.
On March 18, 2014, S&P published a Research Update report in which it upgraded AGM's
financial strength rating to " A A " (stable outlook) from " A A - " (stable outlook). A G M can give no
assurance as to any further ratings action that S&P may take. See "APPENDIX G — "BOND
INSURANCE — Assured Guaranty Municipal Corp. — Current Financial Strength Ratingi"' in the
Official Statement.
Ratings uf Insured Bonds
The Insured Bonds are rated " A A " by S&P and " A 2 " by Moody's, contingent upon issuance of
the Policy by AGM. See "RA TINGS" in the Official Statement.
This Supplement does nol purport to he a complete statement or summary of the terms of the
Injured Bonds. .4GM or the Policy, and purcha.sers of the Insured Bonds .should read the Ofjicial
Statement, as supplemented and amended herehy, in its entirety.

 NKW rSSlJE-GLOBAL IJOOK ENTRY

RATINGS: See "RATINGS" herein.

Subject to compliance hy Ihc Cil.ij wilh ix'Halt) covcwmlx, in Ihe respective opinion.-i of Clmpnian mid Cutter
Chicfifjo, lllinoi.s, oiid .'iaiicliez Do n ids & lloffmiin. U.P, Cll iciu;o, Illinois, Co-IJond Cun n.sel, under pri^scul. Ian), inleresl on
Ihe fieriea 2014A Bomi.'i /'.s (Kv.cbuUible from groh.'i income of llie oniners Iheicof for fedc-ral income Ui.x piirpo.'ies and is not.
incliiiled lui tin item, of t<i:r. preference in c(nnpnLi-mj the fedend (dlenuUive nri.n iin.um l,ii.t; for indiindual.t and corporations,
but svch iiderest is lakm into account in coin/rulini/ an a/l.jusliiient used in delennininij thefedmd (dtcrnativc
ininimum
tax for certain coritoiations. Interest on. Ihe Ta.xable Series 2l)l^H Bonihi i.s includible in (jmss income of the owners thereof
for federal income tux pn.rpos>xi. Inleresl on the Bonds v.s not e.ceniplfimn pri>senl Stale of Illinois income tiu'ces. See 'TAX
MA'n'hjRS" herein for a, more complete di.scu.ssion.

$883,420,000
OF CHICAGO

CITY
$432,630,000
G e n e r a l O b l i g a t i o n Bonds,
P r o j e c t a j i d R e f u n d i n g Series 2014A
Dated: Date of Delivery

$450,790,000
General Obligation Bonds,
T a x a b l e P r o j e c t and R e f u n d i n g Series 2014B
Due: .lanuary 1, as shown on tiie iiLside IVont cover page

Tlie Gciieriil Ol)li}!iiLion Bonds, Project ami l?cfun(Jiiig Scries 2014A (the "Series 2014A Bonds") and the Gciierid Obligation
Bonds, Ta.xable Project and Refunding Series 2()14B (the "T;ixable Series 2014B Bonds" and together with the Series 2014A
Hf)iids, the "Bonds") will be issuable as fully regisleriMl bonds ;uid will be n!gisl,er<!d in Ihe name of Cedi; <ft Co., ;LS regisU.'r(;d
owner :uid nominee of The Depository Tmst Company, New York, New York ("DTC"). DTC will act as securities depository for
the Bonds. Purchasers f>f Ihe Bonds will nol receive certilicales representing their interests in the Buruls purcha.se<l. Owru;rship
by Ihe beneficial owners of the Bonds will be evi(h;iiced by bcKjk-enlry only. The Bonds will be issued only as fully registered
bonds in denoiuinations of .$5,000 or :uiy inl.egr.U Mnill.i])le thereof.
Inlerest on the Bonds will accrue from Ihe date of issuanc(! and be payable on each January 1 and .Inly 1, coinnieueing
.Inly 1, 2014. Principal of and inlerest on the Bonds will Ix; p:ud by Amalgamated Bank of Chicago, Chic:igo, Illinois, as bond
registrar and paying agent, to DTC, which in turn will remit such principal and interest payments tx> its participants for snbse( uent
disbun>ement to the IxMiefici.d owners ofthe Bonds. As long ;is Cede & Co. is Uic registered owiuiras nomin(!(! <5f DTC, payments
on the Bonds will be made lo such registered owner, and disbursal of such payments will be the responsibility of DTC and its
irarlicipants. Se(> "THE BONDS — Book-KnI.ry System."
i
The Bonds ar<; direct :uid general ob!ig;il.ioiis of the City of Chicago (the "City") and all l.axable properly in the City is .subject
to the levy of l;u<es lo pay iJie .s;uue without liiniLLlion ;is to ratx; or uniouiiL The Cily has pledged its full faith ;uid credit for the
payiuent of the principal of and interest on tlie Bonds.
l Yoceeds of the Bonds will be u.sed as described herein. St;c "PI.AN OF FINANCING."
n i e Bonds are subject lo ivdeniplioii prior lo niatiirily as deseribed herein. See "THE BONDS — Redemption."
For maturities, principal amounts, interest rates, yields, prices and CUSIP numbers of the Bonds, see the inside
f r o n t cover page.
Tlie scheduled payment of principal of ;uid interest on the Scries 2014A Bonds maturing on (ami only on) Jaiuiary 1,2031 (the
"Insured Bonds"), when due will be guaranteed under :ui insurance policy (the "Policy") lobe issued concurrently with the delivery
of the Insured Bonds by ASSURED GUARANTY MUNICIPAL CORP. ("AGM"). See APPENDIX G — "BOND INSURANCE."

i^SURED
GUARANTY"
MUNICIPAL

nie Bomh arc being offered when, as a nd if issued, aiul svbject lo the deliver!) of approimnj leqal opinion.s by Chapman
and Cutler IJJ^ and Sanclwz Daniels & 1Ioffm.au. IJ.P, Co-ISond Counsel, and to certain, other conditions. Certain legal,
•matters will bn pus.sed on for the City by (i) it,s Corporaiion. Counsel, (ii) in comieclioji with llw pr(rr>aration (flhis Ofjicial
Sui.tenneml; Dnane Morris IMP, Chicago, lIHnoi.s, and Shanahan & Shanahan LLP, Chicago, Illinois, Co-Disclosure Counsel lo
the City, and (iii) in connection with certain pension matters described in. this Official Statement, Cluipman a.nd. Cutler LLP,
Cliicago, Illinois, Speeinl Disclosure Counsel. Certain legal waiters will tie. passed on for the Undenuri.t/frs by Peck, Shaffer
& Williiirns, a division ofDin.smore & Shohl LLP, Chicago, Illinois, Undmniriter.s' Comisel. It is Kir/iected. that the Bonds will
be available for deliveri/ through thefaciliH.es of DTC on or about March 24, 2014.

BMO C a p i t a l M a r k e t s
Loop. C a p i t a l Market.s L L C
Blaylock Beal Van LLC
George K. Baum & Company
Mischler Financial Group, Inc.
Kamlrez & Co., Inc.
thiU'd: Miirch I.i, aOH

Wells Fargo Securities
Cabrera Capital Markets, LLC
William Blair & Company
Estrada Ilinojo.sa & Company, Inc.
Goldman Sachs & Co.
North South Capital LLC
The Williams Capit.al Group, L.P.

 MATURITIES, AMOUNTS, I N T E R E S T R A T E S , Y I E L D S , P R I C E S AND C U S I P NUMBERS

$432,630,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Project and Refunding Series 20I4A
Maturity
.lanuary 1
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036

Principal
Amount

Interest Rate

S 2,735,000
2.X5O.O0O
3,700,000
4,950,000
5.075.000
4,920.000
625,000
4,500,000
5,000.000
4.000,000
10,675,000
23.055.000
30.270,000
3,710,000
36,950,000
15.425,000**
42,615,000
44,875,000
49,700,000
69,000,000
68,000.000

4.00%
4.00
4.00
5 00
5 00
5 00
4 00
5 00
5 00
5.00
5.00
5.25
5.25
5.00
5 25
5 25
5 25
5 25
5.00
5 00
5.00

Yield
1 550%
1 940
2 450
2 970
3.390
3.750
3.950
3.950
4.170
4.400
4 570
4 660
4.770
5.000
4.870
4.750
5 030
5.100
5 120
5 140
5 180

Price*
108 935
109 338
108 289
112 361
110.911
109.262
100.397
108.436
106.598
104.716
103.351
104 580
103.706
100.000
102 918
103 864
101.673
101 134
98.511
98.217
97.658

CUSIP*

•

!67486.StO
167486.SF7
167486.SG5
167486SH3
167486SJ9
I67486SK.6
167486.SL4
167486TA7
167486.SM2
167486.SN0
I67486SP5
167486SW0
167486SQ3
167486SR1
167486SZ3
167486SY6
I67486.SS9
167486Sr7
I67486SU4
I67486SV2
167486.SX8

i'rice lo call dale of .lanuary I , 2024.
The Scries 2014A Bonds due January I , 2031 arc in.sured by As.sured Guaranty Municipal Corp. Sec
APP1:;N1')IX G — -BOND INSUKANCI-;."

$450,790,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project and Refunding Scries 20I4B
$450,790,000 6.314% Term Bonds due .lanuar>' I , 2044, Price 100.000% CUSIP*: 167486SD2

Copynghi 2014, American Bonkers Associ;ilion CUSIP d;iu herein are provided bv Standard & I'lwr's. CUSIl' Service Bureau, a Division of
I he McGraw-Hill Companies. Inc the CUSIP numbers listed are bcini! provided solely for the convenience of the bondholders only at ihe
limc of issuance of the Bonds and the City does not make any representaiion wiih respect lo such numbers or undertake any responsibility lor
their .iccuracy now or al any lime iii the future The CUSIP number for a specific malunty is subject to change alter the issuance ofthe Bonds
as a result of various subsequeni actions including, bul not limited to, a refunding in whole or m part of such inulunly or a.s a result of the
procurement of second.iry market portfolio insurance or other similar cnhancemeni b)' investors that is applicable to all or a portion of certain
maiunlies ofthe Bonds

 CITY OF CHICAGO
MAYOR
Rahm Emanuel
CITY TREASURER
Stephanie D. Neely
CITY CLERK
Susana A. Mendoza
CITY COUNCIL
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
Edward M . Burke, Chairman

CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
Lois A. Scott
CITY COMPTROLLER
Daniel J. Widawsky

BUDGET DIRECTOR
Alexandra Holt
CORPORATION COUNSEL
Stephen R. Patton, Esq.
CO-BOND COUNSEL
Chapman and Cutler LLP
Chicago, Illinois
Sanchez Daniels & Hoffman LLP
Chicago, Illinois
CO-DISCLOSURE COUNSEL
Duane Morris LLP
Chicago, Illinois
Shanahan & Shanahan LLP
Chicago, Illinois
CO-FINANCIAL ADVISORS
Andrew Kalotay Associates. Inc.
Columbia Capital Management LLC

  PAGE. LEFT 

Certain information contained in, or incorporated by reference in, this OfTicial Stalcincnt has been
obtained by the City of Chicago (the "City") from The Depository Trust Coinpany and other sources that
are deemed reliable. No representation or warranty is made, however, as to the accuracy or complelcncss
of such information by the Underwriters or the City. The Underwriters have provided the following
sentence for inclusion in this Official Stateirient: The Underwriters have reviewed the information in this
Official Stateinent in accordance with, and as part of, their respective responsibilities to investors under
the federal securities laws as applied to the facts and circumstances o f this transaction, but the
Underwriters do not guarantee the accuracy or coinplctcncss of such infonnation. This Official Statement
is being used in connection with the sale of securities as referred to herein and may not be used, in whole
or in part, for any other purpose. The delivery of this Official Statement at any liine does not imply that
information herein is correct as of any tiine subsequent to its date.
Assured Guaranty Municipal Corp. ("AGM") makes no representation regarding the Bonds or the
advisability of investing in the Bonds. In addition, AGM has not independently verified, makes no
representation regarding, and does not accept any responsibility for the accuracy or completeness of this
OfTicial Statement or any information or disclosure contained herein, or omitted hercfroin, other than with
respect to the accuracy of the information regarding AGM supplied by A G M and presented under
APPENDIX G — "BOND INSURANCE.^'
No dealer, broker, salesperson or any other person has been authorized by the City or the
Underwriters to give any information or to make any representation olher than as contained in this
Official Statement in connection with the offering described herein and, i f given or made, such other
information or representation must not be relied upon as having been authorized by any ofthe foregoing.
This Official Stateinent does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation o f an offer to buy any
securities other than those described on the cover page, nor shall there be any offer lo sell, solicitation of
an offer to buy or sale of such securities in any jurisdiction in which i l is unlawful to make such offer,
solicitation or sale. Neither this Official Statement nor any statement that may have been made verbally
or in writing is to be construed as a contract with the registered or beneficial owners of the Bonds.
This Official Statement, including the Appendices (except for certain infonnation in (i)
APPENDIX D — "ECONOMIC, DEMOGRAPHIC AND SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION" and (ii)
"Source Information" as defined and used in APPENDIX E, all of which is sourced to parties other than
the City), contains certain opinions, estimates and forward-looking statements and information, including
projections, that are based on the City's beliefs as well as assumptions made by and infonnation currently
available to the City. Such opinions, estimates, projections and forward-looking statements set forth in
this Official Statement were not prepared with a view toward complying with the guidelines established
by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants with respect to prospective financial
information, bul, in the view ofthe City, were prepared on a reasonable basis, reflect the best currently
available estimates and jildgmcnts, and present, to the best of the City's knowledge and belief the
expected course of action and the expected future financial performance of the City. However, this
infonnation is not fact and should not be relied upon as being necessarily indicative of future results, and
readers of this Official Statement are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such opinions, statements
or prospective financial information.
The prospective tlnancial information set forth in this Official Statement, except for certain
information sourced to parties other than the City, is solely the product of the City. Neither the City's
independent auditors, nor any other independent auditors, have compiled, examined, or perfonned any
procedures with respect to, or been consulted in connection with the preparation of, the prospective
financial information contained herein. The City's independent auditors assume no responsibility for the
content of the prospective financial information set forth in this Official Statement, disclaim any
association with such prospective financial information, and have not, nor have any other independent
auditors, expressed any opinion or any other fonn of assurance on such infomiation or its achievability.

 References to web site addresses presented in this Official Statement are for informational
purposes only and may be in the fonn of a hyperlink solely for the reader's convenience. Unless
specified otherwise, such web sites and the information or links contained.therein are not incorporated
into, and arc not part of, the final official statement for purposes of, and as that term is defined in, SEC
Rule 15c2-12.
THESE SECURITIES HAVE NOT BEEN APPROVED OR DISAPPROVED BY THE
SECURIIIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION OR ANY STATE SECURITIES COMMISSliDN
NOR HAS THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION OR ANY STATE SECURITIES
COMMISSION PASSED UPON THE ACCURACY OR ADEQUACY OF THIS OFFICIAL
S TATEMENT. ANY REPRESENTA TION TO THE CONTRARY MAY BE A CRIMINAL OFFENSE.
THE BONDS HAVE NOT BEEN REGISTERED UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933,
AS AMENDED, NOR HAS THE BOND ORDIMANCE BEEN QUALIFIED UNDER THE TRUST
INDENTURE ACT OF 1939, AS AMENDED, IN RELIANCE UPON EXEMPTIONS CONTAINED IN
SUCH ACTS. THE REGISTRATION OR QUALIFICATION OF THE BONDS IN ACCORDANCE
WITH APPLICABLE PROVISIONS'OF LAW OF THE STATES IN WHICH THE BONDS HAVE
BEEN REGISTERED OR QUALIFIED AND THE EXEMPTION FROM REGISTRATION OR
QUALIFICATION IN OTIIER STATES CANNOT BE REGARDED AS A RECOMMENDATION
THEREOF.
IN CONNECTION WITH THE OFFERING OF THE BONDS, THE UNDERWRITERS MAY
OVERALLOT OR EFFECT TRANSACTIONS THAT STABILIZE OR MAINTAIN THE MARKET
PRICES OF THE BONDS AT LEVELS ABOVE THOSE WHICH MIGHT O i l lERWISE PREVAIL IN
THE OPEN MARKET. SUCH STABILIZING, IF COMMENCED. MAY BE DISCONTINUED AT
ANY TIME. THE PRICES AND OTHER TERMS RESPECTING THE OFFERING AND SALE OF
THE BONDS MAY BE CHANGED FROM TIME lO TIME BY THE UNDERWRITERS AFTER THE
BONDS ARE RELEASED FOR SALE, AND THE BONDS MAY BE OFFERED AND SOLD AT
PRICES OTHER THAN THE INITIAL OFFERJNG PRJCES, INCLUDING SALES TO DEALERS
WHO MAY SELL THE BONDS INTO INVESTMENT ACCOUNTS.

 T A B L E O F CONTENTS

P_age
OFFICIAL STATEMENT SUMMARY

i

INTRODUCTION

I

THE CITY
General
Government
Annual Budget Process
Corporate Fund
Use of Long-Term Reserves
Capital Improvements Program
Property Taxes
General Obligation Debt
Collective Bargaining Agreements
Retirement Funds and Other Post-Employment Benefits
City Investment Policy

I
I
2
2
2
7
7
9
11
15
15
17

PLAN OF FINANCING
General
Financing ofthe Project
Refunding and Restructuring

17
17
17
18

SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS

19

THE BONDS
General
Payment ofthe Bonds
Redemption
Book-Entry System
Additional Information
Bonds Nol Presented for Payment
Defeasance
Registration and Transfers
Registered Owner Treated as Absolute Owner

'.

19
19
20
20
24
26
26
26
27
28

SECURITY FOR THE BONDS
General Obligation of the City
Prof>crty Tax Limit Considerations
Bankruptcy
Insured Bonds
Additional General Obligation Debt

28
28
28
29
29
29

LITIGATION

29

INDEPENDENT AUDITORS

31

 RATINGS

31

CO-FINANCIAL ADVISORS

31

CERTAIN VERIFICATIONS

32

UNDERWRITING

32

TAX MATTERS
The Series 2014A Bonds
The Taxable Series 20I4B Bonds
State and Local Considerations

33
33
35
36

APPROVAL OF LEGAL MATTERS

36

SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE
Annual Financial Information Disclosure
Reportable Events Disclosure
Consequences of Failure ofthe City lo Provide Information
Amendment; Waiver
EMMA
Termination of Undertaking
Additional Information
Corrective Action Related to Certain Bond Disclosure Requirements

36
37
38
39
39
39
40
40
40

MISCELLANEOUS

41

APPENDIX A — REAL PROPERTY TAX SYSTEM AND LIMITS
APPENDIX B — FINANCIAL AND OTHER INFORMATION
APPENDIX C — Cl f Y OF CHICAGO BASIC FINANCIAL S fATEMENTS FOR
THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
APPENDIX D — ECONOMIC. DEMOGRAPHIC AND SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
APPENDIX E — RETIREMEN T FUNDS AND O THER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFI TS
APPENDIX F — FORMS OF OPINIONS OF CO-BOND COUNSEL
APPENDIX G— BOND INSURANCE
APPENDIX H — REFUNDED BONDS

 O F F I C I A L S T A T E M E N T SUIMIMARY
This summary is subject in all respects to the more complete information and definitions
contained or incorporated in this Official Statement.
•JIIK I.S.Sl.it:R

;

City of Chicago (Ihc 'City").

IIIKBOM>S

$883,420,000 Cily of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, consi.sting of
.$432,630,000 General Obligation trends, Project and Refunding Scries 20I4A
(the - Scries 2014A Bonds") and $450,790,000 General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project and Relunding Scries 2014B (the "Taxable Scries 2014H
Bonds" and together wilh the Series 2014A Bonds, the "Bonds"). The Bonds
will be dated the date oFtheir delivery and mature in the principal amounts and
on the dates as set forth on the inside cover of this OITicial Statement. See
" THE BONDS."

PAYMENT OK INTERKS T

Inlerest on the Bonds will accrue from the dale of issuance and be payable on
each Januar>' I and July 1, commencing July I , 2014. The Bonds will bear
interest at the rales per year as set forth on the inside cover of this OrPicial
Stalemenl. Interest on the Bonds is computed on the basis of a 360-day year
con.si.sling of twelve 30-day months. See "THF. BONDS - General.''

AUTIIORITY FOR ISSLIANCK

'I he Bond.s are being issued pursuant to Ihe constitutional home rule powers of
the Cily. The Bonds are authorized by an ordinance adopted by the City
Council of the City (Ihe "City Council") on February 5, 2014 (the "Bond
Ordinance").

I'lSlL OV I'ROCIitDS

The proceeds from the .sale ofthe Bonds will be u.sed to (i) pay Tor a porlion of
the costs of the Projeci (as defined herein), (ii) refund the Refunded Bonds (as
defined herein), (iii) provide for the retirement or repayment of a porlion of the
City's outstanding general obligation commercial paper notes and bomnvings
under the City's general obligation lines of credit, (iv) fund capitalized inlerest
on the Bonds, and (v) pay the costs of is.suance of the Bonds (including the
underwriters' discount). See "PLAN OF FINANCING ' and "SOURCES AND
USES OF I-IJNDS."

SECURirY FOR THE UOND.S

The Bonds arc direct and general obligations of the Cily and shall be payable, as
lo principal and inleresl, from any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or
funds ofthe City legally available for .such purpose, including, but not limited
to, the proceeds of a direct annual lax levied hy the Cily in the Bond Ordinance
upon ail taxable propeny located in the Cily sufficient lo pay the principal of
and interest on the Bonds. The City has pledged its full failh and credit lo the
payment ofthe Bonds. Sec "SECURITY FOR THE BONDS."
The scheduled payment of principal of and interest on the Series 2014A Bonds
maturing on (and only on) January 1, 2031 (the "Insured Bonds'), when due
will be guaranteed under an insurance policy (the "Policy") to be issued
concurrently with the deliver)' of the Insured Bonds by Assured Guaranty
Municipal Corp. ("ACiM"). APPENDIX (i — "BOND INSURANCE."

REDEMPTION
Optional Rrilenipliuii

The Series 2014A Bonds maturing on and aller Januarj' I , 2025 are subjecl to
redemption prior to maturity al the option ol the Cily, in whole or in part, on any
dale on or after January 1, 2024, at a redemption price equal to the principal

 amount of such Bonds being redeemed plus accrued interest lo Ihe date fixed for
redemption.
See "TI IE BONDS — Redemption — Optional Reilemption of llie Serie.s- 2014.4
Bonds."
The Taxable Series 2014B Bonds shall be subject to redemption prior to
maturity al the option ofthe Cily, in whole or in part, on any Business Day (as
defined herein) al a redemption price equal lo the greater of: (A) the principal
amount of such Bonds lo be redeemed, or (B) the sum of the present values of
the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on such Bonds to be
redeemed, not including any portion of those payments of interest accrued and
unpaid as of the dale such Bonds are lo be redeemed, discounted lo the date of
redemption of such Bonds to be redeemed on a semiannual basis (assuming a
360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Tretisury Rale (dellned
herein) plus 40 basis points plus accrued inleresl on such Bonds being redeemed
to the dale fixed for redemption.
See "TME BONDS — Redemption — Optional Kedemplion of Ihe laxahle
Series 20I4H liunds wilh Malce Whole Premium."
Mandatory Redemption

The Taxable Series 20I4B Bonds are .subject lo mandatory redemption prior to
maturity, in each case at par and accrued interest to the dale fixed for
redemption, on January 1 of ihe years 2037 through 2043.
See "'TTIE BONDS — Redemption — Mandator^' Redemption of the Hands.''

BOND REGISTRAR A M )
PAVING AGEN1'

Amalgamated Bank of Chicago, Chicago. Illinois, as trustee.

T.AX EXEMPTION

Subject to compliance by the City with certain covenants, in the respective
opinions of Co-Bond Counsel, under present law, interest on the Series 20I4A
Bonds is excludable from gross income ofthe owners thereof for federal income
tax purposes and is not included as an item of tax preference in computing ihc
federal altemative minimum tax for individuals and corporations, but such
interest is taken inlo account in computing an adjustment used in delcmiining
the federal alternative minimum lax for certain corporations. Interest on the
Taxable Series 20I4B Bonds is includible in gross income ofthe owners thereof
Ibr federal income tax purpo.ses. Interest on the Bonds is not exempt from
present State of Illinois income taxes. See " T A X MATTERS."

CO-BONDCOliNSEI

Chapman and Cutler LLP, Chicago, Illinois, and Sanchez Daniels & Hoffman
LLP, Chicago, Illinois.

RATINGS

The Bonds are rated " B a a l " (negative outlook) by Moody's Investors Service,
Inc., •"A+" (negative outlook) by Standard & Poor's, a division of The McGrawHill Companies, Inc., and " A - " (negalive outlook) by Filch, Inc., based upon
each rating agency's assessment of the creditworthiness of the Cily. The
Insured Bonds are rated " A A - " by S&P and " A 2 " by Moody's, contingent upon
issuance of the Policy by A G M . See "RA TINGS" ANT) APPENDIX G —
"BOND INSURANCE."

 OFFICIAL STATEMENT

$883,420,000
C I T Y OF CHICAGO
$432,630,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Project and Rerunding Scries 20I4A

$450,790,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Ta.xable Project and Refunding Series 20I4B

INTRODUCTION
This Official Stateinent (including the cover page and Appendices hereto) is furnished by the City
of Chicago (the "City") to provide information with respect to the General Obligation Bonds, Project and
Refunding Series 2014A (the "Series 2014A Bonds") andthe General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project
and Relunding Scries 20I4B (the "Taxable Series 2014B Bonds" and together with the Series 2014A
Bonds, the "Bonds").
The proceeds from the sale ofthe Bonds will be used to (i) pay for a portion ofthe costs ofthe
Project (as defined herein), (ii) refund the Refunded Bonds (as defined herein), (iii) provide for the
retirement or repayment of a portion of the City's outstanding general obligation commercial paper notes
and borrowings under the City's general obligation lines of credit, (iv) fund capitalized interest on the
Bonds, and (v) pay the costs of issuance of the Bonds (including the underwriters' discount). See "PLAN
OF FINANCING" and "SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS."
The Bonds are authorized by an ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City (the "Cily
Council") on February 5, 2014 (the "Bond Ordinance").
THE CITV
General

The City was incorporated in 1837. The City is a municipal corporation and home rule unit of
local government under the Illinois Constitution of 1970 and as such, "may exercise any power and
perform any function pertaining to its government and affairs including, but not limited to. the power to
regulate for the protection ofthe public health, safety, morals and welfare; to license; to tax; and to incur
debt" except that it can "impose taxes upon or measured by income or earnings or upon occupation" only
if authorized by statute.
The General Assembly of the State of Illinois (the "State") may, by a three-fifths vote of each
house, limit the ability of a home rule municipality to levy taxes. The General Assembly may similarly
limit the debt that the City may incur, except that the General Assembly does nol have the power to limit
the debt payable from property taxes to less than three percent of the assessed valuation of the taxable
properly in the City. To date, the General Assembly has not imposed limits on the City's ability to levy
taxes under its home rule powers or to incur debt payable from real property taxes. See APPENDIX A —
"REAL PROPERTY TAX SYSTEM AND LIMITS — Property Tax Limit Considerations — State of
Illinois."

 For certain economic and demographic and supplemental information concerning the City, sec
A P P E N D I X D — " E C O N O M I C , D E M O G R A P H I C A N D S U P P L E M E N TAL I N F O R M A T I O N . "
Government
The Mayor and a 50-person City Council govern the City. The City Clerk and the City Treasurer
along with the Mayor are the only three citywide elected officials. Citywide elected officials serve fouryear terms. The City is divided into fifty legislative districts or wards. Each ward is represented by an
alderman who is elected by their constituency to serve a four-year lerm. In addition to representing the
interests o f their ward residents, together the fifty aldermen comprise the City Council, which serves as
ihe legislative branch o f government o f t h e City. The legislative powers o f the City Council are granted
by the state legislature and by home rule provisions o f the Illinois Constitution.
Annual Budget Process
Pursuant to Executive Order No. 2011-7 issued by Mayor Emanuel, the City's Budget Director is
directed to issue by July 31 o f each year a long-term budget and financial analysis (the "Annual Financial
Analysis") to provide Ihe framework for the development o f the City's annual operating and capital
budgets for the following fiscal year. The Annual Financial Analysis is to be developed by the Budget
Director with input from the Mayor's Economic, Budgetary, and Business Development Council; Ihc
Deputy Mayor; the Chief Financial Officer; the City Comptroller; City departments and sister agencies;
elected officials; and other relevant parlies.
The Annual Financial Analysis includes a historical- analysis o f the City's revenues and
expenditures, a financial forecast and analyses o f t h e City's reserves, capital program, debt and pensions.
The City released its 2013 Annual Financial Analysis on July 3 1 , 2013.
In developing an annual budget recommendation, the Budget Director considers the proposed
annual budgets submitted by all the departments and agencies whose budgets w i l l become part o f the
City's proposed budget for the following year. The final budgel recommendation balances expenditures
with forecasted available resources. The final budget recommendation is then submitted to City Council
for consideration through the City Council's Committee on the Budget and Govemment Operations. The
proposed budget may be changed by the City Council through amendments made as part o f the City
Council hearing and review process. The Committee on the Budget and Government Operations and then
the full City Council vole on the budget and any amendments.
After the City Council has approved the proposed budget as the annual appropriation ordinance, it
is forwarded lo the Mayor for approval. Should the Mayor veto the approved annual appropriation
ordinance, the City Council, with a two-thirds vote, may override the veto. The City Council may also
refuse to approve the final budget recommendation. In such a case, the appropriate process for passage o f
the City budget may have to be judicially determined. By law, the City must have a balanced budget
approved by December 31 o f t h e year preceding the budget year. The City Council and the Mayor
approved the annual budget for 2014 on November 26,2013.
Corporate Fund
Overview. The Corporate Fund is the City's general operating fund and supports basic City
operations and services. Public safety functions account for approximately two-thirds o f Corporate Fund
expenses each year, and infrastructure services such as waste disposal and street repair and maintenance
account for an average o f ten percent o f annual Corporate Fund expenses. Regulatory, community
services, development, and administrative llinclions account for the remainder o f the Corporate Fund

 budget. Personnel-related expenditures make up the largest portion of the Corporate Fund budget, with
salaries and wages and employee benefits making up more than three-quarters of Corporate Fund
expenses each year. Non-personnel expenses, including motor fuel, utilities, and contractual services
such as information technology costs and building rent and maintenance, make up the remainder of
Corporate Fund expenses.
Corporate Fund revenue consists of local tax revenue, intergovernmental tax revenue, non-lax
revenue and proceeds and transfers-in. Local tax revenue includes utility, transaction, transportation,
recreation, and business taxes. Intergovernmental tax revenue includes the City's share of the State sales
and use tax, income tax, personal property replacement tax, and municipal auto rental lax. Non-tax
revenue includes charges for licenses and pennits, fees and fines, proceeds from sales and leases,
reimbursements and other revenue. Reimbursements and other revenue include internal service eamings
transferred to the Corporate Fund for central services such as police, fire, streets and sanitation, and
similar services provided to other City funds, including the City's aviation, water and sewer funds, and
sister agencies. Proceeds and transfers-in denote the movement of resources into the Corporate Fund
from other outside sources, including interest generated on the long- and mid-term reserves established in
connection with the parking meter and Skyway concessions and revenue captured from expiring and
terminated 'TIF districts and the equalized assessed value ("EAV") of new property in the city.
Between 2003 and 2007, an average of 67 percent of total Corporate Fund revenues was derived
from local and intergovemmental tax revenues. Beginning in 2008, these revenues began to decline both
in dollar amount and as a percentage of total revenues, decreasing to 59 percent in 2009. By 2011, local
and intergovernmental taxes made up 57 percent of total Corporate Fund revenues.
As these
economically sensitive revenues declined, the Cily did nol decrease expenditures enough to match these
shrinking revenues, but instead increasingly utilized transfers into the Corporate Fund from outside
sources. Between 2003 and 2007. such transfers constituted an average of 6 percent of Corporate Fund
revenues each year and came largely from investment income on general obligation bond proceeds and
other financing transactions. In 2005, the City began to use proceeds from the long-term lease of the
Chicago Skyway to supplement its operating budget, and in 2009 proceeds from the long-term concession
of the City's metered parking system (the "Metered Parking System") also began to subsidize the
operating budget. In the period from 2009 through 2011, an average of $487 million each year, or 16
percent of Corporate Fund revenues, came from such transfers. See "— Use of Long-Tenn Reserves"
below.
I
In 2011 and 2012, the City began the process of aligning expenditures with revenues through
efficiencies, targeted cuts, and select revenue enhancements. Since that time, the City has continued to
reduce its structural deficit by improving management of Citywide costs and increasing select revenues.
The City also began to rebuild its reserve funds by depositing $20 million in 2012 and $15 million in
2013 inlo its long-term reserves.
The City's current fiscal outlook shows both the progress that has been made towards bringing
operating expenses in line with revenues, and the continuing pressure placed on City finances by growing
wages, primarily due to labor contracts, and long-term obligations such as pension payments. Through
the annual financial analysis, the City has projected an operating budget shortfall for the coming two
years. Comprehensive pension reform could significantly impact these costs on the City's budget over
the coming years; however, such action must occur al the Slate level, as the City's pension funds are
governed by State law.
The difference between revenues and expenditures tuiticipated by the City in its preliminary
Corporate Fund budget estimates each year is commonly referred to as the "budget gap." The preliminary
budget gap for 2014 was projected at S338.7 million, almost half of what was projected in 2011. The

 decreasing size ofthe budget gap is the result ofthe recovering economy's impact on revenues, as well as
the real and lasting changes made as part o f t h e past two budgets, such as the introduction of managed
competitions for City services, the transition lo grid-based garbage collection, the review and
renegotiation of major contractual costs, reforms that have reduced the City's healthcare costs and certain
revenue increases. 'The 2014 budget gap was closed through expenditure reductions, revenue growth and
increases, and the utilization of prior-year resources.
A balanced budget for 2014 was passed in
November 2013.
Selected Financial Information. The following table sets forth revenues and expenditures for
the Corporate Fund on a historical basis for the years 2010-2012, as estimated for the year 2013, and as
budgeted for 2014. The Corporate Fund is included in the City's General Fund for accounting purposes.
The General Fund is comprised of the Corporate Fund (which is approximately 99.0 percent of the
General Fund) and olher non-major operafing funds. See APPENDIX B — "FINANCIAL AND OTHER
INFORMATION — SCHEDULE OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES IN FUND
BALANCES — General Fund" and APPENDIX C — "CITY OF CHICAGO BASIC FINANCIAL
STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012." The financial information
contained in the following table for the years 2010, 2011 and 2012 is based on the budgetary basis of
accounting for the General Fund as reported in the City's audited basic financial statements for the years
2010. 2011 and 2012, respectively. The financial information contained in this section for the year 2013 is
not audited and the numbers provided are preliminary estimates and subject to change. No data on
revenues and expenditures is final until the City has completed its annual audit and finalized its basic
financial statements, which is released by June 30 of each year for the prior year. The financial
information contained in this section for the year 2014 reflects budgeted revenues and expenditures. This
table should be read in conjunction with the financial information set forth in APPENDIX B —
"FINANCIAL AND OTHER INFORMATION" and APPENDIX C - - "CITY OF CHICAGO BASIC
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012."
Corporate Fund
Revenues and Expenditures 2010 — 2014
(Dollars in Millions)
(Estimated/
2010

Revenues:
Intergovemmental 'Ta.\es
i .ocal 'Ta.\es
Non- Tax Revenues
Proceeds & Transfers In
Prior Year Available Resources.
'Total Revenues
Expenditures
Revenues Over Expenditures

Actual*
2011

Unaudited)
2013

2012

Budget
2014

% 553.x
1,283.7
773.3
519.0
0.0

$ 525.2
1,334.9
921.1
467.7
0.0

$ 587.6
1,425.3
907.8
86.6
72.3

$ 629.8
1,467.1
944.4
21.4
177.0

$ 621.5
1.478.2
1,078.5
58.6
53.4

3,129.8
3,044.2

3,248.9
3,069.4

3,079.6
3,079.6

3,239.7
3,16I.X

, 3,290.2
' 3,290.2

$ 85.6

$ 179.5

$

$

$

0.0

77.9

0.0

Ol)taincd from l!i\hibil 6 in ihe City of Cliicuyo IHLSIC rmancul siatcmcnis for the respective yean; The breakdown ot revenues by
cjiegoiy can be oblainecJ Iroin Schedule A-1 ofthe Ciiy of Chicago Compreliensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) for the respeclive
ve.irs

2012 Corporate Fund. Total Corporate Fund resources for 2012 were $3.08 billion,
includes $72.3 million carried over from 201 1.

This

 Utility taxes came in 3 percent below budget in 2012, driven in large part by the unseasonably
warm winter and spring and decreases in natural gas prices, which were down 31 percent from 2011. As a
result, natural gas tax revenues were 15 perceni below budgeted amounts. Telecommunications and
electricity lax revenues were also below budgel, though electricity bounced back slightly given the
unusually high temperatures during the summer.
Hotel tax revenues, in contrast, finished the year 14 percent above budget, as Chicago's tourism
and convention business grew. Revenue per available room in the cily was up 10 percent from 2011, and
hotel occupancy up 4 percent. Recreation tax revenues were slightly above budget, with strong liquor and
non-alcoholic beverage sales offsetting the decline in cigarette tax revenues caused by decreased
consumption attributable to the State's increase in its cigarette tax rate.
Sales tax revenues in 2012 were also strong at 7 percent above budget for the year. Despite
declines in home values, real property transaction tax revenues finished the year 39 percent above
budgeted levels, due to increasing home sales and large commercial transactions during the year.
• Income tax revenues were similarly strong in 2012, with collections up 10 percent from 2011
levels as unemployment dropped and corporate profits grew. In addition, the City received 13 monthly
income tax distributions from the State, further increasing the City's 2012 income tax revenues above
budget. Throughout 2011 and into the start of 2012, there was a substantial delay in income tax
distributions to municipalities by the Slate. Because the final 2011 di.stribution was received after the City
closed its 2011 books, that amount had to be accounted as 2012 revenue.
Non-lax revenues ended 2012 slightly below budget, as revenues from business license and
permit issuances, as well as certain fines, were down from budgeted levels. The overall amount o f nontax revenue lo the Corporate Fund was also affected by the postponement to 2013 o f t h e roll-out ofthe
City's municipal marketing program.
Expenditures for 2012 were $3.08 billion, approximately $27 million less than 2012 budgeted
expenditures. Salary and wage expenditures ended the year just above budget for the year; however,
these increases were offset by greater than expected healthcare savings and reduced spending on
contractual services such as rental of equipment, telecommunications contracts, IT maintenance and
software licensing, and other professional services.
2013 Corporate Fund Estimates. 'Total Corporate Fund resources for 2013 are estimated to end
the year at $3.24 billion, approximately 2 percent, or an estimated $77.9 million, above 2013 budgeted
revenues. This includes $177 million carried over from prior years, which was included in the 2013
budget and is attributable in part to the effective controls, cuts, and initi.atives implemented during the
course of 201 1 and 2012.
'These year-end estimates reflect increases in many of the City's economically sensitive and
tourism-driven revenues, as well as the anticipated receipt of an additional monthly income tax
distribution as the State catches up from delays in payments seen in recent years.
Utility tax revenues are expected to come in 4 percent above budget for the year as natural gas
prices rebound from 2012 lows. Natural gas and electricity lax revenues were further impacted by
increased usage with the extreme winter weather.
Real properly transfer tax revenues are expected to come in approximately 47 percent above
budget for the year as the commercial real estate market continues to perform well zind the housing
market shows significant improvement over 2012 in both sales and prices. Sales tax revenues are

 expected to outperform budget by approximately 3 percent for the year, as consumer confidence
continued to improve in 2013.
Both corporate and individual income lax revenues are expected lo end 2013 significantly above
budget, due in part to an anticipated additional monthly distribution in back-payment from the State,
coupled with the stabilizing economy and certain one-time collections associated wilh businesses and
individuals selling assets or receiving dividends or bonuses in 2012 in anticipation of higher federal lax
rates.
The City's non-tax revenues saw an increase in fee revenue from business licenses, building
permits, and other licenses and permits, offset by a decline from budgeted expectations in revenues from
fines, forfeitures, and penalties.
Corporate Fund expenditures are currently expected to end 2013 approximately even with
budgeted amounts. This estimate reflects operational decisions, payroll trends, contract utilization, and
market pricing for relevant commodities throughout the year.
2014 Corporate Fund Budget. The 2014 budget projects that Corporate Fund resources will total
$3.29 billion, up slightly from the 2013 year-end estimate of $3.24 billion. For most major revenue
sources. 2014 projections reflect the continuation of trends seen in 2013.
Overall utility tax revenues are projected to be down 3 percent from 2013 levels in 2014,
budgeted at a total of $450.3 million, due in part to the anticipated continued decline in
telecommunications tax revenue in line with changing consumer preferences and industry trends.
Hotel tax revenue projections anticipate continued growth in hotel occupancy, and are budgeted
at $97.7 million in 2014. Overall recreation taxes are budgeted above 2013 levels in 2014, anticipating
some growth in amusement and liquor tax revenues and accounting for the increase in the City cigarette
tax rate that took effect at the start of 2014.
Sales tax revenue to the Corporate Fund is budgeted at $596.8 million in 2014, a 3 percent
increase from 2013 year-end estimates, and other transaction tax revenues, including real property
transfer taxes and personal property lease taxes, are expected in continue to increase in 2014, in line with
the market and consumer confidence.
The City anticipates that monthly income tax collections will increase slightly in 2014 with the
economy, but total 2014 budgeted income tax revenues are below 2013 levels, because of the one-time
and prior-year payments expected in 2013, as discussed above.
Non-tax revenues are budgeted at $1.08 billion in 2014, an increase over anticipated 2013 non-tax
revenues. Revenue from fines, forfeitures, and penalties is expected to increase in 2014 with the full
implementation of automated speed enforcement in select locations near parks and schools throughout the
city.
Budgeted expenditures grow slightly in 2014. balancing with budgeted resources at $3.29 billion.
2014 budgeted expenditures account for anticipated changes to salaries and wages governed by collective
bargaining agreements, increased fliel expenses to accommodate the potential continued increase in gas
prices, and costs associated with the coming year's election cycle and the first full year of citywide
recycling.

 Use o f L o n g - T e r m Reserves
The Chicago Skyway reserve funds were established in 2005 in the amount o f $975 million from
the proceeds received by the City in connection with the closing o f t h e long-term concession and lease o f
the Skyway. The Metered Parking System reserve funds were established in 2009 in the amount o f $1.15
billion from the proceeds received by the City in connection with the closing o f t h e long-term concession
o f t h e Metered Parking System. Approximately $475 million o f the Skyway reserves and $425 million o f
the Metered Parking System reserves were initially designated for budgetary uses, leaving a long-term
reserve o f $500 million from the Skyway and, for the Metered Parking System, a $400 m i l l i o n long-term
reserve and a $326 million budget stabilization fund. The $326 million budget stabilization fund was
fully utilized for budgetary purposes by the end o f 2010. Over the period from 2009 through 2 0 1 1 , the
City also used $320 million from the Metered Parking System long-term reserve fund for budgetary
purposes. The 2012 budget phased oul the use o f principal from the Metered Parking System long-term
reserve to subsidize the City's operating budget. In addition, Ihe City has begun to rebuild the Metered
Parking System long-term reserve fund by depositing into it $20 m i l l i o n in 2012 and $15 m i l l i o n in 2013.
The current ordinances applicable to the Skyway and Metered Parking System long-term reserves specify
lhat only the interest earned on those reserves can be transferred to the Corporate Fund.
Set forth in the table below is information about the City's long term reserves from 2009 Ihroueh
2013.
Long-Term Reserves
2009 — 2013
($ in millions)

Year
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Skyway
$500
500
500
500
500

Metered Purking
System
.1:380
220
80
100
115

Total
.S880
720
580
600
615

Capital Improvements Program
The City's capital improvement program funds the physical improvement or replacement o f Cityowned infrastructure and facilities with long useful lives, such as roads, buildings and green spaces. The
following discussion o f the City's capital improvement program does not include the City's water and
sewer or aviation systems, which are separate self-supporting systems.
The City accounts for proceeds o f debt used for the capital improvement program in the City's
basic financial statements under Capital Projects Funds. Capital Projects Funds are comprised o f the
Community Development and Improvement Projects Fund and the Non Major Capital Projects Fund. Sec
A P P E N D I X B — " F I N A N C I A L A N D OTHER I N F O R M A T I O N — S C H E D U L E OF R E V E N U E S ,
E X P E N D I T U R E S A N D C H A N G E S IN F U N D B A L A N C E S — Capital Projects Funds."
From 2003 to 2012, the City utilized proceeds from the issuance o f general obligation bonds to
fund $2.1 billion o f its capital program. These bonds are utilized to support a wide variety o f project
types, including: (i) greening, such as streetscaping projects, green ways, medians, trees, fountains,
community gardens, neighborhood parks, wetlands, and other natural areas; (ii) facilities, such as the
improvement and construction o f City buildings and operating facilities, police and fire stations, health

 clinics, senior centers, and libraries; (iii) infrastructure, such as ihe construction and maintenance o f
streets, viaducts, alleys, lighting, ramps, sidewalks, bridge improvements, traffic signals, bike lanes, and
shoreline work; and (iv) aldermanic menu projects, which are selected by aldermen, each o f whom is
allotted $1.32 million o f general obligation bond funding to be spent at their discretion on a specific menu
o f improvements in their respective wards. Over the past seven years, these funds have been used
primarily for sidewalks, residential street resurfacing, street lighting, and curb and gutter replacement,
with portions o f these funds contributed lo the Chicago Park District ($13.5 million), Chicago Public
Schools ($2.6 million), and the Chicago Transit Authority ($500,000).
The capital uses o f general obligation bond funds over the period 2003 to 2012 is set forth in the
table below.
Capital Uses of General Obligation Bond Funding
2003 — 2012
($ in millions)
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Facilities

S 71.4
30.4
124.9
169.5

$ 64.7
46.5
77.2
9.4

,S 61.2
23.3
3X.6
41.6

$ 54.2
32.7
64.3
47.4

$85.9
28.0
74.8
47.3

$ 93.4
20.7
54.0
14.9

$ 94.4
19.0
36.8
35.8

$ 81.4
15.7
28.9
40.0

$102.0
5.8
26.0
24.9

$84.0
4.2
33.1
12.7

Toliil

$396.2

$197.8

.•5164.7

.SI 98.7

S236.1

$283.0

$185.9

SI 66.0

Aid. Menu
Greening
Infrastmclure

.SI 58.7. $134.1

The City's current capital improvement plan calls for improvements o f $2.3 billion over the
period 2013 through 2017. Funding for the City's capital improvement program comes from general
obligation bond issuances, state and federal funding, tax increment financing, and private funding through
public/private ventures.
In addition to traditional sources o f funding for capital projects, the City is undertaking new
initiatives to fund capital improvements, which include the Chicago Infrastructure Trust, accessing federal
programs under the Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act o f 1998 ( T I F I A ) , and
repaying from operating savings commercial paper issued to fund projects. The City is also emphasizing
the use o f current revenues for pay-as-you-go financing where practical.

 The City's 2014 capital improvement program recommends investing approximately $629
million in capital improvements in 2014. The table below presents the anticipated sources of capital
funding and the proposed uses of capital funding for 2014.
2014 Capital Improvements
($ in thousands)
CAPITAL FUNDING SOURCES:
Federal
General Obligation Bonds
Tax Increment Financing
Other
nriA
State Funding
Total

Amount

CAPITAL FUNDING USES:
City Infra-Strueture
Aldermanic Funds
Greening & Streetseapes
City Facilities
Total

Amount

$238,238
133,492
111,635
53,256
48,000
36.311
.$620,932

.$436,325
84,000
75,233
25,374
$620,932

Percent
38.4%
21.5
18.0
8.6
7.7
5.8
100.0%
Percent
70.3%
13.5
12.1
4.1
100.0%

Property Ta.xes
Revenue from the City's property tax levy is used to pay the City's general obligation debt
service obligations, contributions lo employee pension funds and library-related expenses. The City is
one of several taxing districts reflected on a Chicago resident's property tax bill. The amount of property
taxes collected by Cook County is divided among these districts, wilh the City allocated approximately 20
percent of the total bill. Cook County determines the amount that will be billed to an individual Chicago
taxpayer based on the composite tax rate that results from dividing the districts' aggregate levy by the
aggregate EAV, and then applying that rate to the EAV ofthe taxpayer's property. Changes in EAV do
not affect the amount of the City's property tax revenue because the City's property taxes are levied at a
flat dollar amount. For more information on real property assessment, tax levy and tax collection in Cook
County, see APPENDIX A — "REAL PROPERTY TAX SYSTEM AND LIMITS"

 Set forth in the lable below are the uses ofthe property lax levies ofthe City for the years 2003
through 2012.
Property T a x Levy 2003 —-2012
($ in thousands)

Tax
Levy
Vear
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012

Retirement
Fund
Contributions
$291,838
299,258
324,1)68
•
342,256
334.700
345,936
351,234
350,733
348,666
349,666

Uses of Property l ax Levy
General
Obligation
Library
Debt Service
Debt Service
.$417,344
$4,784
411.096
3.697
333,759
54,515
.336,508
34,737
3.';2,039
29,103
373,874
77,710
368,533
77,710
369.014
77,710
370,934
77,711
370,517
77,821

City Colleges
Debt Service*
$ 5,729
5.729
5,729
5,729
33,509
36,632
36.632
36.632
36,637
36,632

Total Tax Levy
for Fiscal Year
$719,695
719.780
718.071
719,230
749,351
834,152
834,109
834,089
833,948
834.636

* The Cily previously issued bonds on behalfof City Colleges
Over the past five years, the City has chosen to keep the aggregate property tax levy stable,
The lop property tax payers; in the City in 2012 based on 2012 E A V are shown below.
Top Ten Property T a x Payers 2012
($ in thousands)

Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Property
Willis Tower
AON Center
One Prudential Plaza
Blue Cro.ss Bluie Shield Tower
Water Tower Pilace
Chase 'Tower
'The Franklin - A T& f Corp. Center
Three First National Plaza
131 S. Dearborn
300 N. l.aSalle
Total

.J

2012 EAV
($ in thousiinds)
$ 3X6,266
255,347
234,964
205,275
201.246
200,708
192.9X5
187,449
184,596
179,X04
$2,22X,64I)

%of
Total
EAV
0.59%
0.39
0.36
0.32
0.31
0.31
0.30
0.29
0.28
0.28
3.42%

As shown in the table, the top ten taxpayers account for less than 4% of the City's total tax base.
The 2014 budget provides a total appropriation of $595.1 million to service general obligation
debt, $355.7 million of which will be funded with revenue from the City's property tax levy (but not
including three other property tax levies used for debt service on three specified general obligation bond
issues (the "Three Specified Bond Issues")). In 2013, general obligation debt service (excluding the
Three Specified Bond Issues) was $531.1 million, $355.7 million of which was paid from revenue from
the City's property tax levy.

 The City Council adopted an ordinance on November 15, 2012 which authorized a property tax
levy of $370.5 million (representing $355.7 million after losses in the collection o f taxes) for the year
2013 to pay debt service payments on the City's outstanding general obligation bonds (except for the
Three Specified Bond Issues). Each of the outstanding general obligation bond issues is secured by a
separate, multi-year property lax levy established in the ordinance specifically authorizing that issue of
general obligation bonds. The aggregate amount ofthe unabated property tax levies for the outstanding
general obligation bond issues for the year 2013 equals approximately $485.0 million. 'The Bonds to be
issued for refunding purposes are expected to be issued in such amounts and with such repayment terms
as will allow an abatement of the property taxes levied for the Refunded Bonds sufficient to cause the
property tax levies for the remaining outstanding general obligation bonds for the year 2013 to be nol
greater than $370.5 million (representing $355.7 million after losses in the collection of taxes).
General Obligation Debt
Debt Service Funds. The City accounts for the payment of principal and interest and the
redemption of its general obligation bond issues in its basic financial statements under Debt Service
Funds. Debt Service Funds are comprised of Ihe Bond, Note Redemption and Interest Fund and the Debt
Service Fund - Special Taxing Areas for General Obligation and Tax Increment Financing. See
APPENDIX B — "FINANCIAL AND OTHER INFORMATION - SCHEDULE OF REVENUES,
EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES IN FUND BALANCES — Debt Service Funds."
General Obligation Bonds. General obligation bonds are generally issued annually by the City
to pay for capital projects and equipment and, from time to time, refunding o f outstanding general
obligation bonds for interest cost savings, general obligation debt restructuring, settlements, judgments
and certain retroactive employment and pension obligations.
For a significant portion ofthe City's general obligation bonds, an annual property tax levy has
been established for each series of such bonds and pledged to the payment of debt service on such bonds.
For certain other general obligation bonds issued by the City (which make up a small subset ofthe City's
general obligation bonds), either (i) an annual property tax levy has been established for such bonds but
such levy is annually abated if certain other specified revenues are available that year for payment of debt
service on those bonds, or (ii) no annual property tax levy has been established for debt service on such
bonds and payments of debt service on such bonds are appropriated from sources o f revenue other than
property taxes.
Set forth below is the City's outstanding general obligation bonds for the years 2009 through
2013.
General Obligation Bonds*
2009 — 2013
(in millions)

Year
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

I'ald from Property
Ta.x Levy
$5,849
6.345
6.818
7.078
7.005

Principal Amount of Bond.s
Sttureil by
C.'cncral Ohli ;atioii
Alternate Revenues
without Levy
$.^35
$108
660
107
629
105
593
103
555
101

Total
$6,492
7.112
7.552
7.774
7,661

•See APffcNDIX B — "FINANCIAt. ANI3 OTHER CITY INFORMATION — General Obligaiion Bonds IX-bl .Service Schedule "

 Variable Rale Debt. The City htis outstanding certain series of general obligation bonds that pay
variable rates of interest. These issues are supported by letters of credit and/or liquidity facilities
provided by banks for the payment of debt service or tender prices for the bonds. The Cily has not issued
variable rate bonds since 2007.
Set forth in the table below is information about the City's bond liquidity and letter of credit
facilities for the City's outstanding variable rate general obligation bond issues. A City general obligation
debt rating below what is shown in the chart in the "Ratings Thresholds" coluinn would constitute an
event of default under the agreements with the related banks.
Bond Liquidity and Letter of Credit Facilities
Bund
Series

Kacility
Expiration

2003 13-1
2003 B-2
2003 H-3
2007F
2007E
20()7Ci
2005 n-i
2005 D-2
2002 B-3
2002 B-4
2002 B-5

09/17/14
09/17/14
09/17/14
12/31/14
12/31/14
12/31/14
01/12/15
01/12/15
10/02/15
10/02/15
10/02/15

Bund
Maturity'
Date
01/01/34
01/01/34
01/01/34
01/01/42
01/01/42
01/01/42
01/01/40
01/01/40
01/01/37'
01/01/37
01/01/37

Ratings Thresholds
Bank
JPMorgan
JPMorgan
Jl'Morgan
JI'Morgan
B;irclay.s
Barclays
Bank o f Montreal
Northern rrtist
KBC
Bank o f New York
Bank o f New York

Fitch
BBBBBBBBBBBB-

.Moody's
Baa3
Baa3
Baa3
Baa3

S&l'
BBBBBBBBBBBB-

*
*

«

*

BBBB13BBBB
BBB
BBB

Baa3
Ba;i3
Baa2
Baa2
Baa2

BBBBBBBBB
BBB
BBB

• The agreements with Barclays provide that (1) if the City's general obligation debt that is supported by property lax is
rated by two or more rating agencies, if at any time two or more rating agencies rale that general obligation debt below
BBB+ or below Baal for a period of 180 days, or
if this debt is rated by only one rating agency and that rating
agency rates this debt below BBB+ or below Baal for a period of 1,S0 days, or liii) any rating agency rates tlie
iineiilmnced general obligation debt ofthe City siippoiled by property tax below BBB or Baa2, this would constitute an
event of default under these agreements.

Interest Rate Exchange Agreements. The City is authorized to enter into inlerest rate exchange
agreements with counterparties in connection with its general obligafion bonds. Interest rate exchange
agreements, or options to enter inlo such agreements, can provide the City with (i) an interest rate basis,
cash How basis, or other basis different from that provided in the related City indebtedness for the
payment o f interest, or (ii) with respect to a future delivery of general obligation bonds, notes or
commercial paper, one or more of a guaranteed interest rate, interest rate basis, cash flow basis, or
purchase price. Interest rate exchange agreements can include, without limitation, agreements or
contracts commonly known as interest rate exchange, swaps, including forward starling swaps, collar,
caps, or derivative agreements, forward payment conversion agreements, interest rate locks, forward bond
purchase agreements, bond warrant agreements, or bond purchase option agreements and also include
agreements granting to the City or a counterparty an option lo enter into any o f the foregoing and
agreements or contracts providing for payntents based on levels of or changes in inlerest rales, including a
change in an interest rate index, to exchange cash flows or a series of payments, or to hedge payment, rate
spread, or similar exposure.
The stated aggregate notional amount (net of offsetting transactions) under all interest rate
exchange agreements related to certain City indebtedness cannot exceed the principal amount of the
indebtedness to which such interest rate exchange agreements relate. An "offsetting transaction" is any
transaction which is intended to hedge, modify or otherwise affect another outstanding transaction or its
economic results. The offsetting transaction need not be based on the same index or rate option as the
12

 related City indebtedness or the transaction being offset and need not be with the same counterparty as the
transacfion being offset. Examples of offsetting transactions include, without limitation, a floating to
fixed rate interest rate swap being offset by a fixed to floating rate interest rate swap, and a fixed to
floating rate interest rate swap being offset by a fioating to fixed rate interest rate swap or an inlerest rate
cap or fioor or a fioating to floating interest rate swap.
The City is a party to the following outstanding interest rate swaps in connection with the City's
general obligation variable rate bonds.
Variable Rate General Obligation Bonds
Interest Rate Swaps
Current
Issue
Name

Nutifinal
Amount

Counterparty
(llacliup C o u n t e r p a r t y )

General
Obligation
Series
2007 r.FG

$200,000,000

Loop Financial
(l>;ulsche Bank)
Morgan Stanley
Wells l-'argo
Wells Fargo

f.ierieral
Obligation
Scries
20O5D

$222,790,000

Goldman Sachs
Loop Financial
(Deutsche Bank)
Kice Financial
(Bank o f New York
Mellon)
Loop Financial
( B M O Hams)
IXnilsche Bank A G . N V
PNC

General
Obligation
Series
20(J3B

$192,765,000

Wells Fargo

Jl'JVIorgaji

'J'ypc

C i t y Receives

C i l y rays

F.ITeetivc
Date

I'vrin illation
Date

Floating-IoFi.scd
Floaling-loFiNcd
Floaling-loFloaling
1 loating-ioI' loaling
Floaling-loFi.ved
Floaling-toFi.xed
i'loaling-IoI'loaling

SIFMA

3 998%

11/8/2007

1/2/2042

.SIFMA

3 998%

11/8/2007

1/2/2042

72 5% of
LIBOR
72 5% o f
LIBOR
SIFMA

SIFMA

I/I/20I4

1/1/2042

SII-MA

I/I/2014

1/1/2042

4 104%

8/17/2005

l/2/2fWO

SIFMA

4 104%

8/17/2005

1/2/2040

72 5»i of
LIBtJR

SIFMA

I/I,'20I4

I/I.'2031

72 5% of
LIBOR
72 5% o f
LIBOR
72 D'i'o o f
LIBOR
66 9 l % o l
lOyrUSIJISDA
Swap Rate
66 9 1 % o f
lOvrtJSD-

SIFMA

1/1/2014

I/I/203I

SIFMA

1/1/2014

1/1/2031

SIFMA

1/1/2031

1/1/2040

4 052%

8/7/2003

1/1/2034

4 052%

8/7/2003

I/I/2034

3/1/2014

1/1/2019

3/1/2014

11/1/2014

11/1/2014

1/1/2019

10/3/2002

I/I/2037

10/3/2002

1/1/2037

Floaliiig-IoFloaling
I-loaliiig-toFlonling
Floatiiig-toFloaiing
Floaling-tori.\ed

Floaling-ioFi.sed

Total
Mark-tiH
Martlet
(llnaultitrd)*
$(51,225,345)

$(58,148,459)

$(30,748,981)

isoA

General
Obligation
Series
2002 B

$206,700.00(1

•AsorJaiuiaiy31,20l4

Swap Rate
75% of L I B O R

I'NC

Floaling-torioaling

PNC

Floating-toFloating

75% o f LIBOR

13ank of New York
Mellon

Hl(ialing-toFloaiing

75% of LIBOR

Jl* Morgan

Floating-loFi.xed
t-loating-ioFi\ed

70'!o of LIBOR

66 9 1 % of
lOyrUSUISDA
Swap Rale
66 9 1 % o f
lOyrUSDLSOA
Swap Rate
66 9 1 % of
lOyrtJSDISDA
Swap Rale
3 }75'.i

7 0 % o f LIBOR

3 575%

Bank o f Amenca

S(33,034.2W>)

 •fhe City entered into the interest rate swaps listed above as a means o f limiting, reducing or
managing the City's interest ctKt wilh respect to the related general obligation bonds, limiting interestrate risk inherent in variable rate debt, or managing risks associated w i l h existing interest rate swaps on
the same general obligation bonds. The interest rate swaps may expose the City to certain market and
credit risks. The City may terminate the interest rate swaps at any time at market value, or upon the
occurrence o f certain events. In addition, either the City or the counterparties may terminate the related
interest rate swaps i f the other party fails to perform under the terms o f such swaps. A counterparty may
terminate its related interest rate swaps i f the City's rating falls below " B B B f " ( B B B for the swap
relating to the Series 2002B bonds) from Standard and Poor's Ratings Services or " B a a l " (Baa2 for the
swap relating to the Series 2002B bonds) from Moody's Investors Service, Inc. I f the interest rate swaps
are terminated, the related bonds would continue to bear interest at a variable rate (unless converted by
the City lo a fixed interest rate), and the City could be liable for a tennination payment i f the swaps have a
negative market value. The estimated aggregate mark-to-market valuation for all o f the interest rate
swaps listed in the table above is negative $173 million. This estimate is ba.sed on the information
provided by each counterparty and has not been independently verified by the C i l y .
In 2012, the City tenninated its general obligation swap option with a notional amount o f S3I8.7
million. The swap option allowed the counterparty to execute a fixed to floating rate swap at a certain
date in the future, i f certain market conditions existed. The City received an upfront payinent o f $13.4
million and made a termination payment o f $4.9 million, for a net benefit o f $8.5 m i l l i o n . Terminating
the swap option eliminated the future related variable rale risk.
Short-Term Borrowing Program. In addition to long-term general obligation bonds, the City
utilizes certain types o f general obligation short-term debt, such as commercial paper and lines o f credit
borrowings (collectively, the "Short-Term Borrowing Program"). The Short-Term Borrowing Program
authorizes the issuance o f debt to address various operating, liquidity, and capital needs o f the City. Debt
issued under the Short-Term Borrowing Program are general obligations o f the City but are not supported
by a City property lax levy.
The following table shows the City's outstanding balances under the Short-'ferin Borrowing
Program as o f December 31 o f t h e years 2009 through 2013.
S h o r t - T e r m JJorrowings
2009 — 2013
($ in thousands)
Year

Principal Amount

2009
2010
2011

$159,838
198,101
127.707

2012
2013

166,513
415.256

Under the Bond Ordinance, the City has increased the maximum aggregate principal amount o f
debt that can be outstanding under the Short-Term Borrowing Program from $500 million to $1 billion.
Under its current arrangements with its credit providers, the City has the ability to issue up to $300
million o f commercial paper and borrow up to $300 million under its lines o f credit. In the future, the
City may enter into further arrangements with credit providers and obtain up to S400 m i l l i o n o f additional
letter o f credit or lines o f credit borrowing capacity lo reach the $1 billion authorized amount under the
Short-Term Borrowing Program.

14

 Set forth In the lable below is infonnation on the City's current general obligation cotnmercial
paper program and lines o f credit. A City general obligation debt rating below what is shown in the chart
in the "Ratings Thresholds" column would constitute an event o f default under the agreements with the
related banks.
General Obligation
Commercial Paper and Lines of Credit

Kacility

Series or
Year

Borrowing;
Authority

Itxpiration
or
Termination

Credit
Line oF
Credit

hitch

Moody's

S&P

n/a

I3;ia3

BBB-

n/a

Baa3

BBB-

BBB+

Baal

BBB+

BBB

Baa2

BBB

Wells

Commercial
Paper Notes
Commcrciiil
Paper Notes
Line o f

Uati ngs Threshold's
Bank

2()02A/B

% 200,000.000

5/8/2015

2()02C/D

$ 100,000.000

5/8/2015

2013

$ 200,000,000

.3/22/2016

1

2014

$100,000,000

2/20/2016

Turtio
BMO
Harris
Bank o f
America
Morgan
Stanley

A portion o f the outstanding general obligation commercial paper notes (the " C P Notes") and
borrowings under the general obligation line o f credit with Bank o f America (the " L i n e o f Credit") w i l l be
refired or repaid with proceeds o f t h e Bonds. See "SOURCES A N D USES OF F U N D S . " After giving
effect to the issuance o f the Bonds and the retirement and repayment o f the CP Notes and the Line o f
Credit, the City w i l l have borrowing capacity o f approximately $199.7 million under its general
obligation commercial paper program and $300.0 million under its general obligation lines o f credit.
Collective Bargaining Agreements
The C i l y has collective bargaining agreements with 46 unions representing approximately 9 0 % o f
its 32,000 employees. Currently, the City is in negotiafions with the following unions on successor
collective bargaining agreements to replace agreements with expired terms: Fraternal Order o f Police
(representing approximately 10,800 police ofTicers); Chicago Fire Fighters Union, Local 2 (approximately
4,600 employees); American Federation o f State, Couniy and Municipal Employees (approximately 3,400
employees); Illinois Nurses Association (approximately 75 employees); Policemen's Benevolent &
Protective Associaiion o f Illinois, Unit I56C Captains (approximately 30 employees); and Teamsters
Local 700/Shift Supervisors o f the Security Communications Center (approximately 10 employees).
While negotiations continue on successor agreements, the prior collective bargaining agreements remain
in effect. The 2014 Corporate Fund budgel includes funds for wage increases and anticipated wage
increases with respect to successor agreements.
For the remaining City employees represented by other unions, the City has collective bargaining
agreements currently in effect, which provide for annual wage increases. The 2014 Corporate Fund
budget includes funds for wage increases for these employees scheduled to receive them for 2014.
Retirement Funds and Other Post-Employment Benefits
'The City provides funding for four retirement funds (the "Retirement Funds"'), which provide
benefits upon retirement, death or disability lo employees and beneficiaries. As described in A P P E N D I X
E - - " R E T I R E M E N T FUNDS A N D OTHER P O S T - E M P L O Y M E N T B E N E F I T S — R E T I R E M E N T
F U N D S , " Ihe benefits provided to members o f the Retirement Funds and the City's contributions to the
Retirement Funds are governed by the provisions o f t h e Illinois Pension Code (the "Pension Code"), and
the Retirement Funds' sources o f funding come from the City's contributions, the employees'

 contributions and investmenl income on the Retirement Funds' assets. The City's contributions and the
employees' contributions are based upon what is established under the Pension Code and are not based on
the actuarially recommended levels. For a description ofthe Retirement Funds, the manner of funding the
Retirement Funds, their historical and projected unfunded status, and recent legislative changes affecting
the Retirement Funds and olher information, sec APPENDIX E — "RETIREMENT FUNDS AND
OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS — RETIREMENT FUNDS." The foregoing description is
qualified in its entirely by reference to APPENDIX E — "RETIREMENT FUNDS AND OTHER POSTEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS — RETIREMENT FUNDS," which a prospective purchaser ofthe Bonds
should read in its entirety.
The City allocates a portion of its contributions to the Retirement Funds to its enterprise funds,
including the City's aviation, water and sewer funds, based upon the amount of services provided by City
employees to the enterprises or functions related to or paid out of those funds. The funds account for their
allocable share of the City's contributions to the Retirement Funds as operating and maintenance
expenses. In 2012, the enterprise funds reimbursed the City $35.7 million for their allocable share of
retirement benefits.
Future Pension Contributions. Under current State law, beginning in 2016 the City must make
actuarially-ba.sed annual contributions to its significantly underfunded police and firemen's pension
funds. Such contributions, which are made out of the City's Corporate Fund, must be in amounis
necessary to achieve specified funding levels by 2040. The current estimate of the City's 2016 annual
conlribution for these two pension funds is over $885 million, which is an increase of approximately $584
million over the projected 2015 contribution for these funds. This amount is in addition to the annual
contributions the City must make, in large part from the Corporate Fund, lo its municipal and laborers'
funds, which are also significantly underfunded and face insolvency absent State legislative reforms in
their funding and/or benefit levels. The City continues to pursue comprehensive pension reform at the
State level to alleviate the substantial burden its annual pension contributions will likely have on the
City's financial condition and its economy absent such reform. I f the City fails to achieve such reform,
then it will likely need to implement large property tax increases and/or significant reductions of City
services. No assurance can be given that the City will be successful in achieving pension refonn or that, i f
such reform is enacted, it will be upheld upon legal challenge. Even i f such pension reform is enacted by
the Slate and upheld upon legal challenge, the City will still likely face significant increases in its annual
contributions to the pension funds. See "APPENDIX E — RETIREMENT FUNDS AND OTHER
POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS." The foregoing description is qualified in its entirety by reference
to "APPENDIX E — RETIREMENT FUNDS AND OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS,"
which a prospective purchiiser ofthe Bonds should read in its entirety.
The City and the Retirement Funds share the cost of post-employment healthcare benefits
available to certain former City employees participating in the Retirement Funds through a singleemployer, defined benefit healthcare plan (the "Health Plan"), which is administered by the City. The
Health Plan is fiinded on a pay-as-you-go basis and as such assets arc not accumulated or dedicated to
funding the Health Pltin. On May 15, 2013, the City announced changes to the funding ofthe Heahh
Plan, including, but not limited to, the phase-out of the Health Plan by the beginning of 2017. The
phase-out ofthe Health Plan is expected to save the City approximately $100 million annually beginning
in 2017. Lifigation is currently pending with regard to the continuafion of the Health Plan. For a
description ofthe post-employment healthcare benefits, the manner of funding such benefits, the funded
status of the benefits and pending litigation wilh regard to the Health Plan, see APPENDIX E —
"RETIREMENT FUNDS AND OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS — OTHER POSTEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS." The foregoing description is qualified in its entirety by reference to
APPENDIX E — "RETIREMENT FUNDS AND OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS —

 OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS," which a prospective purchaser ofthe Bonds should read
in its entirety.
City investment Policy
The investment of City funds is governed by the Municipal Code of Chicago (the '"Municipal
Code"). Pursuant to the IVTunicipal Code, the City Treasurer has adopted a Statement of Investment
Policy and Guidelines for the purpose of establishing written cash management and investment guidelines
to be followed by the City Treasurer's office in the investment of Cily funds. See APPENDIX C - "BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012 - Notes (1)
and (4)."
PLAN O F FINANCING
General
The proceeds from the sale of the Bonds will be used as described below.
infonnation, see "SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS."

For additional

Financing ofthe Project
A portion ofthe net proceeds of the Series 2014A Bonds and the Taxable Scries 2014B Bonds are
expected to be used by the City to finance the following projects (collectively, the "Project"): alley
resurfacing; installation of residential speed bumps; residential street resurfacing; installation of guard
rails and bollards; installation of alley aprons; sidewalk replacement; curb and gutter replacement;
installation of cul-de-sacs; installation of traffic signals; installation of street lights; park improvements
(including (i) installation of playgrounds, walking paths, field houses, playlols, security cameras, water
spray feature, baseball fields and lights, (ii) creation of a community garden, (iii) repair of tennis court
surfaces and fences, and (iv) bench removals); installation o f temporary parking signage; removal of
decorative baskets; installation of ramps and markings; power wash of underpasses; painting of pedways;
tree planting; installation of planters and LED lights; installation of decorative planters; fencing repairs;
installafion of pedestrian countdown signals; bikeway lanes; htizardous right-of-way repair; work on
storm water tunnels; maintenance and repair of City facilities (include roofing repair, property
maintenance, HVAC systems maintenance, onsile equipment maintenance, replacement of carpeting, and
in-house labor costs); blue cart acquisitions; acquisition of police prisoner transport vans; acquisition of
fire department ambulances; public library programs; and the establishment ofthe Bloomingdale Trail.
The Bond Ordinance authorizes the City to use the Bond proceeds to finance one or more of the
following (collectively, the "Authorized Uses"): (i) public right-of-way infrastructure improvements in
City neighborhoods, including street and alley construction and improvements, lighting improvements,
sidewalk improvements and replacement, and curb and gutter repairs and replacement; (ii) infrastructure
improvements to enhance the development of economic activity, including industrial street construction
and improvements, streetscaping, median landscaping, demolition of hazardous, vacant or dilapidated
buildings that pose a threat to public safety and welfare, shoreline reconstruction, riverbank stabilization,
residential and commercial infrastructure redevelopment and railroad viaduct clearance improvements;
(iii) transportation improvements to Cily property and facilities and to property and facilities located
within the City limits which are owned by other governmental entities, including street resurfacing, bridge
and freight tunnel rehabilitation, traffic signal modernization, new traffic signal installation, intersection
safety improvements and transit facility improvements; (iv) grants or loans to ;issi.st not-for-profit
organizations or educational or cultural institutions, or to assist other municipal corporations, units of
local government, school districts, the Stale of Illinois or the United States of America; (v) cash How

17

 needs of the City; (vi) the acquisition of personal property, including, but not limited to, computer
hardware and software, vehicles or other capital item.s useful or necessary for City purposes; (vii) the duly
authorized acquisition of improved and unimproved real properly within the City for municipal,
industrial, commercial or residential purposes, or any combination thereof, and the improvement,
demolition and/or remediation of any such property; (viii) constructing, equipping, altering and repairing
various municipal facilities including fire stations, police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and
other municipal facilities; (ix) the enhancement of economic development within the City by making
direct grants or loans to. or deposits to funds or accounts to secure the obligations of, not-for-profit or forprofit organizations doing business or seeking to do business in the City; (x) the funding of (A) judgments
entered against the City, (B) certain settlements or other payments required to be made by the City as a
condition to the resolution of litigation or threatened litigation or arbitration and (C) such escrow accounts
or other reserves as shall be deemed necessary for any of said purposes; (xi) the payment o f certain
contributions lo the Policemen's Anniiity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Firemen's Annuity and
Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago and the
Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago; (xii) the provision of
facilities, services and equipment to protect and enhance public safety, including, but not limited to.
increased costs for police and fire protection services, emergency medical services, staffing at the City's
emergency call center and other City facilities, and enhanced security measures at airports and other
major Cily facilities; and (xiii) acquiring motor vehicles for a term of years or lease period.
One or more components of the Project described above may later be changed by the City to
include financing of other Authorized Uses.
^
Proceeds of the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds in the amount of $198 million are expected to be
used to fund legal judgments or settlements incurred by the Cily.
Refunding and Restructuring
A portion of the proceeds ofthe Series 2014A Bonds and the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds will
be used lo refund all or a portion of the principal of and interest on certain maturities of outstanding
general obligation bonds of the City (the "Refunded Bonds"), retire ihe CP Notes and repay borrowings
under the Line of Credit. See "SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS." The Refunded Bonds are .set forth
in APPENDIX H —"REFUNDED BONDS."
Portions of the refunding will result in debt service savings to the City and extend the average
maturity of the City's general obligation debt. See APPENDIX B — "FINANCIAL A N D OTHER
INFORMATION — Debt Service Schedule."
To provide for the payinent and retirement ofthe Refunded Bonds, certain proceeds ofthe Series
2014A Bonds and the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds will be used to purchase securities constituting direct
obligations ofthe United States of America (collectively, the ''Government Obligations"). The principal
of and interest on the Government Obligations, together with available cash deposits, will be sufficient (i)
to pay when due the interest on the Refunded Bonds to their respective maturity or redemption dates, and
(ii) to pay or redeem the Refunded Bonds on their respective maturity or redemption dates at their
respective principal amounts or redemption prices.
The Government Obligations purchased wilh the proceeds of the Series 2014A Bonds and the
Taxable Series 20I4B Bonds, together with available cash deposits, will be held in escrow accounts with
the respective paying agents for the Refunded Bonds or an escrow agent (collectively, the "Escrow
Accounts'"). Neither the cash on deposit, the maturing principal of the Government Obligations nor the

 interest to be earned thereon will serve as security or be available for the payment ofthe principal of or
the inlerest on the Bonds.
The mathematical computation of (i) the adequacy of maturing principal of and interest earnings
on the Government Obligations together with initial cash deposits in the Escrow Accounts to provide for
payments on the Refunded Bonds as described above and (ii) the actuarial yields on the Series 2014A
Bonds and the Government Obligations will be verified at the time of the delivery ofthe Bonds by Robert
'Thomas CPA, LLC, Shawnee Mission, Kansas, independent certified public accountants.
See
"CERTAIN VERIFICATIONS."
Proceeds ofthe Bonds used to retire the CP Notes will be held by the trustee for the CP Notes
until the maturity date of the CP Notes. Proceeds ofthe Bonds used to repay a portion of the outstanding
balances under the Line of Credit will be applied to such payment on the date of issuance of the Bonds.
SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS
The following table sets forth the sources and uses of Bond proceeds.

Series 2014A
Bonds

Taxable
Series 2DI4B
Bonds

Total

SOURCE OF FUNDS:
Principal Amounl ofthe Bonds
Net Issue Premium
Total Sources of Funds

$432,630,000
5.207,769
$437,837.769

$450,790,000

$883,420,000
5.207,769
$888,627,769

USES OF FUNDS:
Costs of Project
Refunding of Refunded Bonds
Retirement of Commercial Paper
Repayment of Tine of Credit
Capitalized Inlerest
Co.sts of Issuance (including the

$205,123,000
44,175,105
98,467,000
50,000,000
36,928,833

$125,800,000
141,048.874
53,224,054
95,385,946
31,408,858

$330,923,000
185,223,979
151,691,054
145,385,946
68,337,69!

3,143,831
$437,837,769

3.922.268
$450,790,000

7,066.099
$888,627,769

$450,790,000

underwriters" discount and bond

insurance premium)
Total Uses of Funds

THE BONDS
General

Each series of Bonds will be dated the date of issuance, will mature on January I ofthe years and
in the amounts set forth on the inside front cover page of this Official Statement, and will bear interest
from the dale of issuance. The Bonds will be issued only as fully registered bonds in denominations of
$5,000 or any integral multiple thereof
The Bonds will bear interest at the rates .set forth on the inside front cover page of this Official
Stalemenl, on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months. Interest on the Bonds will be payable
on January I and July I of each year, commencing July 1, 2014, to the person in whose name the Bond is
registered as ofthe 15th day ofthe month next preceding any such interest payment date. Each Bond will

19

 bear interest from the later o f its date o f issuance or the most recent interest payment date to which
interest has been paid until the principal amount o f such Bond is paid.
Amalgjunatcd Bank o f Chicago, Chicago, Illinois (the "Bond Registrar"'), w i l l serve as bond
registrar and paying agent for the Bonds. Principal o f and inleresl on the Bonds w i l l be payable in lawful
money o f t h e United States at the designated corporate trust office o f t h e Bond Registrar.
The Bonds inifially are registered through a book-entry only .system operated by The Depository
Trust Company, New York, New York ( " D T C " ) . Details o f payments o f the Bonds when in the bookentry only system are described below under the subcaption " — Book-Entry System." Except as
described under the subcaption " — Book-Entry System — General " below, beneficial owners o f the
Bonds w i l l not receive or have the right lo receive physical delivery o f t h e Bonds, and w i l l not be or be
considered to be the registered owners thereof Accordingly, beneficial owners must rely upon (i) the
procedures o f DTC and, i f such beneficial owner is not a D T C "Direct Participanf or "Indirect
Participant'" (as defined below), the Direct or Indirect Participant who w i l l act on b e h a l f o f such beneficial
owner to receive notices and payments o f principal and interest or redemption price o f t h e Bonds, and to
exercise vofing rights and (ii) the records o f DTC and, i f such beneficial owner is not a Direct or Indirect
Participant,'such beneficial owner's Direct or Indirect Participanf, to evidence its beneficial ownership o f
the Bonds. So long as DTC or its nominee is the registered owner o f the Bonds, references herein to
Bondholders or registered owners o f such Bonds mean DTC or its nominee and do not mean the
beneficial owners o f such Bonds. The laws o f some states may require that certain purchasers o f
securities take physical delivery o f such securities in definitive form. Such limits and laws may impair
the ability to transfer beneficial interests in a Bond.
Payment of the Bonds
Principal o f each Bond and redemption premium, i f any, w i l l be payable in lawful money o f the
United States upon presentation and surrender o f such Bond at the designated corporate trust olllce o f t h e
Bond Registrar.
Payment o f t h e installments o f interest on each Bond shall be made to the registered owner o f
such Bond as shown on the registration books o f the City maintained by the Bond Registrar at the close o f
business on the 15th day o f t h e month next preceding each interest payment date and shall be paid by
check or draft o f t h e Bond Regisfrar mailed to the address o f such registered owner as it appears on such
registration books or at such other address fumished in writing by such registered owner to the Bond
Registrar or, at the option o f any registered owner o f SI ,000,000 or more in aggregate principal amount o f
the Bonds, by wire transfer o f immediately available funds to such bank in the continental United States
o f America as such registered owner shall request in writing to the Bond Registrar.
Redemption
The Bonds are subjecl lo both optional and mandatory redemption prior to maturity, as described
below. The Bonds shall be redeemed only in principal amounts o f $5,000 and integral multiples thereof
Optional Redemption o f Series 2014A Bonds. The Series 2014A Bonds maturing on and after
January 1, 2025 are subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option o f t h e City, in whole or in part,
on any date on or after January 1, 2024, and i f less than all o f t h e outstanding Bonds o f a single series,
maturity and interest rate are to be redeemed, the Bonds to be called shall be called from such maturities
and interest rates as shall be determined by the Chief Financial Officer o f t h e City or the City Comptroller
(each, an "Authorized Officer"'), by lot in the manner hereinafter provided, at a redemption price equal to
the principal amount o f t h e Bonds being redeemed plus accrued interest to the date fixed for redeinption.

20

 The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call any ofthe Bonds for
optional redemption, in whole or in part; provided, that such sale or waiver will not adversely affect the
excludability of interest on the Series 2014A Bonds from gross income for federal income lax purposes.
Optional Redemption i f the Taxable Series 20I4B Bonds with Make Wliole Payment. The
Taxable Series 2014B Bonds shall be subjecl to redemption prior to maturity at the option o f the City, in
whole or in part, and i f in part from such maturities and interest rates as shall be determined by an
Authorized Officer on any Business Day (as defined below) al a redeinption price equal to the greater of:
(A) the principal amount of such Bonds lo be redeemed, or (B) the sum of the present values o f the
remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on such Bonds to be redeemed, not including any
portion of those payments of interest accrued and unpaid as ofthe date such Bonds are to be redeemed,
discpunted to the date of redemption of such Bonds to be redeemed on a semiannual basis (assuming a
360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury Rate (defined below) plus 40 basis
points plus accrued interest on such Bonds being redeemed to the date fixed for redemption.
The make whole optional redemption price ofthe Taxable Series 20I4B Bonds to be redeemed
will be calculated by an independent accounting firm, investmenl banking finn or financial advisor (the
"Calculation Agent"") retained by the City at the City's expense. The Bond Registrar and the City may
rely on the Calculation Agent's determination ofthe make whole optional redemption price and will not
be liable for such reliance. An Authorized Officer shall confirm and transmit the redemption price as so
calctilated on such dates and to such parlies as shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.
The "Treasury Rate" is, as of any redemption date, the yield to maturity as of such redemption
date of U.S. Treasury securities wilh a constant maturity (as compiled and published in the most recent
Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.15 (519) that has become publicly available four Business Days (as
defined below) prior to the redemption date (excluding inflation indexed securities) (or, if such Statistical
Release is no longer published, any publicly available source of similar market data)) most neariy equal to
the period from the redemption date to the maturity date of the Bonds of such series to be redeemed;
provided, however, that i f the period from the redemption date to such maturity date is less than one year,
the weekly average yield on actually,traded U.S. Treasury securities adjusted lo a constant maturity o f
one year will be used. "Business Day" means any day other than a day on which banks in New York,
New York, Chicago, Illinois, or the city in which the Bond Registrar maintains its designated office are
required or authorized to close. The Treasury Rate will be determined by an independent accounting
firm, investment banking firm or financial advisor retained by the City at the City's expense.
The City is authorized lo sell or waive any right the City may have to call the Taxable Series
2014B Bonds for optional redemption.

21

 Mandatory Redemption ofthe Taxable Series 20I4B Bonds. The Taxable Series 2014B Bonds
are subject lo mandatory redemption prior to maturity, in each case at par and accrued interest lo the date
fixed for redemption, on January I ofthe following years and in the following principal amounts:

Year

Taxable Scries 20I4B Bonds
Principal Amount

2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044

$ 37,770,000
50.625,000
57,670,000
2S,255,00O
32,255.000
34,300.000
101,745,000
108.170,000 (maturity)

Reduction of Mandatory Redemption .Amounts. In connection wilh any mandatory redemption of
Bonds of a series as described above, the principal amounts of Bonds o f such series to be mandatorily
redeemed in each year may be reduced through the earlier optional redemption thereof wilh any partial
optional redemptions of such Bonds of such series credited against Atture mandatory redemption
requirements in such order ofthe mandatory redemption dates as an Authorized Officer may detennine.
In addition, on or prior to the 60th day preceding any mandatory redempfion date of Bonds of a series, the
Bond Registrar may, and i f directed by an Authorized Officer shall, purchase Bonds o f such series
required to be retired on such mandatory redemption date at such prices as an Authorized Officer shall
determine. Any such Bonds so purchased shall be cancelled and the principal amount thereof shall be
credited against the payment required on such next mandatory redemption date with respect to such series
of Bonds.
Selection o f Bonds f o r Redemption. While the Series 2014A Bonds are registered in the bookentry system and so long as DTC or a successor securities depository is the sole registered owner of the
Bonds of such series, i f less than all o f t h e Bonds of such series, maturity and interest rale are to be
redeemed prior to maturity, the particular Bonds or portions o f such Bonds of such series will be selected
by lot by DTC or such successor securities depository in such manner as D TC or such successor securities
depository may detennine. See "THE BONDS — Book-Entry System." If the Series 2014A Bonds are
not registered in the book-entry system, the following procedures for the selection of the Bonds o f such
series shall apply. If fewer than all of the outstanding Bonds of such series, maturity and interest rate are
to be optionally redeemed, the Bonds of such series, maturity and interest rate to be called shall be called
from such maturities and within any maturity as may be determined by an Authorized Officer by lot. In
the event ofthe redemption of less than all Bonds of such series of the same maturity and interest rale, the
aggregate principal amount thereof to be redeemed shall be $5,000 or an integral multiple thereof and the
Bond Registrar shall assign lo each Bond of such series of such maturity and interest rate a distinctive
number for each $5,000 principal amount of such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so
assigned as many numbers as. at $5,000 for each number, shall equal the principal amount o f such Bonds
lo be redeemed. The Bonds of such series, maturity and interest rate to be redeemed shall be those to
which were assigned numbers so selected; provided that only so much of the principal amount of each
Bond of such series, maturity and interest rate shall be redeemed as shall equal $5,000 for each number
assigned to it and so selected. The Cily shall, at least 45 days prior to any optional redemption dale
(unless a shorter lime period shall be satisfactory to the Bond Registrar), notify the Bond Registrar of
such redemption date and ofthe principal amount of Bonds to be redeemed.
While the Taxable Series 20I4B Bonds are registered in the book-entry system and so long as
DTC or a successor securities depository is the sole registered owner ofthe Bonds of such series, i f less

22

 than all o f t h e Bonds o f such series are to be redeemed prior lo maturity, the particular Bonds o f such
series or portions thereof to be redeemed w i l l be selected on a pro-rata pass-through distribution o f
principal basis in accordance with DTC procedures, provided that, so long as the Taxable Series 2014B
Bonds are registered in the book-entry system, the selection for redemption o f the Bonds o f such series
w i l l be made in accordance with the operational arrangements o f DTC then in effect and, i f the D'TC
operational arrangements do not allow for redeinption on a pro-rata pass-through distribution o f principal
basis, the Taxable Series 2 0 I 4 B Bonds subject to redeinption w i l l be selected for redemption, in
accordance with DTC procedures, by lot.
It is the City's intent that the Taxable Series 201413 Bonds redeinption allocations made by D T C ,
the DTC Participants or such other intermediaries lhat may exist between the City and the Beneficial
Owners be made on a pro-rata pass-through distribution o f principal basis as described above. However,
none o f the City, the Underwriters or the Bond Registrar can provide any assurance that D T C , DTC's
Participants or any olher intermediary w i l l allocate the redemption o f t h e Bonds o f such series on such
basis. I f the D T C operational arrangements do not allow for the redemption o f t h e Taxable Series 2014B
Bonds on a pro-rata pass-through distribution o f principal basis as discussed above, then the Taxable
Series 2014B Bonds w i l l be selected for redemption in accordance with D T C procedures, by lot.
I f the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds are not registered in the book-entry system, any redemption o f
less than all o f the Bonds o f such series w i l l be allocated by the Bond Registrar among the registered
owners o f t h e Bonds o f such series on a pro-rata basis.
Notice o f Redemption. Unless waived by any owner o f t h e Bonds to be redeemed, notice o f t h e
call for any redemption o f such Bonds w i l l be given by the Bond Registrar on behalf o f the C i l y by
mailing the redemption notice by first class mail at least 30 days and not more than 60 days prior to the
date fixed for redemption to the registered owner o f the Bond or Bonds to' be redeemed at the address
shown on the registration books o f t h e Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing
by such registered owner to the Bond Registrar but the failure to mail any such notice or any defect
therein as lo any Bond shall not affect the validity o f the proceedings for the redemption o f any olher
Bond. Any notice o f redemption mailed as described in this paragraph w i l l be conclusively presumed to
have been given whether or not actually received by the addressee. With respect to an optional
redemption o f any series o f Bonds, such notice may state that said redemption is conditioned upon the
receipt by the Bond Registrar on or prior to the dale fixed for redemption o f moneys sufficient to pay the
redemption price o f Bonds o f such scries. I f such moneys are not so received, such redemption notice
w i l l be o f no force and effect, the Cily w i l l not redeem such Bonds and the Bond Registrar w i l l give
notice, in the same manner in which the notice o f redemption was given, that such moneys were not so
received and that such Bonds w i l l not be redeemed. Unless the notice o f redemption is made conditional
as described above, on or prior to any redemption date, the City is required to deposit with the Bond
Registrar an amount o f money sufficient to pay the redemption price o f all the Bonds or portions thereof
o f such series which are to be redeemed on that date.
Notice o f redemption having been given as described above, the Bonds, or portions thereof, to be
redeemed shall, on the redemption date, become due and payable at the redemption price specified in such
notice, and from and after such dale (unless the Cily shall default in the payment o f the redemption price
or unless, in the event o f a conditional notice as described above, the necessary moneys were not
deposited) such Bonds, or portions thereof, shall cease to bear or accrue interest.

 B o o k - E n t r y System
General
The following informaiion concernini^ DTC has been J'urnished hy DTC for use in this p//;c-/<a/
Slalement and neither the Cily nor any Underwriter
takes any responsibility
for its accuracy or
completeness.
D T C w i l l act as securities depository for the Bonds, 'fhe Bonds w i l l be issued as fully-registered
securities registered in the name o f Cede & Co. (DTC"s partnership nominee) or such other name as may
be requested by an authorized representative o f DTC. One fully-registered Bond certificate w i l l be issued
for each maturity o f each series o f the Bonds, each in the aggregate principal amount o f such maturity,
and w i l l be deposited wilh D T C .
D T C , the world's largest securities depository, is a limited-purpose trust coinpany organized
under the New York Banking Law, a "banking organization" within the meaning o f the New York
Banking Law, a member o f t h e Federal Reserve System, a "clearing corporation" within the meaning o f
the New York Uniform Cotnmercial Code, and a "clearing agency" registered pursuant to the provisions
o f Section I 7 A o f the Securities Exchange Act o f 1934 (the "Exchange A c t " ) . D T C holds and provides
asset servicing for over 3.5 million issues o f U.S. and non-U.S. equity issues, corporate and municipal
debt issues, and money market instruments (from over 100 countries) that D T C ' s participants ("Dire'ct
Participants") deposit with D T C . DTC also facilitates the post-trade settlement among Direct Participants
o f sales and olher securities transactions in deposited securities, through electronic computerized bookentry transfers and pledges between Direci Participants' accounts. This eliminates the need for physical
movement o f securities certificates. Direct Participants include both U.S. and non-U.S. securities
brokers and dealers, banks, trust companies, clearing corporations, and certain other organizations. D'I'C
is a wholly-owned subsidiary o f The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation ( " D T C C " ) . DTCC is the
holding company for DTC, National Securities Clearing Corporation and Fixed Income Clearing
Corporation, all o f which are registered clearing agencies. D T C C is owned by the users o f its regulated
subsidiaries. Access to the D T C system is also available to others such as both U.S. and non-U.S.
securities brokers and dealers, banks, trust companies, and clearing corporations that clear through or
maintain a custodial relationship with a Direct Participant, either directly or indirectly ("Indirect
Participants"). DTC has a Standard & Poor's rating o f A A + . The D T C Rules applicable to its
Participants are on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "Commission"'). More
infonnation about DTC can be found at www.dtcc.com.
Purchases o f Bonds under the DTC system must be made by or through Direct Participants,
which w i l l receive a credit for the Bonds on DTC's records. The ownership interest o f each actual
purchaser o f each Bond ("Beneficial Owner") is in turn lo be recorded on the Direct and Indirect
Participants' records. Beneficial Owners w i l l not receive written confirmation from D T C o f their
purchase. Beneficial Owners are, however, expected to receive written confirmations providing details o f
the transaction, as well as periodic statements o f their holdings, from the Direct or Indirect Participant
through which the Beneficial Owner entered into the transaction. Transfers o f ownership interests in the
Bonds are to be accomplished by entries made on the books o f Direct and Indirect Participants acting on
behalf o f Beneficial Owners. Beneficial Owners w i l l not receive certificates representing their ownership
interests in the Bonds, except in the event that use o f the Book-Entry System for the Bonds is
discontinued.
To facilitate subsequeni transfers, all Bonds deposited by Direct Participants with D T C are
registered in the name o f DTC's partnership nominee. Cede & Co., or such other name as may be
requested by an authorized represenlalive o f DTC. The deposit o f Bonds with D T C and their registration

24

 in the name of Cede & Co. or such other DTC nominee do not effect any change in beneficial ownership.
DTC has no knowledge of the actual Beneficial Owners of the Bonds; D fC's records reficct only the'
identity ofthe Direct Participants to whose accounts such Bonds are credited, which may or may not be
the Beneficial Owners. The Direct and Indirect Participants will remain responsible for keeping account
of their holdings on behalf of their customers.
Conveyance of notices and other communicafions by DTC to Direct Participants, by Direct
Participants to Indirect Participants, and by Direct Participants and Indirect Participants to Beneficial
Owners will be governed by arrangements among them, subject to any statutory or regulatory
requirements as may be in effect from time to time.
Redemption noliccs shall be sent to DTC. I f less than all of the Bonds within an issue are being
redeemed, DTC's usual practice is to determine by lot the amount of the interest of each Direct
Participant in such issue to be redeemed. In accordance with DTC's procedures, the City has directed the
Bond Registrar to notify DTC that in the event that less than all of the Taxable Series 20I4B are
redeemed any such redemption shall be on a pro-rata basis.
Neither DTC nor Cede & Co. (nor any other D TC nominee) will consent or vote with respect to
Bonds unless authorized by a Direct Participant in accordance with DTC's MM I Procedures. Under its
usual procedures, D'TC mails an Omnibus Proxy to the City as soon as possible after the record date. 'The
Omnibus Proxy assigns Cede & Co.'s consenting or voting rights to those Direct Participants to whose
accounts the Bonds are credited on the record date (identified in a listing attached to the Omnibus Proxy).
Redemption proceeds and principal and interest payments on the Bonds will be made to Cede &
Co., or such other nominee as may be requested by an authorized representative of D'TC. D TC's practice
is to credit Direct Participants' accounts upon DTC's receipt of funds and corresponding detail
infonnation from the City or Bond Registrar, on payable date in accordance with their respective holdings
shown on D'TC's records. Payments by Participants to Beneficial Owners will be governed by standing
instructions and customary practices, as is the case with securities held for the accounts o f customers in
bearer form or registered in "street name," and will be the responsibility of such Participant and not of
DTC. the Bond Registrar, or the City, subject to any statutory or regulatory requirements as may be in
effect from time to time. Payment of redemption proceeds and principal and interest payments to Cede &
Co. (or such other nominee as may be requested by an authorized representative of D'TC) is the
responsibility ofthe City or Bond Registrar, disbursement of such payments to Direct Participants will be
the responsibility of DTC. and disbursement of such payments to the Beneficial Owners will be the
responsibility of Direct and Indirect Participants.
DTC may discontinue providing its services as depository.with respect to the Bonds at any time
by giving reasonable notice to the City or Bond Registrar. Under such circumstances, in the event that a
successor depository is not obtained, Bond certificates are required to be printed and delivered.
Discontinued Use of Book-Entry System

-'

'The City may decide to discontinue use of the system of book entry only transfers through D TC
(or a successor securities depository). In that event. Bond certificates will be printed and delivered to
DTC.

25

 Procedures May Change
Although DTC h;is agreed to these procedures in order to facilitate transfers of securities among
DTC and its Participants, DTC is under no obligation to perform or continue to perform these procedures
and these procedures may be discontinued and may be changed at any time by DTC.
'The information in this section concerning D'TC and the Book-Entry System luis been obtained
from sources that the City believes to be reliable, but neither the City nor any Underwriter takes any
responsibility for the accuracy thereof
Additional Information
For every transfer and exchange of the Bonds, DTC, the Bond Registrar and the Participants may
charge the beneficial owner a sum sufficient to cover any tax, fee or olher charge that may be imposed in
relation thereto.
NEITHER THE CITY NOR THE BOND REGISTRAR WILL HAVE ANY RESPONSIBILITY
OR OBLIGATION TO ANY PARTlCIPAN'fS, OR TO THE PERSONS FOR WTIOM THEY ACT AS
NOMINEES WI TH RESPECT TO THE BONDS, OR TO ANY BENEFICIAL OWNER I N RESPECT
OF THE ACCURACY OF ANY RECORDS MAIN TAINED BY DTC OR ANY PARTICIPANT OR
INDIRECT PARTICIPANT OF ANY AMOUNT IN RESPECT OF TIIE PRINCIPAL OR IN TEREST
ON THE BONDS, OR ANY NOTICE WHICH IS PERMI TTED OR REQUIRED TO BE GIVEN WITH
RESPECT TO THE BONDS, INCLUDIMG ANY NOTICE OF REDEMPTION, THE SELECTION OF
SPECIFIC BONDS FOR REDEMPTION, OR ANY OTHER ACTION TAKEN, BY DTC AS
REGISTERED OWNER OF THE BONDS.
In reading this Official Stateinent it should be understood that while the Bonds are in the BookEntry System, references in other sections of this Official Stateinent to registered owners should be read
to include the person for which a Participant acquires an interest in the Bonds, bul (a) all rights o f
ownership must be exercised through DTC and the Book-Entry System, and (b) notices that are to be
given to registered owners will be given only to DTC.
Bonds Not Presented for Payment
If any Bond is not presented for payment when the principal amount thereof becomes due, either
at maturity or at a date fixed for redemption thereof or otherwise, and i f moneys sufficient to pay such
Bond are held by the Bond Registrar for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond, the Bond
Registrar shall hold such moneys for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond without liability to
the registered owner for interest. The registered owner of such Bond thereafter shall be restricted
exclusively to such funds for satisfaction of any claims relating to such Bond.
Defeasance
If payment or provision for payment is made, to or for the registered owners of all or a portion of
the Bonds, and the principal of and interest due and to become due on any Bond at the times and in the
manner stipulated therein, and there is paid or caused to be paid to the Bond Registrar or such bank or
trust company as shall be designated by an Authorized Officer (such bank or trust company hereinafter
referred to as a "Defeasance Escrow Agent""), all sums of money due and to become due according to the
provisions ofthe Bond Ordinance, then the Bond Ordinance and the estate and rights granted by ihe Bond
Ordinance shall cease, terminate and be void as to those Bonds or portions thereof except for purposes of
registration, transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations.

26.

 Any Bond shall be deemed lo be paid within the meaning o f the Bond Ordinance when payment
o f t h e principal o f any such Bond, plus interest thereon to the due date thereof (whether such due date be
by reason o f maturity or upon redemption as provided in the Bond Ordinance or otherwise), either (a)
shall have been made or cau.scd to have been made in accordance w i l h the terms thereof or (b) .shall have
been provided for by irrevocably depositing with the applicable Bond Registrar or a Defeasance Escrow
Agent, in trust and exclusively for such payment, (1) moneys sufficient to make such payment or ( 2 ) ( A )
direct obligations o f the United Stales o f America; (B) obligations o f agencies o f the United Stales o f
America, the timely payment o f principal o f and interest on which are guaranteed by the United States o f
America; (C) obligations o f t h e following agencies: Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. ( F H L M C ) debt
obligations. Farm Credit System (fonnerly: Federal Land Banks, Federal Intermediate Credit Banks, and
Banks for Cooperatives) debt obligations. Federal Home Loan Banks ( F H L Banks) debt obligations,
Fannie Mae debt obligatiims. Financing Corp. (FICO) debt obligations. Resolution Funding Corp.
(REFCORP) debt obligations, and U.S. Agency for International Development (U.S. A . l . D . ) Guaranteed
notes; (D) pre-refunded municipal obligations defined as follows: any bonds or other obligations o f any
state o f t h e United Stales o f America or o f any agency, instrumentality or local govemmental unit o f any
such slate which are not callable at the option o f t h e obligor prior to maturity or as to which irrevocable
instructions have been given by the obligor lo call on the date specified in the notice; or (E) instruments
evidencing an ownership interest in obligations described in the preceding clauses ( A ) , (B) and (C), or (3)
a combination o f the investments described in clauses ( I ) and (2) above, such amounts so deposited being
available or maturing as to principal and interest in such amounts and at such limes, without consideration
o f any reinvestment thereof, as w i l l insure the availability o f sufficient moneys to make such payment (all
as confirmed by a nationally recognized firm o f independent public accountants). A t such times as a
Bond shall be deemed to be paid under the Bond Ordinance, il shall no longer be secured by or entitled lo
the benefits o f the Bond Ordinance, except for the purposes o f registration, transfer and exchange o f
Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations.
Registration and T r a n s f e r s
The books for the registration and for the transfer o f each series o f Bonds w i l l be kept at the
designated corporate trust office o f the Bond Regi.strar. See " THE B O N D S — Book-Entry System" for a
discussion o f registration and transfer o f the beneficial ownership interests in Bonds while they are in the
Book-Entry System. The following provisions relate to the registration and transfer o f Bonds when the
Bonds are in certificated form.
Upon surrender for transfer o f any Bond at the designated corporate trust office o f ihe Bond
Registrar, duly endorsed by. or accompanied by a written instrument or instruments o f transfer in form
satisfactory to the Bond Registrar and duly executed by the registered owner or its attorney duly
authorized in writing, the City shall execute and the Bond Registrar shall authenticate, date and deliver in
the name o f the transferee or transferees one or more folly registered Bonds o f the same series and
maturity o f authorized denominations, for a like principal amount. A n y Bond or Bonds may be
exchanged at said office o f t h e Bond Registrar for a like aggregate principal amount o f Bonds o f t h e same
series, interest rate and maturity o f other authorized denominations.
N o service charge shall be made for any transfer or exchange o f Bonds, but the City or the Bond
Registrar may require payment o f a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other governmental charge that
may be imposed in connection with any transfer or exchange o f Bonds, except that no such payment may
be required in the case o f the issuance o f a Bond or Bonds for the unredeemed porlion o f a Bond
surrendered for redemption.

27

 'The Bond Registrar shall not be required to transfer or exchange (a) any Bond after notice calling
such Bond for redemption has been mailed, or (b) any Bond during a period of 15 days next preceding
mailing of a notice of redemption of such Bond.
Registered Owner Treated as Absolute Owner
The person in whose name any Bond shall be registered shall be deemed and regarded as the
absolute owner thereof for all purposes, and payment ofthe principal of, redemption premium, i f any, or
inlerest on any Bond, as appropriate, shall be made only to or upon the order of the registered owner
thereof or its legal representative. All such payments shall be valid and elTectual to satisfy and discharge
the liability upon such Bond to the extent ofthe sum or sums so paid.
S E C U R I T Y FOR T H E BONDS
General Obligation of the City
The Bonds arc direct and general obligations ofthe Cily and shall be payable, as to principal and
inlerest, from any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City legally available for
such purpose, including, but not limited to, the proceeds of a direct annual tax levied by the Cily in the
Bond Ordinance upon all taxable properly located in the City sufficient to pay the principal of and interest
on the Bonds. The City has pledged its full faith and credit to the payinent of the Bonds. See
APPENDIX B — "FINANCIAL AND OTHER CI TY INFORMATION — Property Tax Supported
Bonded Debt — Debt Service Schedule." In addition to the Bonds, the City has olher direct and general
obligations previously issued and outstanding under separate ordinances adopted by the City Council.
See APPENDIX B — "FINANCIAL AND o'^THER CI TY INFORMATION — Property Tax Supported
Bonded Debt — Computation of Direct and Overlapping Bonded Debt."'
Under the Bond Ordinance, the Cily is obligated to appropriate amounts sufficient to pay
principal of and inlerest on the Bonds for the years such amounts are due, and the City covenants in the
Bond Ordinance to take timely action as required by law to carry out such obligation, but, i f for any such
year the City fails to do so, the Bond Ordinance constitutes a continuing appropriation of such amounts
without any further action by the City.
If the taxes to be applied to the payment of the Bonds are not available in time lo make any
payments of principal of or interest on the Bonds when due, then the appropriate fiscal officers ofthe City
are directed in the Bond Ordinance to make such payments from any other moneys, revenues, receipts,
income, assets or funds of the City that are legally available for lhat purpose in advancement of the
collection of such taxes.
Property Tax Limit Considerations
The City. In 1993, the City Council adopted an ordinance (the "Cily Tax Limitation Ordinance")
limiting the City's aggregate property tax levy for any one year to an amount equal to the prior year's
aggregate property tax levy (subject to certain adjustments) plus the lesser of five perceni or the increase
in the Consumer Price Index. The City 'Tax Limitation Ordinance also established a safe harbor amount
for each year equal to a specified 1994 base amount increased annually by the lesser of five percent or the
increase in the Consumer Price Index. See APPENDIX A — "REAL PROPERTY T/VX SYSTEM AND
LIMITS — Properly Tax Limit Considerations — The City." Pursuant to the Bond Ordinance, the taxes
levied by the City for the payment of principal and interest on the Bonds are not subject lo the limitations
contained in the City Tax Limitation Ordinance.

28

 State o f Illinois. The City continues lo be excluded from property lax limits imposed by the State
on non-home rule units o f local govemment in Cook County and the five adjacent counties. The property
tax limitations imposed by the State differ from those contained in the City Tax Limitation Ordinance.
There can be no'assurance that legislation applying such property tax limitations to the City w i l l not be
enacted by the Illinois General Assembly. For additional information, see " T H E C I T Y " and A P P E N D I X
A — " R E A L PROPERTY T A X S Y S T E M A N D L I M I T S — Property Tax L i m i t Considerations — State
o f Illinois."'
Bankruptcy
Municipalities cannot file for protection under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code unless specifically
authorized to be a debtor by state law or by a governmental officer or organization empowered by state
law to authorize such entity to be a debtor in a bankruptcy proceeding. Illinois law does not currently
permit municipalities lo do so, except under the provisions o f t h e Local Government Financial Planning
and Supervision Act, 50 ILCS 320, applicable only to units o f local government which have a population
under 25.000. It is unlikely that the broad grant o f powers to home rule municipalities under the Illinois
Constitution would satisfy the specific authorization required in order to permit the City to file for
protection under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
Insured Bonds
The scheduled payment o f principal o f and interest on the Scries 2 0 I 4 A Bonds maturing on (and
only on) January I , 2031 (the "Insured Bonds"), when due w i l l be guaranteed under an insurance policy
to be issued concurrently with the delivery o f t h e Insured Bonds by Assured Guaranty Municipal Corp.
( " A G M " ) . See A P P E N D I X G — " B O N D I N S U R A N C E . "
Additional General Obligation Debt
The City may issue from time to fime notes and bonds and other obligations that are general
obligations o f t h e City and that are secured by the full faith and credit o f the City, which may or may- not
be subject to the provisions o f t h e City Tax Limitation Ordinance.
LITIGATION
There is no litigation pending in any court or, lo the knowledge o f the City, threatened,
questioning the corporate existence o f t h e City, or which would restrain or enjoin the issuance or delivery
o f the Bonds, or which concerns the proceedings o f the City taken in connection w i t h the Bonds or the
Cily's pledge o f its full faith, credit and resources to the payment o f the Bonds.
The City is a defendant in various pending and threatened individual and class action litigation
relating principally to claims arising from contracts, personal injury, property damage, police conduct,
discrimination, civil rights actions and other matters. The Cily believes that the ultimate resolution o f
these matters w i l l not have a material adverse effect on the financial position o f the City.
Property Tax Rate Objections: 2005-2010. 'The City's property tax levies for 2005 through 2010
varied between approximately $720 million and $835 million annually, excluding the School Building
and Improvement Fund levy.
See A P P E N D I X B — " F I N A N C I A L A N D O T H E R C I T Y
I N F O R M A T I O N — P r o p e r t y Tax Levies by Fund." Objections have been filed in the Circuit Court o f
Cook County (the "Circuit Court") to these levies, which objections remain pending. The Cily is unable
to predict the outcome o f the proceedings conceming the objections.

29

 E2 Nightclub Litigation. The City was a defendant in 57 wrongful death and personal injury
lawsuits arising out of a stampede of patrons at the E2 Nightclub on February 17. 2003. The sole
remaining claim against the Cily in this litigation was that police officers blocked, locked, or jammed
access to the entry-exit door, causing a stampede of patrons to pile up on the only stairway leading to the
door. On April I I , 2012, the circuit court granted the Cily's motion for summary judgment and dismissed
the sole remaining claim against the City with prejudice. The City does not know whether the plaintiffs
will appeal the issuance of summary judgment. If the plaintiffs do appeal, the Cily will vigorously defend
the circuit court's judgment in the appellate court.
Parking Meters Litigation. On December 4, 2008, the City entered into the Chicago Metered
Parking System Concession Agreement (the "Concession Agreement") with Chicago Parking Meters,
LLC (the "Concessionaire""), whereby the Concessionaire paid the City approximately $1,151 billion, and
the City granted the Concessionaire the right to operate the City's metered parking system, including the
right to collect revenues derived from the metered parking spaces. 'The City Comptroller is a defendant in
a case brought by the Independent Voters of Illinois Independent Precinct Organization ("IVI-IPO") and
an individual plaintiff, arguing that certitin provisions of the Concession Agreement are illegal or
unconstitutional, and requesting an injuncfion against certain expenditures in connection with the
Concession Agreement. 'The plaintiffs later added the Concessionaire as a defendant. The Circuit Court
dismissed part of the case and granted summary judgment to the defendants on the rest; the plaintiffs have
appealed. While the City cannot predict the outcome of this litigation, the City will continue to defend
the case vigorously.
Automated Red-Light Ticketing Litigation. In July 2010, individual plaintiffs, seeking to maintain
a class action, filed suit against the City and other defendants to challenge the City's use since 2003 of an
automated red-light ticketing system. The plaintiffs allege, among other things, that the 2006 statute
authorizing eight Illinois counties lo enact red-light camera ordinances is unconstitutional local legislation
and that the City lacks home-rule authority to enact a red-light camera ordinance and adjudicate violations
administratively. The plaintiff's seek an injunction against the operation ofthe City's red-light ticketing
system and restitution of fines paid. The Circuit Court granted the Cily's motion to dismiss the case; the
Illinois Appellate Court affirmed. 'The plaintiffs then sought and were granted review in the Illinois
Supreme Court. It is not known when the case will be decided. The City will continue to defend this
matter vigorously.
Parking Garages .Arhilration Claim. On November 3, 2006, the City entered into the Chicago
Downtown Public Parking System Concession and Lease Agreement (the "Garages Lease Agreement'")
with Chicago Loop Parking. LLC ("CLP"), by which CLP was granted a 99-year concession to operate
the public parking garages commonly referred to as Millennium Park. Grant Park North. Grant Park
South and East .Monroe (collectively the "CLP Garages""). The Garages Lease Agreement includes a
provision by which certain events can require the City to compensate CLP. One of those events is the
granfing of a license for the operation of a public garage that was nol in existence as of the date of the
Garages Lease Agreement, within a certain distance from the CLP Garages. CLP has asserted a claim
under this provision. Pursuant to the Garages Lea.se Agreement, the matter was referred to the American
Arbitration Association for arbitration. The arbitration panel issued an award of approximately $59
million in favor of CLP. The City filed a petition in the Circuit Court to enter a judgment on the award,
stay the judgment, and modify the judgment. 'The Circuit Court entered and stayed the judgment but
dismissed the City's request for modification. The City has filed an appeal. The Cily is actively
defending the ctise and cannot predict the outcome at this time.
Parking Garages I.itigalion. On February 13. 2013. IVI-IPO and an individual plaintiff filed a
complaint challenging the facial validity of the Garages Lease Agreement. The plaintiffs allege that
certain compensation provisions in the Garages Lease Agreement violate the legal prohibition against the

30

 delegation, by a governmental entity, of its police powers lo a private parly. On January 16, 2014, the
Circuit Court granted the motions to dismiss that were filed by the City and CLP. It is not known whether
the plaintiffs will appeal the ruling ofthe Circuit Court; if they do, the Cily will continue lo defend this
case vigorously.
HUD Certifications Litigation. 'This is a False Claims Act case in which Albert C. Tianna (the
"Relator"') has sued the City seeking to recover funds on behalf of the U.S. govemment. The Relator
alleges that the City has an affinnative obligation to dismantle racial and ethnic segregation in housing
under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Fair Housing Act and lhat the Cily has falsely
claimed to do so in certifications made by the City to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development ("HUD") as a condition of receiving federal funding through certain HUD-funded grant
programs. 'The Relator seeks the return to the federal government of approximately $880 million in funds
received by the City under these programs and asks the court lo treble that amount, as allowed by statute.
'The City has moved to dismiss the complaint. The City is actively defending the case and cannot predict
the outcome al this time.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS
The basic financial statements ofthe City as of and for the year ended December 31, 2012,
included in APPENDIX C to this Official Statement, have been audited by Deloitte & 'Touche LLP,
independent auditors, as stated in their report appearing in APPENDIX C.
RATINGS
The Bonds arc rated "Baal"" (negative outlook) by Moody's Investors Service, Inc., "A+""
(negative outlook) by Standard & Poor's, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies. Inc., and "A-"
(negative outlook) by Fitch, Inc., based upon each rating agency's assessment of the creditworthiness of
the City.
The Insured Bonds are rated "AA-" by S&P and "A2" by Moody's, contingent upon issuance of
the Policy by AGM. See APPENDIX G — "BOND INSURANCE."
A rating reflects only the view ofthe rating agency giving such rating. An explanation ofthe
significance of such rating may be obtained from such organization. 'I here is no assurance lhat any rating
will continue for any given period of time or that any rating will not be revised downward or withdrawn
entirely if, in the judgment ofthe rating agency, circumstances so warrant. Any such downward revision
or withdrawal of a rating may have an adverse effect on the price at which the Bonds may be resold.
CO-FINANCIAL ADVISORS
The City has retained Andrew Kalotay Associates, Inc. and Columbia Capital Management LLC
to act as co-financial advisors (the "Co-Financial Advisors'") in connection with the issuance and sale of
the Bonds. Under the tenns of their engagement, the Co-Financial Advisors will deliver a letter to the
Cily regarding the faimess of the purchase price paid by the Underwriters to the Cily for the Bonds.
Under the tenns of their engagement, the Co-Financial Advisors are not obligated to undertake, and have
not undertaken to make, an independent verification of or to assume responsibility for the accuracy,
completeness or fairness of the information contained in this Official Statement.

31

  .

CERTAIN VERIFICATIONS
Robert Thomas, CPA, LLC, Shawnee Mission, Kansas (the "Verifier"), upon delivery of the
Bonds, will deliver to the City, Co-Bond Counsel and the Underwriters a report staling lhat the firm, at
the request of the City and the Underwriters, has reviewed the mathematical accuracy of certain
computations based on certain assutnptions relating to (i) the sufficiency of Ihe principal and interest
received from the investmenl in Governmental Obligations, together wilh any initial cash deposit, to meet
the timely payment ofthe applicable principal or redemption price of and interest on the Refunded Bonds,
as described under "PLAN OF FINANCE" and (ii) the yields on the Series 20I4A Bonds and on the
Government Obligations.
The Verifier will express no opinion on the attainability of any assumptions or Ihe tax-exempt
status o f t h e Series 20I4A Bonds. The computations verified by the Verifier are intended in part to
support conclusions of the City and Co-Bond Counsel conceming the federal income tax status of the
Scries 20I4A Bonds.
UNDERWRITING
The Underwriters have agreed, subject to certain conditions, to purchase the Series 20I4A Bonds
at a price equal to $435,549,851 (which represents the aggregate principal amount o f t h e Series 20I4A
Bonds less an Underwriters' discount of $2,287,918 and plus a net offering premium of $5,207,769), and
the Taxable Series 20I4B Bonds at a price equal to $448,135,142 (which represents the aggregate
principal amounl ofthe Taxable Series 2014B Bonds less an Underwriters" discount of $2,654,858).
The obligation of the Underwriters lo accept delivery of the Bonds is subject lo various
conditions set forth in a Bond Purchase Agreement between the Underwriters and the Cily. The
Underwriters are obligated to purchase all of the Bonds if any ofthe Bonds are purchased.
Wells Fargo Securities is the trade name for certain securities-related capital markets and
investment banking services of Wells Fargo & Company and its subsidiaries, including Wells Fargo
Bank, National Association.
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association ("WFBNA"), senior underwriter of the Bonds, has
entered into an agreement (the "Distribution Agreement") with its affiliate. Wells Eargo Advisors, LLC
("WFA"), for the distribution of certain municipal securities offerings, including the Bonds. Pursuant to
the Distribution Agreement, WFBNA will share a portion of its underwriting with respect to the Bonds
with WFA. WFBNA also utilizes the distribution capabilities of its affiliates. Wells Fargo Securities,
LLC ("WFSLLC"') and Wells Fargo Institutional Securities. LLC ("WFIS"). for Ihe distribution of
municipal securities offerings, including the Bonds. In connection with utilizing the distribution
capabilities of WFSLLC. WFBNA pays a portion of WFSLLC's expenses based on its municipal
securities iransactions. WFBNA, WFSLLC, WFIS, and WFA are each wholly-owned subsidiaries of
Wells Fargo & Company.
,
BMO Capital Markets is the trade name for certain capital markets and investment banking
services of Bank of Montreal and its subsidiaries, including BMO Capital Markets GKST Inc. which is a
direct, wholly-owned subsidiary of BMO Financial Corp. which is itself a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Bank of Montreal.
Loop Capital Markets LLC ("LCM") as entered into distribution agreements (each a "Distribution
Agreement") with each of UBS Financial Services Inc. ("UBSFS") and Deutsche Bank Securifies Inc.
("DBS") for the retail distribution of certain securities offerings at the original issue prices. Pursuant to

 each Distribution Agreement, each of UBSFS and DBS will purchase Bonds from LCM at the original
issue prices less a negotiated portion o f t h e selling concession applicable to any Bonds that such firm
sells.
North South Capital has entered into an agreement with BMO Capital Markets GKS T Inc.
whereby BMO Capital Markets is compensated for the assumption ofthe underwriting and retention risk
of the Bonds in the fonn of a percentage of the overall commission (takedown) paid to North South
Capital.
George K. Baum & Company and Pershing LLC, a subsidiary of The Bank of New York Mellon
Corporation, have a distribution agreement enabling Pershing LLC to obtain and distribute certain
municipal securities underwritten by or allocated to George K. Baum & Company. Under the
distribution agreement, George K. Baum & Company will allocate a portion of received takedowns, fees
or commissions to Pershing for bonds sold under the agreement.
Williams Capital has entered into negotiated dealer agreements ("Dealer Agreements"") with TD
Ameritrade and E*Trade Securities LLC for the retail distribution of certain securities offerings at the
original issue prices. Pursuant to the Dealer Agreements. TD Ameritrade and E*TRADE Securities LLC
may purchase Bonds from Williams Capital at the original issue price less a negotiated portion of the
selling concession applicable lo any Bonds that such firm sells.
TAX M A T T E R S
The Series 2014A Bonds
Federal tax law contains a number of requirements and restrictions which apply to the Series
2014A Bonds, including investment restrictions, periodic payments of arbitrage profits to the United
Stales, requirements regarding the proper use of bond proceeds and the facilities financed therewith, and
certain olher matters. The City has covenanted to comply with all requirements that must be satisfied in
order for the interest on the Series 2014A Bonds to be excludable from gross income for federal income
tax purposes. Failure to comply with certain o f such covenants could cause interest on the Series 2014A
Bonds to become includible in gross income for federal income tax purposes retroactively to the date of
issuance of the Series 2014A Bonds.
Subject to the City's compliance with the above-referenced covenants, under present law, in the
opinion of Co-Bond Counsel, interest on the Series 20I4A Bonds is excludable from the gross income of
the owners thereof for federal income tax purposes and is not included as an item of tax preference in
computing the federal alternative minimum tax for individuals and corporations, but inlerest on the Series
2014A Bonds is taken into account, however, in computing an adjustment used in determining the federal
alternative minimum tax for certain corporations.
In rendering its opinion, Co-Bond Counsel will rely upon certifications ofthe City with respect lo
certain material facts within the City's knowledge and upon the mathematical computations o f the yield
on the Bonds and the yield on certain investments by the Verifier. Additionally, Co-Bond Counsel will
assume, without independent verification, the validity and lax-exempt status ofthe Refunded Bonds to the
extent described in the opinions of bond counsel for the Refunded Bonds delivered in connection with the
issuance thereof Co-Bond Counsel's opinion represents its legal judgment based upon its review ofthe
law and the facts that it deems relevant to render such opinion and is not a guarantee of a result.
The Code includes provisions for an alternative minimum tax ("AMT"') for corporations in
addition to the corporate regular tax in certiin cases. The AMT, i f any, depends upon the corporation"s

 alternative minimum taxable income ( " A M T l " ' ) , which is the corporation's taxable income with certain
adjustments. One o f ihe adjustment items used in computing the AM'TI o f a corporaiion (with certain
exceptions) is an amount equal U) 75% o f t h e excess o f such corporation's "adjusted current earnings"
over an amounl equal lo its A M T l (before such adjustment item and the alternative tax net operating loss
deduction). "Adjusted current earnings" would include certain tax-exempt interest, including interest on
the Series 2014A Bonds.
Ownership o f t h e Series 2014A Bonds may result in collateral federal income tax consequences
to certain taxpayers, including, without limitation, corporations subject to the branch profits tax, financial
institutions, certain insurance companies, certain S corporations, individual recipients o f Social Security
or Railroad Retirement benefits and taxpayers who may be deemed to have incurred (or continued)
indebtedness lo purchase or carry tax-exempt obligations. Prospective purchasers o f the Series 2014A
Bonds should consult their tax advisors as to applicability o f any such collateral consequences.
The issue price (the "Issue Price") for each maturity o f the Series 2 0 I 4 A Bonds is the price at
which a substantial amount o f such maturity o f t h e Scries 2 0 I 4 A Bonds is first sold to the public. The
Issue Price o f a maturity o f t h e Series 2 0 I 4 A Bonds may be dilTerenl from the price set forth, or the price
corresponding to the yield set forth, on the inside cover page hereof
I f the Issue Price o f a maturity o f the Series 2014A Bonds is less than the principal amount
payable at maturity, the difference between the Issue Price o f each such maturity, i f any, o f the Series
2014A Bonds (the " O l D Bonds") and the principal amounl payable at maturity is original issue discount.
For an investor who purchases an O l D Bond in the initial public offering at the Issue Price for
such maturity and who holds such O l D Bond to its stated maturity, subject to the condition that the City
complies with the covenants discussed above, (a) the full amount o f original issue discount w i t h respect to
such O l D Bond constitutes interest which is excludable from gross income o f the owner thereof for
federal income tax purposes; (b) such owner w i l l nol realize taxable capital gajn or market discount upon
payment o f such O l D Bond at its slated maturity; (c) such original issue discount is not included as an
item o f fax preference in computing the alternative ininimum tax for individuals and corporations under
the Code, but is taken into account in computing an adjustment used in determining the alternative
minimum lax for certain corporations under the Code, as described above; and (d) the accretion o f
original issue discount in each year may result in an alternative minimum tax liability for corporations or
certain other collateral federal income tax consequences in each year even though a corresponding cash
payment may not be received until a later year. Based upon the stated position o f the Illinois Department
o f Revenue under Illinois income tax law, accreted original issue discount on such O I D Bonds is subject
to taxation as it accretes, even though there may not be a corresponding cash payment until a later year.
Owners o f O I D Bonds should consult their own lax advisors with respect lo the slate and local lax
consequences o f original issue discount on such O I D Bonds.
Owners o f Series 2014A Bonds who dispose o f Series 2 0 I 4 A Bonds prior to the stated maturity
(whether by sale, redemption or otherwise), purchase Series 2014A Bonds in the initial public offering,
but at a price different from the Issue Price or purchase Series 2 0 I 4 A Bonds subsequent lo the initial
public offering should consult their own tax advisors.
I f a Series 2014A Bond is purchased at any time for a price that is less than the Series 2014A
Bond's stated redemption price at maturity or, in the case o f an O I D Bond, its Issue Price plus accreted
original issue discount (the "Revised Issue Price"), the purchaser w i l l be treated as having purchased a
Series 2014A Bond with market discount subject to the market discount rules o f the Code (unless a
statutory de minimis rule applies). Accrued market discount is treated as taxable ordinary income and is
recognized when a Series 2014A Bond is disposed o f (to the extent such accrued discount does not

34

 exceed gain realized) or, at the purchaser's election, as it accrues. Such treatment would apply to any
purchaser who purchases an O I D Bond for a price lhat is less than its Revised Issue Price. The
applicability o f t h e market discount rules may adversely affect the liquidity or secondary market price o f
such Series 2014A Bond. Purchasers should consult their own tax advisors regarding the potential
implications o f market discount wilh respect lo the Series 2014A Bonds.
A n investor may purchase a Series 2014A Bond at a price in excess o f its stated principal amount.
Such excess is characterized for federal income lax purposes as "bond p r e m i u m " and must be amortized
by an investor on a constant yield basis over the remaining temi o f t h e Series 2 0 I 4 A Bond in a manner
that lakes inlo account potential call dates and call prices. A n investor cannot deduct amortized bond
premium relating to a lax-exempt bond. The amortized bond premium is treated as a reduction in the taxexempt inlerest received. As bond premium is amortized, it reduces the investor's basis in the Series
2014A Bond. Investors who purchase a Series 2014A Bond al a premium should consult their own tax
advisors regarding the amortization o f bond premium and its effect on the Series 2014 A Bond's basis for
purposes o f computing gain or loss in connection with the sale, exchange, redemption or early retirement
o f t h e Series 2014A Bond.
'There arc or may be pending in the Congress o f t h e United States legislative proposals, including
some that carry retroactive effective dates, that, il"enacted, could alter or amend the federal tax matters
referred to above or afTect the market value o f t h e Series 2 0 I 4 A Bonds. It cannot be predicted whether or
in what form any such proposal might be enacted or whether, i f enacted, it would apply to bonds issued
prior to enactment. Prospective purchasers o f t h e Series 2 0 I 4 A Bonds should consult their own tax
advisors regarding any pending or proposed federal tax legislation. Co-Bond Counsel express no opinion
regarding any pending or proposed federal tax legislation.
The Intemal Revenue Service (the "Service") has an ongoing program o f auditing tax-exempt
obligations to determine whether, in the viev^ o f the Service, interest on such tax-exempt obligations is
includible in the gross income o f the owners thereof for federal income tax purposes. It cannot be
predicled whether or not the Service w i l l commence an audit o f t h e Series 2 0 I 4 A Bonds. I f an audit is
commenced, under current procedures the Service may treat the City as a taxpayer and the Series 2014A
Bondholders may have no right to participate in such procedure. The commencement o f an audit could
adversely affect the market value and liquidity o f the Series 2014A Bonds until the audit is concluded,
regardless o f t h e ultimate outcome.
Payments o f interest on, and proceeds o f the sale, redemption or maturity' o f tax-exempt
obligations, including the Series 2 0 I 4 A Bonds, are in certain cases required to be reported to the Service.
Additionally, backup withholding may apply to any such payments to any Series 2 0 I 4 A Bond owner who
fails lo provide an accurate Form W-9 Request for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification, or a
substantially identical form, or to any Series 2 0 I 4 A Bond owner who is notified by the Service o f a
failure to report any interest or dividends required to be. shown on federal income tax returns. The
reporting and backup withholding requirements do not affect the excludability o f such interest from gross
income for federal tax purposes.
The Taxable Scries 2014B Bonds
Interest on the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds is includible in gross income for federal income
purposes. Ownership o f the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds may result in other federal income tax
consequences lo certain taxpayers. Taxable Series 201413 Bondholders should consult their tax advisors
with respect to the inclusion o f interest on the 'Taxable Series 2014B Bonds in gross income for federal
income tax purposes and any collateral tax consequences.

 The City may deposit moneys or securities with a Defeasance Escrow Agent pursuant to the
terms ofthe Bond Ordinance in such amount and manner as to cause the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds lo
be deemed lo be no longer secured by ihe Bond Ordinance (a "defeasance"). See " THE BONDS Defeasance." A defeasance o f t h e Taxable Series 2014B Bonds may be treated as an exchange of the
Taxable Series 20I4B Bonds by the holders thereof and may therefore result in gain or loss to the holders.
Bondholders should consult their own tax tidvisors about the consequences (if any) of such a defeasance.
The City is required to provide notice of defeasance of the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds as a Reportable
Event under its Continuing Disclosure Undertaking. See "SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE."
State and Local Considerations
Interest on the Bonds is not exempt from present State of Illinois income taxes. Ownership of the
Bonds may result in other state and local tax consequences to certain taxpayers. Co-Bond Counsel
express no opinion regarding any such collateral consequences arising with respect to the Bonds.
Prospective purchasers of the Bonds should consult their tax advisors regarding the applicability of any
such state and local taxes.
APPROVAL OF L E G A L M A T T E R S
Certain legal matters incident to the authoriziition, issuance and sale of the Bonds are subject to
the approving legal opinions of Co-Bond Counsel, who have been retained by, and act as. Bond Counsel
to the City. Except as noted below, Co-Bond Counsel have not been retained or consulted on disclosure
matters and have not undertaken to review or verify the accuracy, completeness or sufficiency of this
Official Slalement or other offering material relating to the Bonds and assume no responsibility for the
statements or infomiation contained in or incorporated by reference in this Official Statement, except lhat
Co-Bond Counsel have, al the request and for the benefit ofthe City, reviewed only those portions ofthe
Official Statement involving the description of the Bonds, the security for the Bonds (excluding forecasts,
projections, estimates or any other financial or economic information in connection therewith) and the
description of the federal tax status of interest on the Bonds. This review was undertaken solely at the
request of the City and did not include any obligation to establish or confirm factual matters set forth
herein.
Certain legal matters will be passed on for the City by (i) its Corporation Counsel, (ii) in
connection with the preparation of this Official Statement, Duane Morris LLP. Chicago, Illinois, and
Shanahan & Shanalian LLP. Chicago, Illinois, Co-Disclosure Counsel to the City, and (iii) in connection
with certain pension matters described in this Official Statement, Chapman and Cutler LLP, Chicago,
Illinois, Special Disclosure Counsel. Certain legal matters will be passed on for the Underwriters by
Peck, ShatTer & Williams, a division of Dinsmore & Shohl LLP, Chicago, Illinois, Underwriters'
Counsel.
SECONDARY M A R K E T D I S C L O S U R E
The City will enter into a Continuing Disclosure Undertaking (the "Undertaking") for the benefit
ofthe beneficial owners of the Bonds to send certain information annually and to provide notice of certain
events to the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board (the "MSRB") pursuant to the requirements of
Section (b)(5) of Rule 15c2-12 (the "Rule"') adopted by the Commission under the Exchange Act. The
MSRB has designated its Electronic Municipal Market Access system, known as EMMA, as the system
to be used for continuing disclosures lo investors. The information lo be provided on an aruiual basis, Ihc
events that will be noticed on an occurrence basis and a summary of other terms of the Undertaking,
including termination, amendment and remedies, are set forth below.

36

 A failure by the City to comply wilh the Undertaking w i l l not constitute a default under the
Bonds or the Bond Ordinance and beneficial owners o f the Bonds arc limited to the remedies described in
the Undertaking. See " — Consequences ofFailure o f t h e Cily to Provide Infonnation" under this caption.
A failure by the City to comply w i t h the Undertaking must be reported in ttccordance with the Rule and
must be considered by any broker, dealer or municipal securities dealer before recommending the
purchase or sale o f t h e Bonds in the secondary market. Consequently, such a failure may adversely affect
the transferability and liquidity o f the Bonds and their market price.
The Tollowing is a brief summary o f certain provisions o f the Undertaking o f t h e City and does
not purport to be complete The statements made under this caption are subject to the detailed provisions
o f t h e Undertaking, a copy o f which is available upon request from the Cily.
A n n u a l Financial I n f o r m a t i o n Disclosure
'The Cily covenants that it w i l l disseminate its Annual Financial Information and its Audited
Financial Statements (as described below) to the M S R B . The City is required to deliver such information
so that the M S R B receives the informaiion by the dates specified in the Undertaking.
"Annual Financial Information" means information generally consistent with lhat contained under
the caption " T H E C I T Y — Corporate Fund," " — Use o f Long-Term Reserves," " — Capital
Improvements Program," " — Property Ta.xes," " — General Obligation Debt,"" and " — Retirement Funds
and Other Post-Employment Benefits — Future Pension Contributions,'' and in A P P E N D I X B —
"FINANCIAL
AND
OTIIER
CITY
INFORMATION," APPENDIX
D —
"ECONOMIC,
D E M O G R A P H I C A N D S U P P L E M E N T A L I N F O R M A T I O N " (except for the infonnation in
A P P E N D I X D under the headings " — Economy,"' " — Percentage o f Total Non-Farm Employment by
Major Industry Sector"" and " — Housing Market,"" and infonnation relafing to population, per capita
personal income employment, and unemployment rate with respect to the United Slates, the State o f
Illinois, Cook County and the Chicago M S A ) and Tables 1-10
included in A P P E N D I X E —
" R E T I R E M E N T F U N D S A N D O T H E R P O S T - E M P L O Y M E N T B E N E F I T S " (said tables collecfively
referred to as the "Third-Party Sourced Retirement Fund Tables'"). The information contained in the
Third-Party Sourced Retirement Fund Tables is sourced from documents published by the Municipal
Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund o f Chicago, the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund o f
Chicago, the Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund o f Chicago and the Laborers' and Retirement Board
Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund o f Chicago, and the Cily lakes no responsibility for the accuracy
and completeness o f such infonnation.
I f the information contained in the Third-Party Sourced
Retirement Fund Tables is no longer publicly available or is not publicly available in the form, manner or
time that the Annual Financial Information is required to be disseminated by the City, the City shall, as
part o f its Annual Financial Information for the year in which such a lack o f availability arises, include a
statement to that effect and to the effect that it w i l l promptly file such information as it becomes available.
"Audited Financial Statements" means the audited basic financial statements o f t h e City prepared
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to governmental units as in effect
from time to time.

I

Annual Financial Information exclusive o f Audited Financial Statements w i l l be provided to the
MSRB not more than 210 days after the last day o f t h e City's fiscal year, which currently is December 3 1 .
I f Audited Financial Statements are not available when the Annual Financial Informaiion is
unaudited financial statements w i l l be included, and Audited Financial Statements w i l l be filed within 30
days o f availability to the City.

 
,
1
'
I

filed.

 Reportable Events Disclosure
The Cily covenants that it w i l l disseminate in a timely manner, not in excess o f ten business days,
to the MSRB the disclosure o f t h e occurrence o f a Reportable Event (defined below). Certain Reportable
Events are required to be disclosed only to the extent that such Reportable Event is material, as
materiality is interpreted under the Exchange Act. The "Reportable Events,'" certain o f which may not be
applicable to the Bonds, arc:
(a)

principal and interest payment delinquencies;

(b)

non-payment related defaults, i f material;

(c)

unscheduled draws on debt service reserves reftecting financial difficulties;

(d)

unscheduled draws on credit enhancements refiecting financial difficulties;

(e)

substitution o f credit or liquidity providers, or their failure to perform;

(0
adverse tax opinions, the issuance by the Internal Revenue Service o f proposed or final
determinations o f taxability, notices o f proposed issue (IRS Form 5701-TEB) or other material notices or
detenninations with respect to the tax status o f t h e Series 2 0 I 4 A Bonds, or other material events affecting
the tax status o f t h e Series 2014A Bonds;
(g)

modifications to rights o f security holders, i f material;

(h)

bond calls, i f material, and tender offers;

(i)

defeasances;

0)

release, substitution or sale o f property securing repayment o f the securities, i f material;

(k)

rating changes;

(1)
bankruptcy, insolvency, receivership or similar event o f the City (considered to have
occurred in the following instances: the appointment o f a receiver, fiscal agent or similar officer for the
City in a proceeding under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code or in any other proceeding under state or federal
law in which a court or governmental authority has assumed jurisdiction over substantially all o f the
assets or business o f the City, or i f the jurisdiction o f the City has been assumed by leaving the City
Council and the City's officials or officers in possession but subject to the supervision and orders o f a
court or governmental authority, or the entry o f an order confirming a plan o f reorganization, arrangement
or liquidation by a court or governmental authority having supervision or jurisdiction over subslanlially
all o f t h e assets or business o f t h e City);
(in)
the consummation o f a merger, consolidation, or acquisition involving the City or the sale
o f all or substanfially all o f t h e assets o f the Cily, other than in the ordinary course o f business, the entry
into a definitive agreement lo undertake such an action or the termination o f a definitive agreement
relating lo any such actions, other than pursuant to its terms, i f material; and
(n)
material.

appointment o f a successor or additional trustee or the change o f name o f a trustee, i f

 Consequences of Failure of the City to Provide Information
'The City shall give notice in a timely manner to the MSRB of any failure to provide disclosure of
Annual Financial Information and Audited Financial Statements when the same are due under the
Undertaking.
In the event of a failure of the City to comply with any provision of the Undertaking, the
beneficial owner of any Bond may seek mandamus or specific performance by court order, lo cause the
City to comply with its obligations under the Undertaking. 'The Undertaking provides that any court
action must be initialed in Ihe Circuit Court. A default under the Undertaking shall not be deemed a
default under the Bonds or the Bond Ordinance, and the sole remedy under the Undertaking in the event
of any failure ofthe Cily to comply with the Undertaking shall be an action to compel performance.
The City is currently in compliance with undertakings previously entered into by it pursuant to
the Rule, 'fhe City has had to take corrective action with respect to its undertakings for its Single Family
Mortgage Revenue Bonds issued from 1996 to 2002. See "—Corrective Action Related to Certain Bond
Disclosure Requirements" below.
Except as noted in "—Corrective Action Related to Certain Bond Disclosure Requirements"
below, the City is currently in compliance with undertakings previously entered into by it pursuant to the
Rule
Amendment; Waiver
Notwithstanding any other provision ofthe Undertaking, the City may amend the Undertaking,
and any provision ofthe Undertaking may be waived, if:
(a)
(i)
the amendment or waiver is made in connection with a change in circumstances
that arises from a change in legal requirements, change in law, or change in the identity, nature or status
ofthe City or type of business conducted;
(ii)
the Undertaking, as amended, or the provision, as waived, would have complied
with the requirements of the Rule at the time of the primary offering, after taking into account any
amendments or interpretations ofthe Rule, as well as any change in circumstances; and
(iii)
the amendment or waiver does not materially impair the interests of the
beneficial owners o f t h e Bonds, as detemiincd by a party unaffiliated with the City (such as the Bond
Registrar or co-bond counsel), or by approving vote of the owners of the Bonds at the time of the
amendment or waiver; or
(b)

the amendment or waiver is otherwise permitted by the Rule.

EMMA
All documents submitted to the MSRB through EMMA pursuant to the Undertaking shall be in
electronic format and accompanied by identifying informaiion as prescribed by the MSRB, in accordance
with the Rule. A l l documents submitted lo the MSRB through EMMA will be word-searchable PDFs,
configured to permit documents to be saved, viewed, printed and electronically retransmitted.

39

 Termination of Undertaking
The Undettaking shall be terminated i f the City shall no longer have any legal liability for any
obligation on or relating to repayment o f t h e Bonds.
Additional Information
Nothing in the Undertaking shall be deemed to prevent the Cily from disseminating any other
information, using the means o f dissemination set forth in the Undertaking or any other means o f
communication, or including any other information in any Annual Financial Infonnation or Audited
Financial Statements or notice o f occurrence o f a Reportable Event, in addition lo that which is required
by the Undertaking. I f the City chooses to include any infonnation in any Annual Financial Information
or Audited Financial Statements or notice o f occurrence o f a Reportable Event in addition to that which is
specifically required by the Undertaking, the City shall have no obligation under the Undertaking to
update such information or include it in any future Annual Financial Infonnafion or Audited Financial
Statements or notice o f occurrence o f a Reportable Event.
Corrective Action Related to Certain Bond Disclosure Requirements
The City is currently in compliance with respect to its undertakings lo file Annual Financial
Information and notices o f Events relating to previously issued bonds and notes in accordance with the
Rule
With respect to the City's Collateralized Single Family Mortgage Revenue Bonds, Scries 2006A
(the "Series 2006A Bonds""). S&P lowered its rating on the Series 2006A Bonds from " A A + " to "AA""
and placed the Series 2006A Bonds on "Credit Watch with negative implications" effective December 16,
201 1. The City did not cause the trustee as dissemination agent to file a notice o f an Event with E M M A
at that time. Subsequently, S&P upgraded the rating on the Series 2006A Bonds from " A A " to " A A + "
effective March 12, 2012. On March 18, 2012, S&P removed the "Credit Watch with negative
implications'" characterization from the Series 2006A Bonds.
'The City caused the trustee, as
dissemination agent, for the Series 2006A Bonds to file a notice o f an Event with E M M A on March 26,
2012 disclosing the downgrade and subsequent upgrade o f t h e Series 2006A Bonds by S&P.
With respect to the City's Chicago O'Hare International Airport General Airport 'Third Lien
Revenue Bonds, Series 2011, American Airlines is an "obligated person" w i t h respect to such bonds. On
November 29, 201 1, A M R Corporafion (the parent company o f American Airlines and American Eagle)
and certain o f its United States-based subsidiaries (including American Airlines and American Eagle)
filed voluntary petitions for Chapter 1 I reorganization in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the
Southern District o f New York. 'The Cily filed a notice with E M M A with respect to this event on March
30, 2012.
W i t h respect to the City's outstanding Motor Fuel Tax Revenue Bonds, the Cily"s pledge o f
additional City revenues to the payment o f such bonds (in addition to the .pledge o f motor fuel tax
revenues) became effective as o f March 19, 2013. 'The City filed a notice with E M M A describing the
pledge o f this additional source o f revenue on May 16, 2013.
With respect to the City"s outstanding Chicago 0"Hare Intemational Airport Customer Facility
Charge Senior Lien Revenue Bonds, Series 2013, Sirnply Wheelz. L L C d/b/a Advantage Rent A Car
("Advantage") is an "obligated person" with respect to such bonds. Advantage filed a voluntary
bankruptcy petition in the Southern District o f Mississippi on November 5, 2013. The City filed a notice
with E M M A with respect to this event on December 5, 2013.

40

 MISCELLANEOUS
'The foregoing summaries or descriptions of provisions of the Bond Ordinance and the
Undertaking and all references to other materials not purporting to be quoted in full, are qualified in their'
entirely by reference lo the complete provisions of the documents and other materials summarized or
described. Copies of these documents may be obtained from the Chief Financial Officer ofthe City.
The Bonds are authorized and are being issued pursuant to the City Council's approval under the
powers ofthe City as a home rule unit under Article VU ofthe Illinois Constitution of 1970. This Official
Stateinent has been authorized by the City Council.
CITY OF CHICAGO

By:

41

/s/ Lois A. Scott
Chief Financial Officer

 

[Ti us PAGE LEFT 

 

APPENDIX A

CITY OF CHICAGO

REAL PROPERTY TAX SYSTEM AND LIMITS

 

 PAGE LEFT 

T A B L E O F CONTENTS
Page
Real Property Assessmenl, Tax Levy and Collection Procedures

A-1

General

A-1

Assessment

A-1

Equalization

A-2

Exemptions

;!

A-2

Tax Levy

A-4

Collection

A-5

Property Tax Limit Considerations

A-6

Stale Legislation

A-6

State of Illinois

A-6

The City

A-6

  us PAGE 

Real P r o p e r t y Assessment, Tax Levy and Collection Procedures
General. Information under this caption provides a general summary o f t h e current procedures
for real property assessment, tax levy and tax collection in Cook County (the " C o u n t y " ) . 'The following is
not an exhaustive discussion, nor can there be any assurance that the procedures described under this
caption w i l l not be changed either retroactively or prospectively. 'The Illinois laws relating to real
property taxation are contained in the Illinois Property Tax Code (the "Property Tax Code"').
Substantially all (approximately 99.99 percent) o f t h e "'Equalized Assessed Valuation"" (described
below) o f taxable property in the City is located in the County. The remainder is located in DuPage
County. Accordingly, unless otherwise indicated, the information set forth under this caption and
elsewhere in this Official Statement with respect to taxable property in the Cily does nol reficct the
portion situated in DuPage Couniy.
Assessment. The Cook County Assessor (the "Assessor") is responsible foi- the tissessment o f all
taxable real property within the County, except for certain railroad property and pollution control
equipment assessed directly by the State. One-third o f t h e real properly in the County is reassessed each
year on a repeating triennial schedule established by the As.sessor. The City was last reassessed in 2012.
The suburbs in the northem and northwestem portions o f t h e County were reassessed in 2013. The
suburbs in the western and southern portions o f t h e County are being reassessed in 2014. The City w i l l
next be reassessed in 2015.
Real property in the County is separated into various classifications for assessment purposes.
After the Assessor establishes the fair cash value o f a parcel o f land, that value is multiplied by one o f t h e
ckissificalion percentages to arrive al the assessed valuation (the "Assessed Valuation") for the parcel.
Beginning w i t h the 2009 tax year, the classification percentages range from 10 to 25 percent depending
on the type o f property (e.g., residential, industrial, commercial) and whether it qualifies for certain
incentives for reduced rates. For prior years, the classification percentages ranged from 16 lo 38 percent.
The Cook County Board o f Commissioners has adopted various amendments to the County's
Real Property Assessment Classificafion Ordinance (the "Classification Ordinance"), pursuant to which
the Assessed Valuation o f real property is established. Among other things, these amendments have
reduced certain property classification percentages, lengthened certain renewal periods o f classifications
and created new property classifications.
The Assessor has established procedures enabling taxpayers to contest the Assessor's tentative
Assessed Valuations. Once the Assessor certifies final Assessed Valuations, a taxpayer can seek review
o f its assessment by the Cook County Board o f Review (the "Board o f Review""). The Board o f Review
has powers lo review and adjust Assessed Valuations set by the Assessor. Owners o f property are able to
appeal decisions o f the Board o f Review to the Illinois Property 'Tax Appeal Board (the "PTAB""), a stalewide administrative body, or to the Circuit Court o f Cook County (the "Circuit Court"). The P T A B has
the power to detennine the Assessed Valuation o f real property based on equity and the weight o f the
evidence. Based on the amount o f the proposed change in assessed valuafion, taxpayers may appeal
decisions o f the P T A B to either the Circuit Court or the Illinois Appellate Court under the Illinois
Adtninislralive Review Law.
In a series o f P T A B decisions, the P T A B reduced the assessed valuations o f certain commercial
and industrial property in the County based upon the application o f median levels o f assessmenl derived
from Illinois Department o f Revenue sales-ratio studies instead o f utilizing the assessment percentages
provided in the Classification Ordinance. On appeal, the Illinois Appellate Court determined that it was

A-

 improper for the PTAB, on its own initiative, to use the sales-ratio studies when such studies were not
even raised as an issue by the taxpayer before the Board of Review or in its appeal to the PTAB.
The Appellate Court decisions do not preclude a taxpayer in a properly presented case from
introducing into evidence sales-ratio studies f or the purpose of obtaining an assessment below that which
would result from application of the Classification Ordinance! No prediction can be made whether any
currently pending or future case would be successful. The City believes that the impact of any such case
on the City would be minimal, as the City's tibility to levy or collect real property taxes would be
unaffected.
As an alternative to seeking review of Assessed Valuations by the PTAB, taxpayers who have
first exhausted their remedies before the Board of Review may file an objection in the Circuit Court. The
City filed a petition to intervene in certain of these proceedings for the first lime in 2003, but the Circuit
Court denied the Cily's petition in early 2004. 'The City appealed the Circuit Court decision. On appeal,
the Circuit Court decision was reversed and the matter was remanded to the Circuit Court with
instructions to allow the City to proceed with its petitions to intervene. In addition, in cases where the
A.ssessor agrees that an assessment error has been made after lax bills have been issued, the Assessor can
correct the Assessed Valuation, and thus reduce the amount of taxes due, by issuing a Certificate of Error.
Eqtializulion. After the Assessed Valuation for each parcel of real estate in a county has been
determined for a given year including any revisions made by the Board of Review, the Illinois
Department of Revenue reviews the assessments and detennines an equalization factor (the "Equalization
Factor"'), commonly called the "multiplier," for each couniy. 'The purpose of equalization is lo bring the
aggregate assessed value of all real property, except farmland, wind turbines wilh a nameplale capacity of
at least 0.5 megawatts and undeveloped coal, in each county to the statutory requirement of 33-1/3
percent of estimated fair cash value. Adjustments in Assessed Valuation made by the PTAB or the courts
are not reflected in the Equalization Factor. The Assessed Valuation of each parcel of real estate in the
County is multiplied by the County's Equalization Factor to detennine the parcel's equalized ctsses.sed
valuation (the "Equalized Assessed Valuation").
The Equalized Assessed Valuation for each parcel is the final property valuation used for
determinafion of tax liability. The aggregate Equalized Assessed Valuation for all parcels in any taxing
body's jurisdiction, after reduction for all applicable exeinptions, plus the valuation of property assessed
directly by the State, constitutes the total real estate tax base for the taxing body and is the figure used to
calculate tax rates (the "Assessment Base"). The Equalizafion Factor for a given year is used in
computing the taxes extended for collection in the following year. The Equalization Factors for each of
the last 11 tax levy years, from 2002 through 2012 (the most recent years available), are listed in
APPENDIX B in the table captioned "Property 'Tax Information."
In 1991, legislation was enacted by the State which provided that for 1992 and for subsequeni
years' tax levies, the Equalized Assessed Valuation used to determine any applicable tax limits is the one
for the immediately preceding year and not the current year. 'This legislation impacts taxing districts wilh
rale limits only and currently does not apply to the City. See "— Property 'Tax Limit Considerations''
below.
Exemptions. The Illinois Constitution allows homestead exemptions for residential property.
Pursuant to the Illinois Property Tax Code, property must be occupied by the owner as a principal
residence on January I ofthe tax year for which the exemption will be claimed.
The annual general homestead exemption provides for the reduction of the Equalized Assessed
Valuation ("EAV") of certain property owned and used exclusively for residential purposes by the

A-2

 amount o f t h e increase over the 1977 E A V , currently up to a maximum reduction o f $7,000 in Cook
County and $6,000 in all other counties. There is an additional homestead exemption for senior citizens
(individuals at least 65 years o f age), for whom the Assessor is authorized to reduce the E A V by $5,000.
A recent amendment to this exemption requires senior citizens to reapply for it on an annual basis. There
is also an exemption available for homes owned and exclusively used for residential purposes by disabled
veterans or their spouses, for whom the Assessor is authorized to annually exempt up lo $70,000 o f the
Assessed Valuation. An additional exemption is available for disabled persons, for whom Ihe Assessor is
authorized to reduce the E A V by $2,000. A n exemption is available for homestead improvements by an
owner o f a single family residence o f up to $75,000 o f t h e increase in the fair cash value o f a home due lo
certain home iinprovtiments lo an existing structure for at least four years from the date the improvement
is completed and occupied. Senior citizens whose household income is $55,000 or less, and who are
either the owner o f record or have a legal or equitable interest in the property, qualify lo have the E A V o f
their property frozen in the year in which they first qualify Tor the so-called "freeze" and each year
thereafter in which the qualifying criteria are maintained. Each year applicants for the Senior Citizens
As.sessinent Freeze Homestead Exemption must file the appropriate application and affidavit with the
chief couniy assessment office.
On July 12, 2004, the Property Tax Code was amended to permit each county in Ihc State, by
enacting an ordinance within six months o f t h e effective date o f t h e law, lo limit future increases in the
taxable value o f residential property in such a couniy to an annual increase o f not more than 7% per year.
This is known as the Alternative General Homestead E.xetnption ( A G H E ) . Upon adoption o f such an
ordinance, homestead property w i l l generally be entitled to an annual homestead exemption equal to the
difference between the property's E A V and the property's "adjusted homestead value." The County
adopted an ordinance electing to be governed by this law. The purpose o f the law is to reduce the
increase in the taxable value o f residential property lhat otherwise occurs when home values rise rapidly.
In 2007, the Alternative General Homestead Exemption law enacted in 2004 was allowed to
sunset. Later in 2007, Public A c t 95-0644 was enacted, which extended the A G H E law for an additional
three years, subject to certain revisions and adjustments to the prior law. On May I, 2011, Public Act 961418 was enacted to extend the A G H E for three more years, and to reduce the maximum amount o f t h e
exemption. For tax years beginning in 2008, the maximum exemption for homeowners is as follows: For
homeowners in the City, $20,000 for the 2008 and 2009 tax years (taxes paid in 2009 and 2010), $16,000
for the 2010 tax year (taxes paid in 2011) and $12,000 for the 2011 tax year (taxes paid in 2012); for
homeowners in Ihe northern and northwestern portions o f the County, $26,000 for the 2008 tax year
(taxes paid in 2009), $20,000 for the 2009 and 2010 tax years (taxes paid in 2010 and 2011), $16,000 for
the 2011 tax year (taxes paid in 2012) and $12,000 for the 2012 lax year (taxes paid in 2013); and for
homeowners in the western and southern portions o f the County, $33,000 for the 2008 lax year (taxes
paid in 2009), $26,000 for the 2009 tax year (taxes paid in 2010), $20,000 for the 2010 and 2011 tax
years (taxes paid in 2011 and 2012), $16,000 for the 2012 tax year (taxes paid in 2013) and $12,000 for
the 2013 tax year (taxes paid in 2014). In the year that a homeowner loses all o f its T'/o savings, a Sunset
Exemption provides an addifional one-lime deduction o f $5,000 o f f the equalized assessed value o f a
property for eligible homeowners.
A s i d e from homestead exemptions, upon application, review and approval by the Board o f
Review, or upon an appeal to the Illinois Department o f Revenue, there arc exeinptions generally
available for properties o f religious, charitable (including qualifying not-for-profit hospitals), and
educational organizations, as well as units o f federal, state and local govemments.
Additionally, counties have been authorized to create special properly tax exemptions in longestablished residential areas or in areas o f deteriorated, vacant or abandoned homes and properties. Under
such an exemption, long-time, residential owner-occupants in eligible areas would be entitled to a deferral

A-

 or exemption from that porlion o f property taxes resulting from an increase in market value because o f
refurbishment or renovation o f olher residences or construction o f new residences in the area. On June 5,
2001, the County enacted the Longtime Homeowner Exemption Ordinance, which provides property tax
relief from dramatic rises in properly taxes directly or indirectly attributable lo gentrification in the fonn
o f an exemption. This is generally applicable to homeowners: (i) who have resided in their homes for 10
consecutive years (or five consecutive years for homeowners who have received assistance in the
acquisition o f the property as part o f a government or nonprofit housing program), (ii) whose annual
household income for the year o f t h e homeowner's triennial assessment does not exceed 115 percent o f
the Chicago Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area median income as defined by the United Slates
Department o f Housing and Urban Development, ( i i i ) whose property has increased in assessed value to a
level exceeding 150 perceni o f t h e current average assessed value for properties in the assessment district
where the property is located, (iv) whose property has a market value for assessment purposes o f
$300,000 or less in the current reassessment year, and (v) who, for any triennial assessment cycle, did not
cause a substantial improveinctil which resulted in an increase in the property's fair cash value in excess
o f the $45,000 allowance set forth in the Property Tax Code.
Tax Levy. There are over 800 units o f local government (the " U n i t s " ) located in whole or in part
in the County that have taxing power. The major Units having taxing power over property within the City
are the City, the Chicago Park District, the Board o f Education o f t h e Cily o f Chicago, the School Finance
Authority, Community College District No. 508, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District o f Greater
Chicago, the County and the Forest Preserve District o f Cook County.
As part o f the annual budgetary process o f the Units, each year in which the determination is
made to levy real estate taxes, proceedings are adopted by the governing body for each Unit. The tax levy
proceedings impose the Units' respective real estate taxes in terms o f a dollar amount. Each Unit certifies
its real estate tax levy, as established by the proceedings, to the County Clerk's Office. The remaining
administration and collection o f t h e real estate taxes is statutorily assigned to the Couniy Clerk and the
County Treasurer, who is also the County Collector (the "County Collector"").
After the Units file their annual tax levies, the County Clerk computes the annual tax rate for each
Unit by dividing the levy o f each Unit by the Assessment Base o f t h e respective Unit. I f any tax rate thus
calculated or any component o f such a lax rate (such as a levy for a particular fund) exceeds any
applicable statutory rate limit, the County Clerk disregards the excessive rate and applies the maximum
rate permitted by law.
The Couniy Clerk then computes the total tax rate applicable to each parcel o f real property by
aggregating the tax rates o f all the Units having jurisdiction over the particular parcel. The County Clerk
enters in the books prepared for the County Collector (the "Warrant Books"") the tax (determined by
multiplying that total lax rate by the Equalized Assessed Valuation o f that parcel), along with the tax
rates, the Assessed Valuation and the Equalized Assessed Valuation. The Warrant Books are the County
Collector's authority for the collection o f taxes and are used by the County Collector as the basis for
issuing lax bills lo all property owners.
The Illinois Truth in Taxation Law (the "Truth in Taxation L a w " ) contained within the Property
Tax Code imposes procedural limitations on a Unit's real estate taxing powers and requires that notice in
prescribed form must be published i f the aggregate annual levy is estimated to exceed 105 percent o f t h e
levy o f the preceding year, exclusive o f levies for debt service, levies made for the purpose o f paying
amounts due under public building commission leases and election costs. A public hearing must also be
held, which may not be in conjunction wilh the budget hearing o f Ihe Unit on the adoption o f the annual
levy. N o amount in excess o f 105 percent o f the preceding year's levy may be used as the basis for
issuing tax bills to property owners unless the levy is accompanied by certification o f compliance with the

A-4

 foregoing procedures. The Truth in 'Taxation Law does not impose any limitations on the rate or amount
o f t h e levy to pay principal o f and interest on the general obligations bonds and noies o f t h e City.
Collection. Property taxes are collected by the Couniy Collector, who remits to each Unit its
share o f t h e collections. 'Taxes levied in one year become payable during the following year in two
installments, the first due on March 1 and the second on the later o f August 1 or 30 days after the mailing
o f t h e lax bills. The first installment is an estimated bill calculated at 55% o f the prior year's tax bill. The
second installment is for the balance o f the current year's tax bill, and is based on the current levy,
assessed value and Equalization Factor and applicable tax rales, and refiects any changes from the prior
year in those factors. Taxes on railroad real property used for transportation purposes are payable in one
lump sum on the same date as the second installment.
'The following table sets forth the second installment penalty date for the lax years 2003 to 2012;
the first installment penalty date has been March 2 for all years.
Second Installment
Tax Y e a r

Penalty Date

2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
2005
2004
2003

August 1,2013
November 1,2012
November 1,2011
December 13,2010
December I, 2009
November 3, 2008
December 3, 2007
September I, 2006
November 1,2005
November 15. 2004

The County may provide for tax bills to be payable in four installments instead o f two. The
County has not detennined to require payinent o f lax bills in four installments. During the periods o f
peak collections, tax receipts are forwarded to each Unit not less than weekly.
A t the end o f each collection year, the County Collector presents the Warrant Books to the Circuit
Court and applies for a judgment for all unpaid taxes. 'The court order resulting from the application for
judgment provides for an annual sale o f a l l unpaid taxes shown on the year's Warrant Books (the "Annual
Tax Sale"'), 'fhe Annual Tax Sale is a public sale, at which time successful tax buyers pay the unpaid
taxes plus penalties. Unpaid taxes accrue interest at the rate o f 1.5 percent per month from their due date
unfil the date o f sale. 'Taxpayers can redeem their property by paying the amount paid at the sale, plus an
additional penalty fee calculated from the penalty bid at sale times a certain multiplier based on each sixmonlh period after the sale. I f no redemption is made within the applicable redemption period (ranging
from six months to two and one-half years depending on the type and occupancy o f the property) and the
tax buyer files a petifion in Circuit Court, notifying the necessary parties in accordance with applicable
law, the tax buyer receives a deed to the property. In addifion, there are miscellaneous statutory
provisions for foreclosure o f tax liens.
I f there is no sale o f t h e lax lien on a parcel o f property at the Annual Tax Sale, the taxes are
forfeited and eligible to be purchased at any time thereafter at an amount equal to all delinquent taxes,
interest and certain other costs to the date o f purchase. Redemption periods and procedures are the same
as applicable to the Annual Tax Sale, except that a different penalty rate may apply depending on the
length o f t h e redeinption period.

A-5

 A scavenger sale (the "Scavenger Sale""), like the Annual fax Sale, is a sale of unpaid taxes. A
Scavenger Sale must be held, at a minimum, every two years on all property in which taxes are delinquent
for two or more years. The sale price of the unpaid taxes is the amount bid at the Scavenger Sale, which
may be less than the amount of the delinquent taxes. Redemption periods vary from six months to two
and one-half years depending upon the type and occupancy of the property.
The annual appropriation ordinance ofthe Cily has a provision for an allowance for uncollectible
taxes. The City reviews this provision annually to determine whether adjustments are appropriate. For
tax year 2013, collectible in 2014, the allowance for uncollectible faxes is about four percent of the
estimated gross tax levy. For financial reporting purposes, uncollected taxes are written off by the City
after four years, but are fully reserved alter one year.
Property Tax Limit Considerations
State Legislation. As described above under "Real Property Assessment, Tax Levy and
Collection Procedures — Exempfions,'" the Alternative Homestead Exemption was not extended for years
after 2013.
Slate o f Illinois. The Property Tax Code limits (a) the amounl of property taxes that can be
extended for non-home rule units of local government located in the County and five adjacent counties
and (b) the ability of those entities lo i.ssue general obligation bonds without voter approval (collectively,
the "State Tax Cap"). Generally, the extension of property taxes for a unit of local govemment subject to
the State 'Tax Cap may increase in any year by five percent or the percent increase in the Consumer Price
Index for the preceding year, whichever is less, or the amount approved by referendum. The State Tax
Cap does not apply to "limited bonds'' payable from a unit's "debt service extension base"" or lo "doublebarreled alternate bonds"' issued pursuant to Section 15 ofthe Local Government Debt Reform Act.
As a home rule unit of government, the Cily is not subject lo the Slate Tax Cap. Under the
Illinois Constitution of 1970, the enactment of legislation applying the State Tax Cap to the City and
other home rule municipalities would require a law approved by the vote of three-fifths ofthe members of
each house ofthe Illinois General Assembly and the concurrence ofthe Governor ofthe State of Illinois.
It is not possible to predict whether, or in what form, any property lax limitations applicable to the City
would be enacted by the Illinois General Assembly. The adoption of any such limits on the extension of
real property taxes by the Illinois General Assembly may, in future years, adversely affect the City's
ability to levy property taxes to finance operations at current levels and the City's power to issue
additional general obligation debf without the prior approval of voters.
State law imposes certain notice and public hearing requirements on non-home rule units of local
government that propose lo issue general obligation debt. These requirements do not apply to the City.
The Cily. In 1993, the City Council of the City adopted an ordinance (the "Chicago Property Tax
Limitation Ordinance") limiting, beginning in 1994, the City's aggregate property tax levy to an amount
equal to the prior year's aggregate property lax levy (subject to certain adjustments) plus the lesser of (a)
five percent or (b) the percentage increase in the annualized Consumer Price Index for all urban
consumers for all items, as published by the United States Deparlment of Labor, during the 12-inonth
period most recently announced prior to the filing of the preliminary budget estimate report. The City
Tax Limitation Ordinance also provides that such limitation shall not reduce that portion of each levy
attributable to the greater of: (i) for any levy year, interest and principal on general obligation notes and
bonds ofthe City outstanding on January 1, 1994, to be paid from collections of the levy made for such
levy year, or (ii) the amount of the aggregate interest and principal payments on the City's general
obligation bonds and notes during the 12-month period ended January 1, 1994, subject to annual increase

A-6

 in the manner described above for the aggregate levy (the "Safe Harbor""). Additional safe harbors are
provided for portions o f any levy attributable to payments under installment contracts or public building
commission leases or attributable to payments due as a result o f t h e refunding o f general obligation bonds
or notes or o f such installment contracts or leases.
The tax limits set forth in the City Tax Limitation Ordinance may in future years adversely affect
the City's ability to finance operations at current levels and limit the ability o f t h e Cily to finance capital
improvement projects through the issuance o f propcrty-lax-supported bonds.
Pursuant to the Bond Ordinance, the taxes levied by the City for the payment o f principal and
interest on the Bonds is not subject to the limitations contained in the City 'Tax Limitation Ordinance.

A-7

  PAGE 

 

APPENDIX 

CITY OF CHICAGO

FINANCIAL AND OTHER INFORMATION

 

 PAGE LEFT 

T A B L E O F CONTENTS
The following tables renecl information for Cook Couniy, which represents approximately 99.99
percent of the equalized assessed value of taxable property in the City, unless otherwise indicated.
Page
PROPERTY TAX INFORMATION

B-I

Assessed. Equalized Assessed and Estimated Value of All 'Taxable Property 2002 - 2012

B-l

Property Ta.xes for All City Funds. Collections and Estimated Allowance for
Uncollectible Taxes 2003 - 2012

B-2

PROPERTY TAX RATES BY FUND PER $100 OF EQUALIZED ASSESSED
VALUA TION 2003 - 2012

B-3

Combined Property Tax Rates ofthe City and Other Major Governmental Units Per $100 of
Equalized Assessed Valuation 2003 - 2012
PROPERTY TAX SUPPOR TED BONDED DEBT

B-4
B-5

Computation of Direct and Overlapping Bonded Debt

B-5

Selected Debt Statistics

B-6

Debt Service Schedule

B-7

PROPER'TY TAX LEVIES BY FUND 2008 - 2012

B-8

SCHEDULE OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES IN FUND BALANCES

B-9

General Fund for fiscal years ended 2008 - 2012

B-9

Special Revenue Funds for fiscal years ended 2008 - 2012

B-10

Debt Service Funds for fiscal years ended 2008 - 2012

B-l I

Capital Projects Funds for fiscal years ended 2008 - 2012

B-l 2

Combining Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund Balances Nonmajor
Governmental Funds Year Ended December 31. 2012
B-13

  PAGE 

oo o
o

~ - a t: o »;
K OL. "r- £
S
«
— rj
C

n

oo
o

o

r-i

Ol

o

oo
rn r~-

O
OJ O l

OI

rn rn

cn
m

wj

-a

r'Ol
oo'
f-)
Qs
—•
o
OJ

jz

CQ CQ

c
o

rn
c-i

^
o

^(NOJOOr
OO r—
oi" O
o '
o - oo r-j
I/-, O _
rn o j r n o
Ol
oo o l
O l OJ OJ c"i

'^OOr^O^^O
"/^ ^ o - f^. o
r n OC oo \ o vd"
o oo oo CC
1/^ oo O l G N oo
^ o o o
— OJ
O l ^— oo r n o l
rn rn o i o i o i

ts

I
r4
o
o

"
(2^

Si e
H a

—
O O l f ' ^ O I ' ^ O v O v O O O
( T s o o O - n - v o r r m o o — — r-^
•Ol r n
oJ O O O C^ O — O l

T3
C

C
o
u

S w ii

ca

O

ta

z

X

<

C

ca
CL
O

>"
H
ai

2 •— CJ
3 u.

m

'/^ oo

—

r n

ooosv-ioJi^mooooov-(
so«/~ti^rno^r-^o-or^o
-T

T - » n 1 " ^ 1 ^ CO C > r n

rn

O s CO

oi oi oi oi oi oi oi rn rn oi o i
Ii-

> .c
•a H
a; c

E ^
.«-• ^
cn O

0
oirn'nooocv^ooom —
ocoov-^-^rocso— r n v o o i
—
Ov^
TT o i " o d r-" -rr r n v-I
^ O r n r s i r - o J O N
r n r ^ r - o i m ' O O s "
o" ^
^ d ' m ' rn" r n
OJ O i O l OJ r n r n r n

TT
r--^
r n
^ ^
^
m

lo
v o
« n
o"
rn

c

CD

vO
rn
o
o
O
m

•o

o

^

OJOOIO^oosOO^-^ro^so

r ^ o o s o c N v o t ^ r n v o o o —•

Ui

a,
O
a.

C3

—

o 00
— '/^
o o^ oj' o
m v o r ^ O — ^r--»oooooiv-^
m ^ o i m » / ^ v o < : > « / ^ o — oj
rn * ^ 0 \ OS r n o -^r" rsi
»o
- --»n'/~i\Do-oooooor^'0

H

05

H

c
r-

X

o
<

130 v O O

N

Ass

.a
a

o i o i ' O O o j ' O r o o o o - 1 - r o ^ m cjv f , o "
T t o o - — oo

•o •o
Equ

ca

rn

vo

-TJ-^ O

oo

—

OJ r n

vo

OS
'rT o i ' oo od' f n o i ' •—' TJ-*
Ta-oovovooor-i:jsosvor3-

on
c

r*-) TT

'•B

OJ O l C \

CI)

vC vo v o " n » 0

OC O v v o

vo

Ol

rn

Trmoiov'^roorn'tr-^vo
.—.r-TTvO'—

O ' O O s l O r n

oom—'Ojr^OvOvO
o o o «oi rn
o)
o o m T < ^ — ojrnr^
oo o O O OJ Ol o) o o
oo

CO
TD

ca
o

\ O o j 3 o r n o c o - o s o
Tj-

—

Ov OJ v c

^ 2.
o

— -rr

»r> O v

E
«
o 2

r n

vo "Ol o vo oo OS r- oo OJ vo
•/-T rn rn oi" vd od' oi oT vo" —'
c
u

<

v O r n O O T T O V O O — r-vD
oo O l oo oo O 0~ v o oo TT —

5

E

(/i
I—

a.

c

•?
o
4>

1-

^ .•

w

S f! c •
•B E d

o i o v v o o o m v o ' ^ — oooo
OJOv" r n r - ' o r - o o r - o
V O ^ O J W ^ O O O J I O O S V O O J

CO

Ii

^

^
-o •

—' r- ' od o*
os ' o "d
Ol r- CC Ol Ol rn rn — o i rOl vo Ov Tjr*-i rn — ov
Ov" o i ' o i rn od od Ov od oo" r~"
fa^
—

O l r n TT v-i ^O o - oo Ov O

o o o o o o o o

—

t=

I-

—

O

O

^

3 n c

S i:z a. c
y o w 3
i
o

£ £-u
P ,c 5

L> Z S ^ 8 ^ = §
•° 2 S H c'
^ W -

— OJ

o o o o o o o o o o o
OJ OJ OJ OJ O l OJ O l OJ O l O l OJ

: S > in m

lie

 +j

—

fti

re

VO

OO

vo ' n

c ^ c*^

C--1 ( N

O

an
3

CJ

u

a*

X

CO —

C5

OC

•S

^

o

i_

—
' • •—>

CB 5

OJ

°

^O

" "S SJ

•a

o
OJ

Ol

00

vq

vo m c n
rn

•n
oo

•a- vq >o
r-.' oc:
ov CJv

O
OC3
CJv C3N

OJ

o-*' r i

Ol

"
=: c5
ci. H -

<

o
»n

"

C

u
c
c?

Ov

ca

E

OJ

o
—
vd

Ov
Ov

CTv CJv

0\

OJ

'/^ o rn
—
. oi vd" rn
O
J '
—' ——
' 'm

'o O

n

B
r- VO
oo r .

o

C^J C O

Ov

rs o
c

I

B
o

o
o c
ca
cn

= !«;

n
cn
C

O
J=

Col

cti-

o ca
U H fc
3

seq[ u e n l

^ U

CO r o

Su

n

r-^

cn

>•

—"do

C3V
vO

o

VO

ri
vo

c: \o_
rn"
rl

oo -a;

•a- vo o o
r- r-i ' O o

-a-

vd' r i

t-^

CTv C^l
CC
vO

CO

(^1
00

vO

l/>

CD
Ov

6

— -o

oo

-a- vo •avo o
n oo^ r-^ CJv
r-" vo" czT •a-' •/S
Ov

CN

O

—
.
•n
.—^
—oo
vd
— —m ^—

2 i iZ

I

u.
•a- 1 ^
cp
vd vd
•n
c^ o oo O v

IS

—o-aoo

o
-a-' vd
(3V O v

s
2 «
'^ 'i

s -

Ov
r i ro
>n •a- ro vo OO
0\
vo o
•a- O' rCi
• r i vq
ri
»n
o
-a-' di C N vd o " (3V
o trJ <Jv
•a-" O•a-'v CJS
ro
o
vo vo vo v O
oo

"5

r^l
rn

c

o

1.

—

O) T J

—'

QUI

I

CQ

o
o —O' OJl ov Ov oo vo
oo
o oo -Ti- r n
O ; o- m
o OJ_^ r n — —o es vq
— 1

Cv

vq

Cs" Gs' DO Os" Cv' -t

o~ o-

rn

TT
m r n rn m r n
o- oo oo oo oo OC

c5
H o

>v L>

C5

3
O
Vj

(=
o
>v

3 ^

(N
oo o c
•a- •n vo
o O O o o o ——
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
r i c^l r l C^( c^l C-vJ C^J c^l C N

9.

 O C N r o d ^ O v o v o O C ^

ooo^vo^rooO'—' —
r o r o f v   O O O c : 7 v O ' —

CJ

•a
c

m -d"
v o »oi
r— v-j

CN

c.

Em

o
I

Ann

CQ

'o>
O
o'vO

CN

— vo
'Ol v o
vo
'
'O o-

o o p o

£3

0

0

0

0

o
0

o
o

CN

0

-a-

0
0
0

ca

>

r o -a-ac^l
r~
ov
«n
CTv
00
0
0

0

0

ro
00

0

CN

•n r o
Ov
0

CO 0

—.

OC
u-l
00
C3V 0 0
0
0

01

•a- C^l
•a- ro
>n

00

00

0
00
0

00

d

0

00

0

ro
00
1—

0
00
00
0

cd

0

—

•n

•a-

VO
ro
0
Ov

CI
0
00
t-~

vO

vo ov

0

d cd

0

ro

0
0

<
-a
a
3
O"

W

VO

00

•a- vo 0r o
^—
n ro
r i C^J

CO 0
0 0 as
O,

3

ft*

E = a

0
ro

-a-

•a- ri r o
r- vo «o
cd cd d d
<d 0
c^l

0

ro

CD

c»

o

c -ca
n u

o

vo r i
VC
3

O

C

C

0*

O

0
ro

vo
C^l

-a-

vO
CN

CN

^

•n
rvo

C^l
1—

r o CTV
CN

cd cd cd cd cd

CTv
ro

00
ro

>^
Tt

0
Ov

f-l
C^l

cd <d cd cd

•° § 1=

a- S
§1 &

ca
m
<U

U
—

a
f.

<d <d

0

0

r-vo »n
0

C^l

00
00
*rv

—.—

CTv
^ri

ro

•avq •acd cd cd cd

S S" c?

a -a

It

u

_

<m

•0 0

C

C

CN CTV
0
OC
ro
0
VO r-. 0
(N r o
<Tv' Ov 06 O^ CTv
r o ro
00 OC

ov

CTv 0 0 v o
00
ro

ii
C
c^
0 n

ro ro ro
00 00 00

0

CTV vq
— — o_
-a-" r o -a-'

c/>

0
0
0
0
0
0
CN C^J f v l

v O r- 0 0 CTv 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
CN CN CN C^l ( N

—.

r l

0
0
c-^1 CN

^

0
S
in
u
0

it

.c

z> (J
0

0

5
r o -a- »o

i>
u

P Cei

;

a.
o

0

CO
0

C
i

lUUC

V

at

00
r-i
0

erk*s

u

Q.

g 1 =

0
VO
vo ( N 0 0
V O CTv 0 0
CTv V O 0 0
vO »ri «ri

°

r-i

00

,'y

>>

ro rvi vo
-a- 'a- 0

r-

lude

a
H

<Tv v O
VO
. — 1
VO
. — 1
0
ro vo
OC

lew-

3

c*

=

00

C3V CO

for

-a
c

ro
vo

'/^ -a-

0

5

(-1

0

_

c c
Q Q

 o
H

^1
O

3

m o
r n oo
OJ
vd vd

—
oo
Ov
>/S

ro ro
Cv ro
VO ci-l 'O
cp cd cd

o
ro

o j - ^ v o r o OS — OJ
m Ov o o v q
'/-^

— ' n v o
r n ' n Ov
Os -Tt r n
-^r * o v d

o vo
•a- ro
f^l vo r—o
o •a- Ov
ro
m
•a-d cd
cd cd cd cd cd

^(3
>- u

«

c

cn

O

3

Ov o o
m — Ov — o o r n
'Ol sO v o ' O » 0
"TT
vO
O O O O O O O O O O

o o o o o o o o o o
00

E

s
s_
"3

7
i;
o =
o

— O - ' / ^ T t r n o l — - r t O O
vO-* — o O v O ' / ^ ^ l ^ o ^ i O c n m m o ) o i o j o i o t r n r^;

a; re . -

o o o o o o o c i c j o

S > J2
o

^3
c

°
u '^

at ^

<->

2 (£ ^

-o

•n ro (Tv cn ro Ov CV
c^I O

•a-ro CO ro r o ro
•
o•a- Ti-a;
d c ed cd cd cd cd cd

.
—
•

cu

U

vo i n
Tv
-a- Cro
ro
C: cd

vocN-a-'ncTvvoo — ' n o
^ - t r o o ' n ' n 'O 'O vo c:^>
C^J r j f ^ l fv)

cdcdcdcJcdcdcJcdcdcd

3
CS

o .2
•P H

U

o
ca
o

H

O

cu

^

_

s. C "

re o

= S

'.a-g

f ^ i Ti- v o r-. r o cN v o —
-a"OC^lC3vOOt^vOOO
—• —^ o v o ' n -a- CO '/"»
r o r o r o CN o i f S r v j r i
to

—

r».

' n CN
t^CN
C50
r^i r o

OO —.

'O O- Ol •— g
o

o o

o

o

E
o
U
o

o o

o

o

00 E

O O i r n r i ^ ^ - O v O v O O C s

0

o o o - * v o - ^ m o c ——
r n r n Ol o o o OS o — r i

m - ^ w n v o t ' - o o o s O ' — ol

o o o o o o o o

rj

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

OJ O l OJ O l o l OJ O I O l OJ

cn

 CITY OF CHICAGO
PROPERTY TAX SUPPORTED BONDED DEBT
Computation of Direct and O v e r l a p p i n g Bonded Debt
As of M a r c h

13,2014

(Aidjusted for llic issuance and application o f p r o c c c d s froin the Bonds)
tDollar.s in Thousands)

Direct Dchl.
GcnerarObligiition Bonds ;md Notes'
The Bonds
Short- Term i:)bligations'

$7,878,.373
88.'5.420
1395,797)

Net Direct l.ony-Tcrm Debt

$8J65J?26
Net Direci
Debt'

Overlapping Debt^
City Colleges ol'Chic.igo
Board ol lidueation
Chicago I'ark District
Metropolitan Water Reclamation f)istrict O f Greater Chicago..
Cook County
Cook County l-orest Preserve District

2.50,1)01)
6,1 17.45.')'
826,190'
2,458,516
.3,578,905
179,655

Percent
Overlapping''
100.00%
100.00
100 00
48.91
47 92
47 92

Total (Dverlapping Long-1 enn Debt
Net Direct ;uid Overlapping Long- Tenn Debt

Ucbt
Applicable
$

250,000
6,117.4.55
826,190
1,202,560
1,714,876
86.084
S 10,197,165
$ 18,563,161

Includes cnilslandini; Gc:nc;nil Obligation Commercial Papc;r Nolc:s and lines ofcredil consisting of (dollars in ihc)us;inds)
Amount

.Scries

$187,502
63.295
145.000

20(>2rj
20U2I)
2013 hneorcrcdii

Includes debt secured by property taxes (including "alternate bonds" and "limited la.\" bunds)and FBC bonds secured by long-term lease
ubiigaliuns .TISO secured by properly taNCS
.Source r.:icb ofthe respeclive lax districts
Source Cook Couniy Clerk's (JI ficc
Includes S5.944,5I5.661 and $396,570,000 ol'general obligaiion hcmcls of llie Board ot'Hducalion and the Chicago Part; District, respeclively,
issued as "allornalc revenue" b(>nds secured by allernale revenue "courccs An ad valorem properly la.s levy is filed in an amounl sunkicnl lo
pay debt service on the allernale revenue bonds When suincicnt revenues have accumulated lo pay annual debt service on the alternate
revenue bonds, the property lax levy is abaied 'lo dale, alternate revenues have been available in amounts sulTicient to pay principal and
inleresl coming due on Ihe allernale revenue bonds issued by the l3oard of Lducation and Chicago Park Disincl

B-5

 Selected Debt Statistics
Population (2011))
Total i:quali/.cd Assessed Value (2012)
Total Estimated Fair Ca.sh Value (2011)

2,695,59S'
$65,250,3X7,267^
$222,856,063,501'

Percent o f T o t a l

Nel Direct I.ong-Tenn Debt
Total Net Direct and Overlapping Long- rcmiDebl...

Amount
$ 8365,996,160
$18,563,160,160

,
I'cr Capita
$3,103
$6,886

Percent of Total
Estimated Fair
Cash Value
3.75%
8.33%

' Source tJ S Census Bureau
^ Source Cook Couniy Clerk's Office. 'I'olal Hc^uali/ed Assessed Value is nel ot'esemplions Includes assessmenl of piillution conlrol faeililies
and excludes portions of the City in DuPage Couniy
Source 'I he Civic I-ederalion r.\cludes r.iilroad propeny, polluiion control I'acililies and portion of Ihc City in DuPage Couniy

[RHMAINDER OT PAGE IN TENTIONALLY LF.l-T BLANK]

B-6

 0\
•j^
-T

o
C> t ? i r - i
- T O vO r I
Ci — o
O

3
•o"o"
o

o

OO

o
•o

y

;i

\o

CO

:p o.

ri

Ol

rl

3

T

o'

vO

In

r-' - r

— < "2

v n vO a o r n (

r'.S S
2 g S

vC
ri

o'

T

f n r-

O

r-

O

'^1 ' f

^

n

s ;-i g g s s 8 s

O

-T VO —' -O — r-r t-i' r * »
w-i v q

r » m ' vo o

— r'l S VO rn S> ^ i ^
r t' i n
V \ 0 * -T
r-* vo* O

O

- O

Ol

O

oo C

c> O

vc O

~

•/-> v r i

'

r-i -tj^ -O

i-l_ O

r~r-~. r n ' O r ^ t ^ ' O r i

vO - T ' O — r

—

O
O

C

O

O

0_
^

O

n

O

v O i / 1 0 \ v O T O
— - i J O O r - w ^ t T i r ^
- f I o
-a- I " , - I •
oo O
' O o " <• f N£J c ' o o '

•S c ^-

^

—
o

to

3 -p. '
so:

HZ
o

CT.

o
*f
•o

-T

-T'

1^ o

^1

vO

o'

^»r i '

f r

io

C3 —_ (

_

_

lOf—
O
—
oo' ^

„

„

c^

——

_

ol

O]

-a)
13 - a

c

If

"5 "3 -5

C^ D i C i 0 »

5

g 3

I Flo

2 ^

s
C

rs i n .

-**

r - l —i — v i ( - i ' O Q i — O v O 0_
— r i_ (-1_ w
n-^ oo_ 0 \ 0 0 - T — ' J ' \ 0 1—r c ' ' O m — '

>= ™ o
o E o

11;

E o s
-C -S «
t / l .13

"5 = 2

)
Q o o
oo oo oo oo oo oo oo
>
o cc ;;o_ooo_ooooo ooo c
> o oo o_
o_ c o o o_ o
)
)

Si c

S =i;i 3

-g 3 a
H ° ^

8888S

Q,

^

'f I 1

''•

S   S 8 8 8
M

3 5 -o
II- =

=3 1

kn* O « o w r t r i " o " O
w> v - i ' Q " r t v i ' \ f \ cX'
o
— r i ' O w ^ — T f ^ O C T v v O - T
" O I - — trt
— - 1 ' OCTir i r n
»T_ r t
0\ vo 'O
ITS
i r-.' OO O " -O* t * "

I 3I

- o -c
« C CI §
fc o w

' 6 s-

> . r i ty)
n

•S

c^ —

2

^

CJ

Q.

U

^

<= O

^1^

I

CQ

:-i,ac
— x>
-O

?
^

XI
Q

—
O

—
o

m C > 5 ' 5 » ^ J v r t O C > —
C
1*^ O f-- O n
OO O OO t o
(7> t*-' O * - T
. ^
C v —• ' 1 » n T <7> I
— "™ n o 1o r - o i ' r nCT»^
.^.H
i e i O c o r « i r - - > / l
\ 0 - - ^ v-T r--.' OC oo" o ' O N-i" < n - T
v o v o v - i - r r n r i r i
— O O v o o r

O C V O ^ O v O r
r-- f ' l — OO — r i
v-C — ' v o ' r \ f i -O* O *
v j 3 i 7 4 r i « ^ r i i n o v
T O O o o r i ^ r - « 0 ' t ^ n
r-t' O
f t <> O* O
c". r t "
«
v o t r ^ p r j
— 0 \ i O

"T_ U N CT. O O
v o ' oo" c
o " —' r-' — ' m "
O
O f - > r r - r ^ o r - t
— — o l ^ ^ C T ^ ( J ^ u ^ ^ / 1
- r r~' t n — o
o
o
r~
— O 0 ^ S ' ^ • T ^ l
"T^

'O_

O

. o

? 9 *;

g'2'"
I

to

i
'
•
•
•

-a

c c 2
o o S

«

j3

go 0
Q o

o g (=:
v> — —
o o r t o o o O O O r i ^ m o o i
r i r - v O - r r - o
— - T O r i
—
r ^ v o r i o
»*• m r ~ c v
r- c j i r i T t m o c r .
— r - o o

3_ 5 r-_ «> S I ?
•o DO S O

o

•  oo
- T Cv
,
..
- J n - C - O O C T T
I <o
—^
m — Cv O 'O
O
O VI o" C>' irt" 'O f-1 rn Ov
f n - i - T ' n v o r - r ^ o o o o t i O f

— u 2 O

O _ ' _O
. . - ^ - 0 ^ ' / ^ 0 0 0 0
1 O - vO e - . (— O <rt r » t o O O
O
f - i v O i o C ' n O O O

'
r
'
r

n
Cv

3
J3

I T r~ m —
o vo r
o Cv
0_ rn_ O
CTs r J — f l - T v C r ) C
T
r j v r t r l O OO i J i '

"9

t)

3

o
...

Qt;

V

u

I,

= 3 O

r

°
— rr
c o

. § a?,

s sS
2 =
CO

C

; g 113

^

6 S1S •
3
i \ D v C v O v O v r j v O v O O v , n > f l ' O O O O O m
- "/-I i n i n •*-) m w-1 i j - . O O O O C
O
^
i f ^ n m o o s o o O i n v E i
s C ' v O - O ' C t o O ' ^ r t
)' CO* CO o o " o o ' T * vo' Cv v n c > g \ C - 0 \

2S!

CO OC- t o

^8;

0 0 O O O O O O J v C ^ O ^ 0 v

• ^O v o

CJ "

= s s

oo c
e

o

l O vTi - r

Cv

f

00 00 0 9 v 0 . n ^

-o v: , -

- 5

*"' f i I '.°
; - S H =
g a.

O
O
O

o
o
o o o o

C O
O O
O

O
O

O
O

o o o o o o o <: o o o o o o o o o o o o t
o o o o o o o t O O t O O t J O O O O O O O t
o O O O
o o p_ o o_ o p p p o p p^ (
O O vi
w-i m '
— Il O DO
r l
•vr -.7

o '
O
rO
*r

C
O
0_
Ov"
'O

O O
O
O r-._
oo r-'
vo m

«-i
I'l
vo
o'
vn

o
r~
vq
r<o

m'
v/i
r I
oo
n

in
VI
ri_
f i
m

o
o
rn
m

in" c
-T r
r~- '
— t
O t

"

o 3

"

3 H ^

-

Q

p •» 'S -g 2
• ca « .£ 2

£
«

lo o.
_
- t - n v o r — — — —

o o C v O * —
— — r i r l

f-i —
r i

T < n v o r ^ o 3 C v O
— n m
r i r i r j r i r-l r i ( n r n r n

-

r < n v £ > i - ~ o o C v O
"n n
<—, r - i r - i f n ^

—
n

r i m
T- T -

o o c o o o o o o o o o o o n o o o o o o o o o o o t S o o o

: f. P tJ ^
• *i o p o

- =i

I Si 1/1 E £'s
: S. a: K 2
a
2 S c5 H ' ^ ' -5 « =
!; S c o -3
g i g s
t ^ .3 -A —

o

t:

^81 i l

S -

^
1)

3

ci: "5 ^ Q i'^ : < -S o m

^-

o

 o

—•

^

<0

oo
rn

_SO

SO

oo
in
-rt

—

o

rsi

—

O

oo

Os

°\

o
Ol

^1
f i

sO
CO

oo
'O

Ol

cr\

vd
r-i

o
oo
rsi

Ol
Ol

so"
sO

-3-

O
O

OS

GO

—'

m"
r-^

oo

©s

Ol

Q

Z
>

u

o
1

^

Ol 0 0
GO O T 3

u r« 5
>
u

4)

O

-J c H
W c

H

2 «

>- > s
H
Ofi

CJ
cn

CL

O
a.

o
o

—

O

—

rn

o

Cs

—
—'.

oi

—
•
o
o

ON'

O

o

—

•^r

m

sc

—
o"

—

'/-I

r-

Ct"

—.

o
o

C)

oo

o
m

OC

3

T3

—

rt
H -a

>•. Si

S1
<->

o.

1,
— —

gI

-f

<

c:

-J

3

<=

£ S3

<

o

a> o
03

C

s is
•—

=

E

o

=

CO

<

I 1

CO

S

'iZ

C

S 
-

C3

C30
i

——

" s i s

CL.

m

CL O

O

C

t't 3 S

C2

55 r o

c:

 CITY OF CHICAGO
S C I I E D L L E O F R E V E N U E S , E X P E N D I T U R E S AND CHANGES IN FUND BALANCES
General Fund'
For Fiscal Years Ended 2008-2012'
(Dollars in Thousands)

Revenues:
Utility Ta.\
Sales Tti.\
State Income Ta,\
Other ru.\es
I'eiicral/State Grants
Olher Revenues'
Ti3tal Revenues
Expenditures:
Current:
Public Safety
General Govemment
Other''
Debt Service
Total Expenditures
Revenues Under Expenditures

2010

2011

2012

2008

2009

$ 524,«47.
518,131
378,545
637,923
2,347
813,983
2,875,771

481,275
476,557
251,820
572,472
1,714
777.788
2,561,626

467,411
495,842
282,011
590,575
1.735
773,278
2,610,852

467,630
536,281
236,521
618,385
1,294
921.056
2,781,166

462,475
572,185
282,779
694,383
1,074
907,760
2,920,656

1.856,6.34
889,266
356,066
5.318
3,107.284
(231.51 J )

1,862,914
857,626
288,559
4,978
3,014.077
(452.451)

1,828,984
903,890
296.063
5^004
3,(L33.94I
(423,089)

1,895,404
863,622
278,561
2,849
3,040,436
(259,270)

1.956,152
864,556
258,501
2,160
3,081,369
(160,713)

164,000

94,058
(25,193)

58,500
416,135
(17,463)

16,500
502.502
(13,600)

95,000
372,744
(14,357)

55,000
31.617
(26.965)

232,865

457,172

505,402

453.387

59,652

1.352

4.721
48,443
1.542
54,706

82.313
54,706
(1,478)
$ 135,541

194,117

(101,061)

135,541
5,875
$ 335,533

335,533
(3,170)
$ 232,096

Other Financing Sources (Uses):
Proceeds of Debt, Net of
Original Discount/Including
Premium

Transfers In
Tran-sfers Oul
'I'otal Olher Financing
Sources (Uses)
Revenues and Other i-'inancing
Sources Over (Under)
Expenditures and Other
Financing Uses
Fund Balance - Beginning of Year
Change in Inventory
Fund Balance - End of Year

44,307
2,784
S48,443

$

The (lencml l-'uncj is the chief opor;iting fund ol' Ihc Cily It i.s comprised of llic Corporate Fund .is well ;LS other non-mu)or opeiuling funds
where fund balance is nol reslncied orcommiued as defined by ihe Govemment Accouniing Standards l3oard (GASB)
Source fable 6 in the Siatislical Seciion of (he Cily of Chicago Comprehensive Annual l-inancial Kepon (CAI-'IO for Ihe year ended
IX-eembcr . t l , 2012 fhe City's CAI-R for ihc year ended December 31, 2(112 is available upon request from Ihe (Office of Ihe Cit>'
Coinplrollcr
Includes Internal Service. Licenses and Permits, Fines. Investment Inccimc. Charlies for Services and Miscelhuieous Kevenucs
Includes lldillh. Slrecls and Sanitation. Transporlalion, Cultural and Recreaiional and Other K.xpendilures

B-9

 Special Revenue Funds
For Fiscal Years Ended 2 0 0 8 - 2 0 1 2 '
(Dollars in Thousands)

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Revenues:
Property Tax
Utility Tux
Sales Tax
Stale Income l ax
Other Taxes
Federal/State (irants
Olher Revenues-

326.334
82.373

334.792
75,688

$ 316,618
72,201

$ 373,163
83.317

$ 350,408
63,883

56,848
554,096
794,564
120,401

95,994
572.651
751,555
131,295

108.153
217,188
974,757
105.705

1-^34.616

1.961.975

103.657
588.717
814,144
121.017
2,016,354

1,862,2.83

108,506
607,135
876,790
149.956
2,156,678

35.518
915,659
413,690
677,990
4,360
5,628
2,052,845

50,797
799,236
430,915
566,612
3,357
3,632

80,744
882,553
435.432
521.876
4,903
3,898

88,908
1,193,781
481,407
522,377
2.964
2,533

1,854,.549

1,929,406

2,291,970

119,807
941,885
458,951
725,578
5,259
723
2.252,203

( I 18.229)

107,426

86,948

(429,687)

(95,525)

163.628

72,925

88.018

72,925

70,.54I

155,637

185,358

94,424

149,574

76,640

(48,604)

(1,746,126)

(65.807)

(380,543)

(56,622)

270,661

(1.487,843)

116,635

(158,044)

90.559

Revenues and Other Financing
Sources Over (Under)
Ijixpenditurcs and Olher
Financing Uses

152,432

(1,380.417)

203,583

(587,731)

(4,966)

Fund Balance - Beginning of Year

883.097

1,035,529

(344.888)

(141,305)

(729,036)

$(344,888)

$(141,305)

$(729,036)

$(734,002)

Total Revenues
Expenditures:
Current:
Public Safety
General Government
Employee Pensions
Other'
Capital Outlay
Debt Service
fotal Expenditures
Revenues Under Expenditures
Other Financing Sources (Uses):
Proceeds o f Debt. Nel of
(Original Discount/
Including Premium

Transliirs In
I'ransfers Out
I'otal Olher Financing
Sources (Uses)

Fund Balance - i;nd of Year

$

SI .035.529

' Source 'fable 7 in' the Sialislical Section of the City of Chicago ConipichciiMve Annual Financial Repon (CAFR) for the year ended
Hecember 31. 2012 Ihe City's CAFR for the year ended December 31, 2012 is available upon rec uesl from Ihe Office ot the City
Comptroller
" Includes Intemal Service, Licenses and Pemiils, Fines, Inveslmeiil Income. Charges lor Services and Miscellaneous Revenues
Includes I leallh. Streets arid Sanitation, 'f ninsportalion. Cultural .ind Recreational and Other Lvpendilures

B-10

 Debt Service Funds
For Fiscal Years Ended 2008 2012(Dollars in Thousands)
2008

2009

Revenues:
Propeny'fax
Utility lax
Sales fax
Other faxes
Other Revenues'
I'otal Revenues

$403,4X9
22,282
30,440
220,220
6,562
6X2,993

.$471,218
22,138
27,395
131,993
38,720
691,464

$ 437,463
22,324
31,162
129,566
61,004
681.519

$515,368
13,289
26,875
146,126
44,101
745,759

$590,990
22,324
22,105
18,717
53,340
707,476

Expenditures:
DeblScA'ice
•fotal l Apenditures

1,022,156
1,022,156

777,725
777,725

747,061
747,061

613,048
613,048

799,833
799,833

Revenues Over (Under)
E.xpcndilurcs

(339.163)

(86,261)

(65.542)

132,711

(92,357)

405,311

340,324

560,524

580,015

337,410

(186,421)
33,186
(141,498)

(213,435)
684,277
(81,291)

(412,184)
44,185
(110.049)

(476,787)
47,134
(176,285)

(268,397)
47,322
(83,359)

110.578

729.875

82,476 ,

(25,923)

32.976

(228,585)

643,614

16,934

106,788

(8,911)
_$ (2.37,496)

(237,496)
$406,118

406,118
.$423.052

423,052
$ 529,840

(59,3X1)
529,840
$ 470,459

Other Financing Sources (Uses):
Proceeds of Debt, Nel of Original
Discount/Including Premium
Payment to Refunded Bond
E.scrow Agent
Transfers In
Transfers Out
'fotal (Jther Financing
Sources (Uses)
Revenues and Other Financing
Sources Over (Under) Expenditures and
Other Financing Uses
Fund Balance-Beginning (^f Year
Fund Balance-End of Year

2010

2011

2012

The Debt Service Funds -arc compnsed ofthe Bond, Note Redemption and Inleresl I'und and the Debt Service Fund - Special l'a.\ing Areas
for General Obligation and 'l ax Increment Financing
Source
fable 8 m the Sljlislicil Section of the City of Chicago Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) for the year ended
December 31. 2012 I hc City's CAFR for the year ended fJeccmbcr 31. 2012 is available upon request from the Office of the City
Coinplroller
Includes Investment Income and Miscellaneous Revenues

 Capital Projects Fund.s'
For Fiscal Years Ended 2008-2012"
(Dollars in Thousands)
2008
Revenues;
Other Revenues''
-fotal Revenues
Expenditures
Capital Outlay
I'olal l-.xpendilures

$

44.464
44.464

2009
$

18.240
18,240

2010
$

43,135
43,135

2012

2011

$

16,243
16,243

$

11,343
11,343

657.104
657.104

615,916
615.916

624.007
624,007

467,249
467,249

430.341
430.341

Revenues Under Expenditures

(612.640)

(597,676)

(580,872)

(451,006)

(418,998)

Other Financing Sources (Uses):
Proceeds of Debt, Net of Original
Diseount/Ineluding Premium
Transfers In
fransfers Oul
fotal Other Financing
Sources (U.se.s)

62.493
10,567
(96)

529,553
16,3.34
(3.734)

769,348
6^296
(99)

464.386
2,759
(25)

295,606
22,843
(11.804)

72,964

542,153

775.545

467,120

306,645

(539,676)

(55.523)

194,673

16,114

(112,353)

983,823

444,147

388,624

5X3,297

599,411

^ 444,147

$ 388,624

$ 583.297

$ 599,411

$ 487,058

Revenues and Other Financing Sources
Over (Under) Expenditures and Other
Financing Uses
Fund Balance-Beginning of Year
Fund Balance-End of Year

' The C:ipitol Projecls Funds jrc comprised orthu Coinmiiiuiy Development ;ind Improvcincnt Projects l*iind ;ind the Non Major Cupital Projects
I'und
' Source Tabic 9 m the .Slalistical Section of the City of Chicago Comprehensive Annujl Financial Kepon (CAI-K)for the year ended
iX'cembcr 31. 2012 The City's CAl-R for the >oar ended December 31, 2012 l i jvji!;ible upon rvqucsl iVorn ihe Office of the City
Comptroller
* Includes Invesimcnl Income, Charges for Services und Miscellaneou;. Revenues

B-12

 Combining Statement uf Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund Balances
Nonmajor Governmental Funds
Year Ended Deccmber3l, 2012'
(Dollars in fhousands)

Total Special
Revenue
l-'iin(ls
KCVENUES
Property Tiix
Utility ra.\
.Sales Tax
Traiisportdtion Ta\ . . . .
Stale Income Tax
Transaction Ta.v
Spceial Area Tax
Other faxe;
l-'cdcralASlale Graiils
Intemal Service
I'incs
Investment Income
Charges I'or Service;

i
.

.

63.883

18.816

. .. .

16.361
l.\7II
2.814
37.297
2I.'I33
8.S3,n94

I'otal Kcvenues

36

-

991
104,303

-

244.116
1,600
6,424
49,919
68,224
77,738
458,951
924

. .

103.276

-

177,019
I()8..'i06
'10,846

Miscellaneous

r.XI'FNDITURFS
Current:
• General Government
1 le;illh
Public .Safety
Strcet.s and Sanitation
'I'ransportalioii
Cultural and Recreational
L'mployee Pcn.sions
Other
Capital Outlay
IX-hl Scri'icc:
Principal Retirement
Inlerest and Other I'iscal Charges

Debt Service
Fund .Special
Tii-xiny .Areas

-

Total
Capital
Project
Funds

$

Total Nonmajor
Governmental
Funds*
$

-

453,684
63.883

.
177.019
108,506
40,846

-

18,816

-

16,361
15,711
3,626
37,297
23.757

-

776

1.333
2.109

959.506

-

244,116
1,600
6,424
49,919
68,224
77,738
458.951
924
90.429

-

43,025
29,856

90,429

720

43,025
29,136

fotal li.xpcndiUires

908,616

72,161

90.429

1,071,206

Revenues Over (Under) i;,\pcndittircs . .. .

(55.522)

32,142

(88,320)

(111,700)

51,874

122.415

OTI IHR FINANCING SOURCES (USES)
Issu.ince of Debt
Payment to Relunded Uond Escrow Agent
Transl'ers In

70,541

...

-

Net Change in Fund Kalaiiees
Fund Ualance- IJeginning of Year
I'und Ualance-End ofYcar

$

-

7.965

47.322
(73,254)

19.000
(9.482)

74,287
(82.736)

7X..506

(25,932)

61,392

113,966

22,984
81,749
104,733

6,210
117,530
123.741)

I ransfers Out ...
Total Other rinancing Sources (Uses)

-

$

(26,928;
113,576
$ 86.648

2.266
312,855
$

315.121

Source
Schedule B-2 in the Noninajor Govemmenial Funds Section o f the City o f Chicago Coinprehensive Annual I'inancial Report
(CAFR) lor the year ended December 3 1 , 2012 The Cily's CAI'R tor the year ended December 3 1 , 2012 is available upon request from ihe
C i l i c e ol'lhe City Comptroller
Ihe line ilenis under " l o t a l Nonmajor Ciovernniental Funds" above are idenlieal lo the hne items under Ihe column captioned "Other
(iovemmenl.'il Funds" appeanng as I.Ahibit 4 lo the City s Basic Fin.incial Statements for the year ended December 3 1 . 2012 included as
At>PBNDl,XC herelo

B- 1 3

  PAGE 

 

APPENDIX 
CITY OF CHICAGO

BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012

 

 PAGF. 

City of Chicago
Basic Financial Statements
for the Year Ended December 31, 2012

Rahm Emanuel, Mayor
Lois Scott, Chief Financial Officer
Aincr Ahmad, City Comptroller

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Pages
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS' REPORT
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS

1-2

3-15

BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS;
Government-wlide Financial Statements:
Exhibit
Exhibit

Statement ol Net Position
Statement of Activities

17
18-19

FuncJ Financial Statements;
Exhibit
Exhibit
Exhibit

Exhibit
Exhibit
Exhibit
Exhibit
Exhibit
Exhibit

9
10
11

Balance Sheet - Governmental Funds
Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund Balances Governmental Funds
'
Reconciliation of the Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes
in Fund Balances of Governmental Funds to the
Statement of Activities
Statement of Revenues and Expenditures - Budget and Actual General Fund (Budgetary Basis)
Statement of Net Position - Propnetary Funds
Statement of Revenues, Expenses and Changes in Net Position Proprietary Funds
Statement of Cash Flows - Proprietary Funds
Statement of Fiduciary Net Position - Fiduciary Funds
Statement of Changes in Plan Net Position Pension Trust Funds

NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION (UNAUDITED)
SCHEDULE OF OTHER POSTEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS FUNDING PROGRESS

20-21
22-25
26
27
28-29
30
31-32
33
34
35-79

80

 Deloitte

Doloillo 5 Touche LLP'
1 i I S. '.70lkef Dii'.'C
ilnicayo, IL 60606 asol

us;:
tel. t l 312 435,1000
F.1.C +1 512 435 Mc5
\.'.v,v;delo'lle.cori

INDEPENDENT AUDITOR'S R E P O R T

To the Honorable Rahm L-manuel, Mayor
and MciTibcrs ofthe Cily Council
City of Chicago, Illinois
Report on the Financial Statements
Wc have audited the accompanying financial statcnienLs ofthe governmental activities, the business-type
activities, each major fund, and the aggregate rcinaining fund information ofthe City o f Chicago, Illinois
(ihc "City'"), as of and for the year ended December 3 I, 2012, and the related notes lo the financial
statements, which collectively comprise the Cily's basic financial slatcmenls as listed in the table of
contents.
Management's Responsibility for the Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial statements in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States o f America; this includes
the design, implementation, and maintenance o f intemal conlrol relevant to the preparation and fair
presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or
error.
Auditor's Responsibility
Our responsibility is lo express opinions on these financial slalcments ba.scd on our audit. We did not
audit the financial statements ofthe Cily's Pension Plans (the "Plans") which, in aggregate, represent
substantially all the assets and revenues ofthe fiduciary funds, included in the aggregate remaining fijnd
informaiion. Those statements were audited by olher auditors whose reports have been fumished to us,
and our opinion, insofar as it relates lo the amounts included for the Plans, is based solely on the reports
ofthe other auditors. We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in
the United Slates o f America. Those standards require lhat we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free from material misstatement.
An audit involves perfonning procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditor's judgment, including the
assessmenl ofthe risks o f material misstalemenl of Ihe financial statements, whether due to fraud or error.
In making Ihose risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant to the entity's preparation
and fair presentation ofthe financial statements in oidcr to design audit procedures thai are appropriate in
the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness ofthe entity's
internal conlrol. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes evaluating the
appropriateness ofaccounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation ofthe financial
statements.

Meinbef DI ^

 We believe lhat the audit evidence we and other auditors have obtained is sufiicienl and appropriate to
provide a basis for our audit opinions.
Opinions
In our opinion, based on our audit and the reports o f other auditors, the tlnancial statements referred to
above present fairly, in all material respects, the respective financial position ofthe governmental
activities, the business-type activities, each major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund information o f
the Cily, as of December .11, 2012, and the respective changes in financial position and, where applicable,
cash flows thereof and the respective budgetary comparison for the General Fund for the year then ended
in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Other Matters
Required

Supplementary

Information

Accounting principles generally accepted in Ihe United States of America require that the Management's
Discussion and Analysis and Schedule of Other Postemployment Benefits Funding Progress, as listed in
the table of contents, be presented to supplement the basic financial slatemenls. Such infomiation,
although not a part ofthe basic financial slatemenls, is required by the Govemmental Accounting
Standards Board who considers it to be an essential part of finaricial reporting for placing the basic
financial statements in an appropriate operational, economic, or historical context. We and other auditors
have applied certain limiled procedures to the required supplementary infomiation in accordance with
auditing standards generally accepted in the United Slates o f America, which consisted of inquiries of
management about the methods of preparing the infonnation and comparing the information for
consistency with management's responses to our inquiries, the basic financial statements, and other
knowledge we obtained during our audit ofthe basic financial statements. We do nol express an opinion
or provide any assurance on the infomiation because the limited procedures do nol provide us with
sufficieni evidence to express an opinion or provide any assurance.

fcJlcAgj:,;
Chicago, Illinois
June 29, 2013

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Management's Discussion and Analysis
As management of the City of Chicago, Illinois (City) we offer readers of the City's Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report (CAFR) this narrative overview and analysis of the financial activities of the City for the fiscal year ended
December 3 1 , 2012. We encourage the readers to consider the information presented here in conjunction with
information contained within this report.
2012 Financial Highlights
•

•

•

•

•

Liabilities and Deferred Inflows of the City, in the government-wide financial statements, exceeded its assets and
deferred outflows at the close of the most recent fiscal year by $3,828.3 million {net deficit). Of this amount.
$8,891.6 million is an unrestricted deficit, while $2,172.3 million is net investment In capital assets and $2,891.0
million is restricted for specific purposes.
The City's total assets increased by $631.7 million. The increase primarily relates to a $1,004.0 million increase
in capital assets as a result of the City's capital improvement program, offset by a $319.7 million decrease in cash
and cash equivalents and investments pnmanly as a result of the City's financing of its operations.
Revenues and Other Financing Sources, in the fund financial statements, available for general governmental
operations during 2012 were $6,751.5 million, a decrease of $889.7 million (11.6 percent) from 2011 due to a
decrease in the amount of bonds issued.
The General Fund, also in the fund financial statements, ended 2012 with a total Fund Balance of $231.3 million.
Total Fund Balance decreased from 2011 pnmanly because Revenues and Other Financing Sources were less
than Expenditures and Other Financing Uses by $101.1 million. Fund Balance at December 31, 2012 of $177.0
million was assigned. Unassigned Fund Balance was $33.4 million at December 31, 2012.
The City's general obligation bonds and notes outstanding increased by $234.1 million during the current fiscal
year The proceeds from the increase in bonds-were used to finance the City's capital plan and certain operating
expenses.

Overview of the Basic Financial Statements
This discussion and analysis is intended to serve as an introduction to the City's basic financial statements, which
include the following components: 1) government-wide financial statements, 2) fund financial statements, and 3)
notes to the basic financial statements. This report also contains required supplementary information in addition to
the basic financial statements. These components are described below:
Government-wide financial statements. The government-wide financial statements are designed to provide
readers with a broad overview of the City's finances, using accounting methods similar to those used by privatesector companies. The statements provide both short-term and long-term information about the City's financial
position, which assists in assessing the City's economic condition at the end of the fiscal year. These financial
statements are prepared using the flow of economic resources measurement focus and the accrual basis of
accounting. This basically means such statements follow methods that are similar to those used by most businesses.
They take into account all revenues and expenses connected with the fiscal year even if cash involved has not been
received or paid.
The government-wide financial statements include two statements:
The statement of net position presents information on all of the City's assets, deferred outflows, liabilities, and
deferred inflows with the difference reported as net position. Over time, increases or decreases in net position may
serve as a useful indicator of whether the financial position of the City is improving or deteriorating, respectively. To
assess the overall health of the City, the reader should consider additional non-financial factors such as changes in
the City's property tax base and the condition of the City's roads.
The statement of activities presents information showing how the government's net position changed during each
fiscal year. All changes in net position are reported as soon as the underlying event giving rise to the change occurs,
regardless of the timing of the related cash flows. Thus, revenues and expenses are reported in this statement for
some items lhat will only result in cash flows in future periods (for example, uncollected taxes, and earned but unused

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
vacalion). This statement also presents a companson between direct expenses and program revenues for each
function of Ihe City.
Both of the government-wide financial statements distinguish functions of the City that are principally supported by
taxes and intergovernmental revenues (govemmen/a/ activities) from other functions that are intended to recover all
or a significant portion of their costs through user fees and charges {business-type activities). The governmental
activities of the City include general government, public safety, streets and sanitation, transportation, health, and
cultural and recrealion. The business-type activities of the City include water, sewer, tollway and airport services.
The government-wide financial statements present information about the City as a primary government, which
includes the Chicago Public Library and the City related funds of the Public Building Commission. The governmentwide financial statements can be found immediately following this management's discussion and analysis
Fund financial statements. A fund is a grouping of related accounts lhat is used to maintain control over resources
that have been segregated for specific activities or objectives. The City, like other state and local governments, uses
fund accounting to ensure and demonstrate compliance with finance-related legal requirements. All of the funds of
the City can be divided into three categories: governmental funds, proprietary funds, and fiduciary funds.
Governmental funds. Governmental funds are used to account for essentially the same functions reported as
governmental activities in the govemment-wide financial statements. However, unlike the government-wide financial
statements, governmental fund financial statements focus on near-term inflows and outflows of spendable resources,
as well as on balances of spendable resources available at the end of a fiscal year. Such information may be useful
in evaluating a government's near-term financing requirements.
Because the focus of governmental funds is narrower than lhat of the government-wide financial statements, it is
useful to compare the information presented for govemmental funds with similar information presented for
governmental activities in the government-wide financial statements. By doing so, readers may better understand the
long-term impact of the government's near-term financing decisions. Both the governmental fund balance sheet and
the governmental fund statement of revenues, expenditures, and changes in fund balances provide a reconciliation to
facilitate the comparison between governmental funds and govemmental activities.
The City maintains 19 individual governmental funds. Information for the six funds that qualify as major is presented
separately in the governmental fund balance sheet and in the governmental fund statement of revenues,
expenditures, and changes in fund balances. The six major governmental funds are as follows: the General Fund,
the Federal. State and Local Grants Fund, the Special Taxing Areas Fund, Service Concession and Reserve Fund,
the Bond, Note Redemption and Interest Fund, and the Community Development and Improvement Projects Fund.
Data from the other governmental funds are combined into a single, aggregated presentation.
The City adopts an annual appropriation budget for its general and certain special revenue funds on a non-GAAP
budgetary basis. A budgetary companson statemenf has been provided for the General Fund, the only major fund
with an appropriation budget, to demonstrate compliance with this budget. The basic governmental fund financial
statements can be found immediately following the government-wide statements.
Proprietary funds. These funds are used to show activities that operate more like those of commercial enterprises.
Because these funds charge user fees for services provided to outside customers including local governments, they
are known as enterprise funds. Proprietary funds, like government-wide statements, use the accrual basis of
accounting and provide both long- and short-term financial information. There is no reconciliation needed between
the government-wide financial statements for business-type activities and the proprietary fund financial statements.
The City uses five enterprise funds to account for its water, sewer, tollway, and two airports operations.
Proprietary funds provide the same type of information as the government-wide financial statements, but provide
more detail The proprietary fund financial statements provide separate information for the Water Fund, Sewer Fund,
Chicago Skyway Fund, Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Fund and the Chicago Midway International Airport
Fund All the proprietary funds are considered to be major funds of the City. The basic proprietary fund financial
statements can be found immediately following the governmental fund financial statements.

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Fiduciary funds. Fiduciary funds are used primarily to account for resources held for the benefit of parties outside
the primary government. The City is the trustee, or fiduciary, for its employees' pension plans. It is also responsible
for other assets that, because of a trust arrangement can be used only for the trust beneficiaries. The City also uses
fiduciary funds to account for transactions for assets held by the City as agent for various entities. The City is
responsible for ensuring that the assets reported in these funds are used for their intended purposes. Fiduciary funds
are not reflected in the government-wide financial statements because the resources of those funds are not available
to support the City's own programs. All of the City's fiduciary activities are reported in a separate statement of
fiduciary net position and a statement of changes in fiduciary net position. The accounting used for fiduciary funds is
much like that used for proprietary funds. The fiduciary fund basic financial statements can be found immediately
following the proprietary fund financial statements.
Notes to tfie basic financial statements. The notes provide additional information that is essential for a full
understanding of data provided in the government-wide and fund basic financial statements. The notes to the basic
financial statements can be found immediately following the fiduciary fund basic financial statements.
Financial Analysis of the City a s a whole
Net Position. As noted earlier, net position may serve over time as a useful indicator of a government's financial
position. In the case of the City, liabilities and deferred inflows exceeded assets by $3,828.2 million at December 3 1 ,
2012.
A large portion of the City's net position, $2,172.3 million, reflects its investment in capital assets (land, buildings,
roads, bridges, etc.) less any related debt used to acquire those assets that is still outstanding. The City uses these
capital assets to provide services to citizens; consequently, these assets are not available for future spending.
Although the City's investment in its capital assets is reported net of related debf, it should be noted that the
resources needed to repay this debt must be provided from olher sources, since the capital assets themselves cannot
be used to liquidate these liabilities and deferred inflows.

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
City of Chicago, Illinois
Suminary Statement of Net Position
(in millions of dollars)
Governmental
Activities
2012
2011
Current and ottier assets
Capital assets

.. $

Total Assets
Deferred outllows
Total
Long-leim liabilities outstanding ..
Other liabilities
Total Liabilities
Deferred Inflows

Business-type
Activities
2012
2011
$

4,444 1
12,515 5

5,789.0
7,869.7

$ ' 6.125.2
7.579 9

13.658 7
224 2

13,705.1
236 0

16,959 6
253 1

13.882.9

13,941 1

17,212 7

16,863 2
1,245.8

15,212.4
1,484.0

12,496.0
1,018.4

18,109.0

16.696 4

13,514.4

1,618.4

1,639.4

(216.0)
1.908.5
(7.537.0)

(299.9)
1,596.4
(5,691.2)

(5.844 5)

$ (4,394.7)

$

4.480.3
11,801 2

Total
2011

2012

$

16,281 5
255.1

10,233.1
20,385.2

$

10,605 5
19,381 1

30,618 3
477 3

29,986 6
491 1

16,536 6

31,095 6

30,477.7

11,827 3
1,223.6

29,359.2
2,264.2

27,039.7
2,707.6

13,050 9

31,623.4

29,747.3

1.682.1

1,700.6

3,300 5

3,340 0

2.388.3

2.451.8

2,172 3

2,151 9

982.5
(1.354 6)

874.8
(1,541.5)

2,891 0
(8,891.6)

2,471.3
(7,232.7)

Net Position:
Net investment in capital assets ..
Restricted
Unrestncted
Total net (deficit) position

.. $

$

2,016 2

$

1,785.1

$

13,828 31

$

(2,609 5)

An additional portion of the City's net position ($2,891.0 million) represents resources that are subject to external
restrictions on how they may be used.
Governmental Activities. Net position of the City's governmental activities decreased $1,449.8 million to a deficit of
$5,844.5 million. However, a significant portion of net position is either restricted as to the purpose they can be used
for or they are net investment in capital assets (buildings, roads, bridges, etc.) Consequently, unrestricted net
position showed a $7,537.0 million deficit at the end of this year. This deficit does not mean that the City does not
have the resources available to pay its bills next year. Rather, it is the result of having long-term commitments that
are greater than currently available resources. Specifically, the City did not include in past annual budgets the full
amounts needed to finance future liabilities arising from personnel, property, pollution and casualty claims ($888.6
million) and l\/lunicipal employees. Policemen's and Firemen's net pension obligation and post-employment benefits
($6,364.9 million). The City will include these amounts in future years' budgets as they come due. In addition, the
remaining deferred inflow of $1,618.4 million will be amortized into income over the life of the concession service
agreements.
Revenues for all governmental activities in 2012 were
from taxes. Total tax receipts decreased slightly. Total
$38 5 million (4.1 percent). Other taxes decreased by
and transaction taxes. Federal/State grants vary from
programs, construction and other projects.

$5,554.5 million, with over half of the City's revenue derived
tax revenue includes a decrease in property taxes received of
$115.8 million (5.3 percent) as a result of decreases in sales
year to year depending pnmanly on the level of spending for

Expenses for governmental activities in 2012 were $7,004.3 million. This reflects an increase of $195.5 million (2.9
percent) over 2011. Public Safety accounted for approximately 41.5 percent of total expenses.
The cost of all governmental activities was $7,004.3 million The amount lhat taxpayers paid for these activities
through City taxes was only $2,963.7 million. Some of the cost was paid by those who directly benefited from' the
programs ($750.2 million), or by olher governments and organizations that subsidized certain programs with grants
and contnbutions ($920.8 million).
The City paid $919.8 million for the "public benefit" portion with other revenues such as slate aid, interest and
miscellaneous income.

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2012
Although total net position of business-types activities was $2,016.2 million, these resources cannot be used to make
up for the deficit in net position in governmental activities. The City generally can only use this net position to finance
the continuing operations of the water, sewer, tollway, and airports activities.

City o f Chicago, Illinois
C h a n g e s i n Net P o s i t i o n
Years Ended December 3 1 ,
(in m i l l i o n s o f dollars)
Governmental

Business-type

Activities
2012

Activities
2011

2012

Total
2012

2011

2011

Revenues:
Program Revenues:
Licenses. Permits. Fines and
Charges for Services

$

750.2

$

680.9

Operating Grants and Contnbutions . . . .

748.3

788.8

Capital Grants and Contributions

172.5

282 0

$

1.889.1

S

83.2

1,494.3

$

2,639.3

$

2,175 2

-

748.3

788.8

257 4

255.7

539.4

General Revenues:
Property Taxes
Other Taxes

896 3

934.8

2.067.4

2,183.2

-

-

2.067 4

2,183.2

598 4

896 3

934.8

Grants and Contnbutions not
692 2

598.4

-

-

692.2

227.6

240 3

64.0

83.2

291 6

323.5

5,554.5

5.708.4

2.036 3

1.834.9

7.590.8

7.543.3

General Government

2,751.9

2,734 4

2,751.9

2,734.4

Public Safety

2.910 2

2.689.4

2.910.2

2,689.4

Streets a n d Sanitation

228 6

245.9

228 6

245.9

Transportation

383.5

410.8

383 5

410.8

Health

123.1

151.2

123.1

151 2

Cultural and Recreational

146.3

102.8

Interest o n Long-term Debt

460.7

474 3

Restricted to Specific Programs
Olher
Total Revenues
Expenses:

Water
Sewer
Midway International Airport
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport
Chicago Skyway
Total Expenses
Change in Net Position Before Transfers .

-

-

-

417 5
195 9

146.3

102 8

460.7

474 3

416 3

417 5

416 3

194.8

195 9

194.8

225.9

218.1

225.9

218.1

955.3

879.3

955.3

879 3

10.6

10.9

10.6

6.808.8

1.805.2

1.719.4

8,809 5

8.528 2

(1,100.4)

231.1

115.5

(1,218.7)

(984.9)

(1,218.7)

(1.038.8)

(2,609.5)

(1,570 8)

-

-•

7.004.3

(1,449 8)

Special Item
Transfers
Change in Net Position
Nel (Deficit) Position. Beginning of Year
Not (Deficit) Position, E n d of Year

109

(53.9)

-

-

1.0

(1,449 8)

(1,099.4)

(4,394.7)

(3,295.3)

S (5,844 5) $ (4.394.7)

60 6

1,785 1
$

2,016.2

-

(1.0)

231.1

1,724 5
$

1,785 1

$ (3,828 3) $ (2,609.6)

 CITY O F C H I C A G O , ILLINOIS
M A N A G E M E N T ' S D I S C U S S I O N AND A N A L Y S I S
Y E A R E N D E D D E C E M B E R 31, 2012

E x p e n s e s a n d P r o g r a m R e v e n u e s - G o v e r n m e n t a l Activities
(in millions of dollars)

200

400

600

800

1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600 1,800 2,000 2,200 2,400 2,600 2,800 3,000 3,200

General Government
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Health
Cultural and Recreaiional

p

• Expenses

BProgram Revenues

Interest on Long-temn Debt

R e v e n u e s by S o u r c e - G o v e r n m e n t a l Activities

Operating Grants and Capital Grants and
Contributions
Contributions
14%
3%
Licenses, Permits, Fines
and Charges for Services
14%

Property Tax
16%

Other
4%

Grants and Contributions
not restricted to specific
programs
12%

Other Taxes
37%

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Business-type Activities. Revenues of the City's business-type activities increased by $231.1 million in 2012 mostly
from an increase in the charges for services and rental income revenues. All Funds met debt service coverage ratios
set forth in the applicable bond indentures.
•

The Water Fund's operating revenue increased by $122.1 million (26.9%) from 2011 due to a 25% increase in
water rates and increase in usage resulting from a drought summer in 2012. Operating expenses before
depreciation and amortization for the year ended 2012 increased by $7.3 million (2.6%) from the year ended 2011
due to an increase in central services and General Fund reimbursements, increase in power and pumping and
increase in administrative and general offset by a decrease in purification resulting from a decrease in costs of
sediment disposals.

•

The Sewer Fund's operating revenue increased in 2012 by $50.6 million (24.9%) primarily due to an increase in
water and sewer rates. Operating expenses before depreciation and amortization for 2012 remained consistent
with 2011. Depreciation and amortization increased slightly due to an increase in utilily plant.

•

Chicago Midway International Airport Fund's operating revenues for 2012 increased by $0,462 million (0.3%) from
2011 primarily due to increased other rentals and fueling fees, offset by decreased landings fees and terminal
area use charges. Concessions increased by $1.8 million primarily due to an increase in auto parking,
restaurants, and auto rental offset by a decrease in other concessions. Operating expenses before depreciation
and amortization increased by $4.2 million (3.8%) million primarily due to an increase in salary and wages,
adjustments to a capital lease and an increase in provision for doubtful accounts, offset by a decrease in repairs
and maintenance expenses.

•

Chicago O'Hare International Airport Fund's operating revenues for 2012 increased by $23.2 million (3.3%)
compared to 2011 primarily due to an increased terminal rental and usage charges. Operating expenses before
depreciation and amortization increased by $19.1 million (4.4%) pnmarily due to an increase in salaries and
wages, employee benefits, professional and engineering services and capital asset impairment, offset by a
decrease in repairs and maintenance expense.

•

The Chicago Skyway was leased for 99 years to a private company. The agreement granted the company to
operate the Skyway and to collect toll revenue during the term of the agreement. The City received an upfront
payment of $1.83 billion of which $446.3 million was used fo advance refund all of the outstanding Skyway bonds.
The upfront payment is being amortized into non-operating revenue over the period of the lease ($18.5 million
annually).

 CITY O F C H I C A G O , ILLINOIS
M A N A G E M E N T ' S D I S C U S S I O N AND A N A L Y S I S
Y E A R E N D E D D E C E M B E R 31, 2012

E x p e n s e s a n d P r o g r a m R e v e n u e s - B u s i n e s s - t y p e Activities
(in millions of d o l l a r s )

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1,000

Water

Sewer
Chicago Midway International Airport

Chicago-O'Hare Inlernalional Airport

Chicago Skyway

• Expenses

BProgram Revenues

R e v e n u e s by S o u r c e - B u s i n e s s - t y p e Activities

other
3%
Capital Grants an
Contributions
. 4%

Licenses. Permits.
Fines and Charges for
Services
93%

10

1,100

1,200

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Financial Analysis of the City's Funds
As noted earlier, the City uses fund accounting to ensure and demonstrate compliance with finance-related legal
requirements.
Governmental funds. The focus of the City's governmental funds is to provide information on near-term infiows,
outflows, and balances of spendable resources. Such informaiion is useful in assessing the City's financing
requirements. In particular, unassigned fund balance may serve as a useful measure of a government's net
resources available for spending at the end of the fiscal year.
At December 31, 2012, the City's governmental funds reported combined ending fund balances of $1,593.4 million, a
decrease of $262.6 million in comparison with the prior year. Of this total amount $882.1 million was committed to
specific expenditures, $177.0 million was assigned to anticipated uses, a deficit of $1,819.5 million was unassigned,
$2,332.9 million was of restricted in use by legislation, and $20.9 million was nonspendable.
The General Fund is the chief operating fund of the City. At the end of the current fiscal year, the unassigned fund
balance of the General Fund was $33.4 million with a total fund balance of $231.3 million. As a measure of the
General Fund's liquidity, it may be helpful to compare both unassigned fund balance and lotal fund balance to total
fund expenditures. Total General Fund balance represents 7.5 percent of total General Fund expenditures. The fund
balance of the City's General Fund decreased by approximately $104.2 million during the current fiscal year.
The Federal, State and Local Grants Fund has a total deficit fund balance of $206.1 million. This is $84.4 million
lower than 2011 primanly due to slower reimbursement of expenditures.
The Special Taxing Areas Fund has a total fund balance of $1,499.4 million, which is all restricted to specific
expenditures.
The Service Concession and Reserve Fund accounts for deferred inflows from non-business type long-term
concession and lease transactions and has $624.9 million committed to specific expenditures. The unassigned
amount of $1,618.4 million results from the deferred inflows from long-term asset leases.
The Bond, Note Redemption and Interest Fund has a total fund balance of $346.7 million. This is $65.6 million lower
than 2011.
The Community Development and Improvement Projects Fund has a total fund balance of $400.4 million. This is
$85.4 million lower than 2011 due to increase capital improvement efforts.
Ctianges in fund balance. The fund balance for the City's governmental funds decreased by $262.6 million in 2012.
This includes an decrease in inventory of $3.2 million.
Proprietary funds. The City's proprietary funds provide the same type of information found in the government-wide
financial statements, but in more detail.
Unrestricted net position of the Water, Sewer, Chicago Skyway, Chicago-O'Hare International Airport, and Chicago
Midway International Airport Funds at the end of the year amounted to a deficit of 51,354.6 million. The unrestricted
net position deficit decreased by $186.9 million due to an increase in the unrestricted net position in Chicago O'Hare
International Airport. Chicago Midway Inlernalional Airport, Water, and Sewer Funds. Olher factors concerning the
finances of these five funds have already been addressed in the discussion of the City's business-type activities.
General Fund Budgetary Highlights
The City's 2012 Original General Fund Budget was $3,104.3 million. This budget reflects a decrease of $159.4
million (4.9 percent) over the 2011 Budget. The City's 2012 General Fund Budget was approved by the City Council
on November 16, 2011. The General Fund revenues on a budgetary basis were $27.4 million less than the final
budget as a result of lower transfers in and lower than expected use of budgeted prior years' surplus, offset by higher
11

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
than expected taxes. Expenditures were $27.4 million more than budgeted as a result of unfavorable variances in
public safety, primarily as a result of higher than expected personnel related expenses Additional information on the
City's budget can be found in Note 3 under Stewardship, Compliance and Accountability within this report.
The General Fund revenues and expenditures in 2012 ended the current fiscal year with an unassigned fund balance
of $33.4 million.
Capital Asset and Debt Administration
Capital Assets. The City's capital assets for ils governmental and business-type activities as of December 31, 2012
amounl to $20,385.2 million (net of accumulated depreciation). These capital assets include land, buildings and
system improvements, machinery and equipment, roads, highways and bridges, and property, plant and equipment.
Major capital asset events during the current fiscal year included the following:
•

•

•

•

•

•

The City continues its commitment to sustainable design in new construction projects utilizing the Leadership in
Energy & Environmental Design (LEED) strategy. Completed construction in 2012 included a new fire house for
Engine Company 16 totaling $16.8 million. Police District 12 totaling $3.4 million and the Grand Crossing Reading
Garden totaling $0.6 million
During 2012 the City completed $116.4 million in bridge and viaduct reconstruction projects, $90.3 million street
construction projects and $3 5 million in street lighting projects. At year end, Infrastructure projects still in process
had expenses totaling nearty $606 8 million.
At the end of 2012 Ihe Water Fund had $2,861.3 million invested in utility plant, net of accumulated depreciation.
Dunng 2012, the Water Fund expended $318.9 million on capital activities. This included $2.2 million for
structures and improvements, $133.9 million for distribution plant, $5.8 million for equipment, and $177.2 million
for construction in progress.
During 2012, nel completed projects totaling $63.7 million were transferred from construction in progress to
applicable capital accounts. The major completed projects were related to installafion and replacements of water
mains ($63.4 million). The 2012 Water Main Replacement Program completed 79.7 miles of water mains of
which approximately 31.0 miles were completed by in-house crews.
At the end of 2012, the Sewer Fund totaled capital assets of $1,671.3 million. During 2012, the Sewer Fund had
capital additions being depreciated of $246.6 million, and completed projects totaling $79.2 million were
transferred from construcfion in progress to applicable facilities and structures capital accounts. The 2012 Sewer
Main Replacement Program completed 17.4 miles of sewer mains and 51.4 miles of relining of existing sewer
mains at a cost of $246.6 million.
At the end of 2012, Chicago-Midway Internafional Airport totaled $1,167.3 million, invested in net capital assets.
During 2011, the Airport had additions of $64.8 million related to capital activities. This included $3.4 million for
land acquisition and the balance of $61.4 million for construction projects relafing to terminal improvements,
parking and roadway enhancements, and runway improvements.
At the end of 2012 Chicago-O'Hare International Airport totaled $6.5 billion, invested in net capital assets. During
2012, the Airport had additions of $476.5 million related to capital acfivities. This included $8.6 million for land
acquisition and the balance of $467.9 million for terminal improvements, road and sidewalk enhancemerit, runway
and laxiway improvements, along with general parking enhancements. During 2012, completed projects totaling
$314.8 million were transferred from construction in progress to applicable buildings and other facilities capital
accounts. These major completed projects were related to runway improvements, heating and refrigeration, road
and sidewalk enhancements, electrical, water drainage, fuel system enhancements and terminal improvements.

12

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
City of Chicago, Illinois
Capital Assets (net of depreciation)
(In millions of dollars)
Business-type
Activities

Govemmental
Activities
2012
Land

.. $

1,404.5

2011

$

2012

1,401.0

$

Total

2011

1,024.7

S

2012

1,012.6

$

2011

2,429.2

$

2.413 6

Works of Art and
Historical Collections
Construction in Progress
Buildings and Other ImpnDvements ....
Machinery and Equipment
Inlraslruclure
Total

.. $

-

-

13.2

13.1

13.2

13 1

644.3

466.3

1,548 3

1,3104

2.192.6

1.776 7

1.677.7

1,699.0

9,618 2

9,141.0

11,295.9

10,840.0

255 6

313.6

324.3

337.3

579.9

650.9

3,874 4

3,686.9

3,874.4

3.686.9

$ 20,385.2

5 19.381.2

7,869.7

$

-

7,579 9

-

$ 12,515.5

$ 11,801.3

Information on the City's capital assets can be found in Note 7 Capital Assets m this report.
Debt. At the end of the current fiscal year, the City had $7,315.4 million in General Obligation Bonds and $696.4
million in General Obligation Certificates and Other Obligations outstanding. Other outstanding long-term debt is as
follows: $193.0 million in Motor Fuel Tax Revenue Bonds; $577.3 million of Sales Tax Revenue Bonds; $112.2 million
in Tax Increment Financing Bonds; and $11,967.8 million in Enterprise Fund Bonds and long-term obligations. For
more detail, refer to Note 10 Long-term Obligations in the Basic Financial Statements.
City of Chicago, Illinois
General Obligation and Revenue Bonds
(in millions of dollars)
Govemmental
Activities
2012
2011
General Obligation

. $

. Installment Purchase Agreement
Tax Increment
Revenue Bonds
Total

.. $

8,011.8

$ 7,777 7

112.2

131.6

Business-type
Activities
2012
2011

Total
2012
$

8.0118
1122

770 3

776 0

11,967.8

8,894.3

$ 8,685.3

$ 11,967.8

$

2011
$

7.777.7
131.6

11,715.0

12,738 1

12,491 0

11,7150

S 20.862.1

$ 20,400 3

During 2012, the City issued the following:
General Obligation Bonds:
•
•

General Obligation Bonds, Project Series 2012A, Taxable Project Series 2012B, and Refunding Senes 2012C
($594.9 million)
General Obligation Commercial Paper Notes ($133.8 million)

T3

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Enterprise Fund Revenue Bonds and Notes:
•
•
•
•

Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Third Lien Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2012A (Alternative Minimum
Tax - AMT), Series 2012B (AMT) and Series 2012C (Non-AMT) ($728.9 million)
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Passenger Facility Charge Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2012A (NonAMT) and 2012B (AMT) ($452.1 million)
Chicago-O'Hare Internafional Airport General Commercial Paper Notes ($50.6 million)
Second Lien Water Revenue Bonds, Project Series 2012 ($399.4 million)
Second Lien Wastewater Transmission Revenue Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2012 ($276.5 million)

At December 31, 2012 the City had credit ratings with each of the three major rafing agencies as follows:

Rating Agency

Mood/s

General Obligation:
City
Revenue Bonds;
0'Har.e Airport:

Standard &
Poor's

Fitch

Aa3

A+

AA-

A2
A2

AA-

AA

A2
A3

A
A-

A
A-

First Lien General Airport Revenue Bonds
First Lien Passenger Facility Charge (PFC)
Midway Airport:
First Lien
Second Lien
Water:
First Lien
Second Lien
Wastewater:
First Lien
Junior Lien

Aa2
Aa3

AA
AA-

AA+
AA

Aa2
Aa3

AAA+

NR
AA

Sales Tax

Aa3

AAA

AA-

Molor Fuel Tax

Aa3

AA+

A-

In 2012, the City closed and extinguished the First and Second General Airport Revenue (GAR) bonds. The third
Lien bonds became the First Lien bonds.

Economic Factors and Next Year's Budgets and Rates
The City's finances are closely tied with the local, national, and global economies. Throughout 2012, the local and
nafional economies experienced moderate growth, continuing the recovery from the economic downturn. The strong
commercial real estate market seen throughout 2011 confinued into 2012, and 2012 also saw the housing market join
in this recovery. Home sales increased by 22 percent over 2011, and home prices, which had been slower to
recover, licked up 5.7 percent over 2011. Nationwide, retail sales grew 5 percent over 2011 in 2012, and consumer
confidence surged during the holiday season. The average nafional unemployment rate decreased from 8.9 percent
in 2011 lo 8.1 percent in 2012, and Chicago's unemployment rate fell from 11.3 percent in 2011 to 10.1 percent in
2012. Tourism and business and convention travel to Chicago reached near-record levels in 2012, with 46.2 million
visitors to the City, an increase of 6 percent over 2011. This growth was evident in local hotel occupancy, which was
up 4 percent in 2012 from 2011, and revenue per available room, which was up 10 percent in 2012 from 2011.

14

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2012
The City's 2013 General Fund budget, totaling $3,159 million, was approved by a 46 to 3 vote of City Council on
November 15, 2012. The 2013 budget balanced a preliminary budget shortfall of $369 million by cutting spending
and increasing efficiencies without raising any taxes or introducing any new fees. The 2013 Corporate Fund shortfall
was the smallest preliminary budget deficit since the recession, demonstrating the progress and reforms made in the
2012 budget and throughout the year. The 2013 budget built on that progress, invesfing in youth, public safety, and
cntical infrastructure while continuing to phase out the heavy reliance on nonrecurring revenue sources, including
funds from the City's asset concession reserves, seen prior to 2012. In 2012. the City returned $20 million to its longterm reserves, and the 2013 budget commits an additional $15 million to those reserves.
Requests for Information
This financial report is designed to provide a general overview of the City's finances for all of those with an interest in
the government's finances. Questions concerning any of the informafion provided in this report or requests for
additional financial information should be addressed to the City of Chicago Comptroller's Office.

15

 This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Exhibit 1
CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
S T A T E M E N T O F NET POSITION,
D e c e m b e r 31, 2012
( A m o u n t s are in T h o u s a n d s of D o l l a r s )
Pnmary Government

Governmental
Activities

Business-type
Activities

Total

ASSETS AND DEFERRED OUTFLOWS
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investments
Cash and Investments with Escrow Agent

$

Receivables (Net of Allowances):
Property Tax
Accounts
Internal Balances
Inventones
:
Restncted Assets:
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Inveslmenis
Other Assets
Capital Assets:
Land, Art, and Construction in Progress
Other Capital Assets. Net of Accumulated Depreciation
Total Capital Assets

729,095
1,626,647
499.754

$

Deferred Outflows

$

_

1,258,648
929,230
(35,190)
20,885

Total Assets

152,999
170,373

882,094
1.797,020
499,754
1,258,648
1,265,843

336,613
35,190
18,819

39,704

4,495
622,628
132,814

997,524
2,218,063
514,477

1,002,019
2,840,691
647,291

2,062,009
5,807,660
7,869,669 .

2,572,971
9,942,547
12,515,518

4,634,980
15,750,207
20,385,187

13,658,675

16,959,576

30,618,251

224,236

253,120

477,356

$

13,882,911

$

17,212,696

:5

31,095,607

$
$

601,946
672
210,413
335,930
96,867

$

420,281

$

236,915
177,937
183,206

1,022,207
672
447,328
513,867
280,073

280,720
255,376
16,327,129
18,109,053

215,231
253,120
12,027,650
13,514,320

495,951
508,496
28,354,779
31,623,373

1,618,360

1,682,121

3,300,481

2,388,310

2,172,349

LIABILITIES AND DEFERRED INFLOWS
Voucher Warrants Payable
Short-term Debt
Accrued Interest
Accrued and Other Liabilities
Unearned Revenue
Long-term Liabilities:
Due Wilhin One Year
Derivative Instrument Liability
Due in More Than One Year
Total Liabilities
Deferred Inflows

-

NET POSITION
Net Investment in Capital Assets
Restncted for:
Capital Projects
Debt Service
Special Taxing Areas
Passenger Facility Charges
Contractual Use Agreement
Noise Mitigation Program ....
Airport Purposes
Unrestncted (Deficit)
Total Net Position

(215,961)

_

173,130
11,624

409,102
1,499,414

-

$

See notes to basic financial statements.

17

(7,537,057)
(5,844,502)

$

140,142
141,566
245,200
270,855
(1,354,572)
2,016,255

$

173,130
420,726
1,499,414
140,142
141,566
245,200
270,855
(8,891,629)
(3,828,247)

 Exhibit 2
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF ACTIVITIES
Year Ended December 31, 2012
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)

Functions/Programs

Expenses

Primary Government
Governmental Acfivities:
General Government
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportafion
Health
Cultural and Recreational
Interest on Long-term Debt
Total Governmental Activities

$

Business-type Activities:
Water
Sewer
Chicago Midway International Airport
Chicago-O'Hare Internafional Airport
Chicago Skyway
Total Business-type Activifies

2,751,944
2,910,160
228,622
383,510
123,055
146,283
460.660
7,004,234

Licenses, Permits,
Fines and
Charges for Services

$

417,499
195,911
225,867
955,276
10,621
1,805,174

Total Pnmary Government

$

See notes to basic financial statements.

18

8,809,408

452,892
199,572
42,138
39,343
1,751
14,454
750,150

576,287
253,912
201,749
857,114
1,889,062
$

2,639,212

 Program Revenues

Net (Expense) Revenue and Changes in Net Assets
Primary Government

Operating
Grants and
Contributions

521.362
115.976

Capital
Grants and
Contnbutions

$

Governmental
Activities

11,615

$

160,841
95,675
15,243
748,256

172,456

2,500
2,500
4,681
73,538

$

255,675

161,288
60,501
(19,437)
(24,624)
(10,621)
167,107

19

(5.844,502)

(5,166,265)

896,246
548,682
294,417
373,544
281,957
274,617
163,194
131,086

_

692,232
92,050
135,511
3,883.536
(1,449,836)
(4,394.666)

692,232
117,247
174,353
3,947,575
(1,218,690)
(2,609,557)

25,197
38,842
64,039
231,146
1,785,109
$

2,016,255

(1,766,075)
(2,594,612)
(186,484).
(183,326)
(25,629)
(116.586)
(460,660)
(5,333,372)

161,288
60,501
(19.437)
(24,624)
(10,621)
167,107

167,107

896,246
548,682
294,417
373,544
281,957
274,617
163,194
131,086

$

$

-

(5,333,372)

General Revenues
Taxes:
Property Tax
UfilityTax
Sales Tax
Transportafion Tax
Transaction Tax
Special Area Tax
Recreation Tax
Other Taxes
Grants and Contributions not Restricted to
Specific Programs
Unrestricted Investment Earnings
Miscellaneous
Total General Reveniies
Change in Net Assets
Net Position - Beginning
Net Posifion - Ending

Total

-

-

83,219
748,256

(1,766,075)
(2,594,612)
(186,484)
(183,326)
(25,629)
(116,586)
(460,660)
(5,333,372)

Business-type
Activities

$

(3.828,247)

 Exhibit 3
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
BALANCE SHEET
GOVERNMENTAL FUNDS
December 31, 2012
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)

General
ASSETS
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investments
Cash and Investments with Escrow Agent
Receivables (Net of Allowances):
Property Tax
Accounts
Due From Other Funds
Due From Other Governments
Inventories
Restricted Cash and Cash Equivalents
Restricted Investments
Other Assets
Total Assets

$

745
72,702

Federal, State
and Local
Grants

$

219,300
165,078
222,604
20,885
389

LIABILITIES, DEFERRED INFLOWS AND FUND BALANCE
Liabilities:
Voucher Warrants Payable
Bonds, Notes and Other Obligations Payable - Current
Accrued Interest
Due To Other Funds
Accrued and Other Liabilifies
Claims Payable
Deferred Revenue
Total Liabilifies

Special
Taxing
Areas
623,433
620,267

20,931
52,705

350,032
3.732
258,238

10,809
29,694
362,651
3,220

$

701,703

$

181,998

157,322
271

49;612

139,397
110,177
37,685
1,144
470,401

281,434
9,467

11,534
3,872

242,966
691,460

291,271
356,289

27,821

1,499,414

$

5,362
485,372

$

1,855,703

Deferred Inflows
Fund Balance:
Nonspendable
Restricted
Committed
Assigned
Unassigned
Total Fund Balance
Total Liabilities, Deferred Inflows and Fund Balance

20,885

$

See notes to basic financial statements.

20

177,000
33,417
231,302
701,703

$

(233,909)
(206,088)
485,372

$

1,499,414
1,855,703

 Service
Concession
and
Reserve

$

202
40

Bond, Note
Redemption
and Interest

$

-

$

$

$

.

$

600,548

$

988,743

$

$

99,249

$

76,771
5,910
2,159
205,273
19,255

$

97,857
3,032

-

189,883
156,836

346,719
1,080,557

_

400,410

$

400,410
600,548

$

(704)
315,121
988,743"

$

Amounts reported for governmental activities in the statement of nel position are different because:
Capital assets used in governmental activities are not financial resources and therefore are not reported in the funds .
Other long-term assets are nol available to pay for current-period expenditures and therefore are deferred in the funds
Certain liabilities, including bonds payable, are not due and payable in the current
period and therefore are not reported in the funds
$
Net position of governmental activities

21

729.095
1,626,647
499.754
1,258,648
285,918
644.731
639,312
20,885
4,495
622,628
5,362
6,337,475

564,952
96,151
210,413
735,495
145,803
37,685
1,335,249
3,125,748
1,618,360

215,383
100,442

-

$

364,254
673,622

200,138

-

-

$

-

211

435,614
733,838

624,849

72,420
223,936
98,713

Total
Governmental
Funds

437,870
10,910
93,854
51,040

-

-

-

442
528,111
1.781

2.204
67,799

89,970
208,254

1,618,360

$

1,080,557

$
-

(1,618,360)
(993,511)
624,849

$

-

674
622,628
624,849

Other
Governmental
Funds

470,746
37,658
30,068
3,017

1,305

$

10,922
128,886
399,260

Community
Development
and Improvement
Projects

20,885
2.332,911
882,127
177,000
(1,819,556)
1,593,367
6,337,475

7,869,669
1,259,145
(16,566,683)
(5,844,502)

 Exhibit 4
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES IN FUND BALANCES
GOVERNMENTAL FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2012
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)

General
Revenues:
Property Tax
UfilityTax
Sales Tax (Local and State)
Transportation Tax
State Income Tax
Transacfion Tax
Special Area Tax
Recreation Tax
Other Taxes
Federal/State Grants
Internal Service
Licenses and Permits
Fines
Investment Income
Charges for Services
Miscellaneous
Total Revenues
Expenditures:
Current:
General Government
Health
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Cultural and Recreational
• Employee Pensions
Other
Capital Outlay
Debt Service:
Principal Refirement
Interest and Other Fiscal Charges
Total Expenditures
Revenues (Under) Over Expenditures

Federal.
State and
Local
Grants

Special
Taxing
Areas

462,475
572,185
177.890
282.779
241,111
163,194
112,188
1,074
302,924
117.568
290.799
5,439
133,021
58,009

876,790
-

370,454
29,771
406
5,130

2.920,656

876,790

405,761

864,556
24.371
1.956.152
178.065
53,815
13

391,817
101,558
112,429
325,491
16,076

305,952
38
954
116
66,773
8,557

-

2.237
-

8,564'
5,259

1,645
515

_
-

3,081.369
(160.713)

Confinued on following pages.

22

961,194
(84,404)

_
_
3
382,393
23,368

 Service
Concession
and Reserve

$

Bond, Note
Redemption
and Interest
$

-

487,714
22,324
22,105
18.635

82

-

Community
Development
and
Improvement
Projects

Nonmajor
Governmental
Funds

$

$

-

453,684
63,883

177,019
108,506
40,846

18,816

16,361

-

Total
Governmental
Funds
$

941,398
548,682
594,290
373,544
391,285
281.957
370,454
163.194
131.086
877.864
319,285
117,568
306,510
90.885
170.724
135,511

21,033

23,160

4,422

15,711
3,626
37,297
23,757

39,117

603.173

9,234

959,506

5.814.237

-

244,116
1,600
6,424
49.919
68.224
77,738
458,951
924
90,429

1.806,541
127.567
2.075,959
228,100
514.303
102,384
458,951
11,725
435,600

43.025
29,856

340,754
461,962

1,071,206

6,563,846

18,084

-

29,153

-

4,812

-

100

-

-

339,912

_
-

-

296.084
431,588

100

727,672

339,912

(124,499)

(330,678)

39,017

(111,700)

23

(749.609)

 Exhibit 4 - Concluded
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES IN FUND BALANCES
GOVERNMENTAL FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2012
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Federal.
State and
Local
Grants

General
Other Financing Sources (Uses):
Issuance of Debt
Premium
Payment to Refunded Bond Escrow Agent
Transfers In
Transfers Out

. $

55,000

$

$
-

31,617
(26,965)

Total Other Financing Sources (Uses)

68,675
(44.264)

_

59,652

Net Changes in Fund Balance
Fund Balance, Beginning of Year
Change in Inventory
Fund Balance, End of Year

Special
Taxing
Areas

(101,061)
335.533
(3.170)

. $

231,302

See notes to basic financial statements.

24

24.411
47.779
1,451.635

(84.404)
(121,684)

$

(206,088)

$

1,499,414

 Service
Concession
Agreements
and Reserve

$

Bond, Note
Redempfion
and Interest

$

-

337,410

(10.105)

(12,030)

58.908
(65,591)
412.310

$

346.719

$

74.287
(82.736)

722,391 •
36,166
(268,397)
178,750
(178,750)

245.253

113.966

490.160

(85,425)
485.835

2.266
312.855

(259.449)
1.855.986
(3,170)

$

122,415

Total
Governmental
Funds

400,410

$

-

3,843
(2,322)

-

-

207,566
36,166

Nonmajor
Governmental
Funds

-

(268,397)

328
(12,358)

(993.511)

$

-

26.987
(1.020.498)
$

Community
Development
and
Improvement
Projects

$

25

315,121

$

1.593,367

 Exhibit 5
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
RECONCILIATION OF THE STATEMENT OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES
IN FUND BALANCES OF GOVERNMENTAL FUNDS TO THE STATEMENT OF ACTIVITIES
Year Ended December 31, 2012
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Amounts reported for governmental activities in the statement of activities are different because:
Net change in fund balances - total governmental funds

$

(259.449)

Governmental funds report capital outlays as expenditures. However, in
the statement of activifies the cost of those assets is allocated over their
estimated useful lives and reported as depreciation expense. This is the
amount by which capital outlays exceeded depreciation in the current
period

278.635

Revenues in the statement of activities that do not provide current financial
resources are not reported as revenues in the funds

(63,855)

Bond proceeds provide current financial resources to governmental funds,
but issuing debt increases long-term liabilities in the statement of net
assets. This is the amount by which proceeds exceeded repayments

(150,751)

Certain expenses reported in the.statement of activifies do not require
the use of current financial resources and therefore are not reported as
expenditures in governmental funds
Change in the net position of governmental activities

26

(1.254.416)
$

(1,449.836)

 Exhibit 6
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF REVENUES AND EXPENDITURES - BUDGET AND ACTUAL
GENERAL FUND (BUDGETARY BASIS)
Year Ended December 31, 2012
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Original
Budget
Revenues:
UfilityTax
Sales Tax
Transportation Tax
Transaction Tax
Recreation Tax
Business Tax
State Income Tax
State Sales Tax
State Auto Rental
Federal/Stale Grants
Internal Service
Licenses and Permits *
Fines
Investment Income
Charges for Services
Municipal Ufilities
Leases. Rentals and Sales
Miscellaneous
Issuance of Debt, Net of
Original Discount
Budgeted Prior Years' Surplus
and Reappropriations
Transfers In/Out

$

Total Revenues
Expenditures:
Current'
General Government *
Health
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportafion
Debt Service"
Principal Retirement
Interest and Other Fiscal Charges
Total Expenditures
Revenues Over (Under) Expenditures ... $

Final
Budget

Actual
Amounts

Variance
Positive
(Negative)

475.306
250.748
174,271
192.167
160,956
94,146
209,401
284,421
3,354
1,568
362,398
135,110
290.131
4,200
125,141
8.667
9.680
57,100

475,306
250,748
174,271
192,367
160,956
94,146
209,401
284,421
3,354
1,568
362.398
135,110
292,631
4.200
125,141
8.667
9.680
57.100

462,475
272,312
177.890
241,111
163,194
108.278
282.779
299,873
3.910
1.074
302.924
117,568
290,799
5.439
124.606
8,415
14,747
43.262

(12,831)
21,564
3,619
48,744
2,238
14,132
73,378
15,452
556
(494)
(59,474)
(17,542)
(1,832)
1,239
(535)
(252)
5,067
(13,838)

50.000

50,000

55.000

5.000

143.549
72.000

143,549
72.000

72.347
31.617

(71.202)
(40,383)

3,104.314

3,107.014

3.079.620

(27,394)

960.820
25.407
1.881,453
178,644
55,610

963,520
25.407
1,881,453
178,644
55.610

882,437
25.896
1.938,657
178,338
51,914

81,083
(489)
(57,204)
306
3,696

1.645
735

1,645
735

1,645
733

3,104,314

3.107,014

3,079,620

-

See notes to basic financial statements.
* Housing Revenue Fund is included.

27

27.394

 Exhibit 7
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF NET POSITION
PROPRIETARY FUNDS
December 31, 2012
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Business-type Activities - Eiilerprise Funds
Major Funds
Chicago-

Chicago

Water

Sewer

Midway

O'Hare

Inlernalional

Intemational

Chicago

Airport

Airport

Skyway

Total

ASSETS AND DEFERRED OUTFLOWS
CURRENT ASSETS:
Cash and Cash Equivalents

$

Investments
Accounts Receivable (Nel ol
Allowances)
Due from Olher Funds .

.

Due from Olher Governments

Total Cuirent Assets

84,429

$

17,722

44.188

16,952

128,805
20.607

74,328

$

11,785
36,079

$

13,663
14,437

18,840

-

-

17,356

1,463

295,385

129,305

75,964

38,226

$

72,758

$

152,999
170,373

-

308,443
82,366
28,170
18,819

259,225

1,291

761,170

_

91,589
28,482
28,170

-

837
396
58

-

RESTRICTED ASSETS'
Cash and Cash Equivalents

39,102

71,216

122.523

764.583

395,439

270,573

197,960

1,354,091

434,541

341,789

320,483

2,118,774

16,446

11,694

134,927

341,223

10,187

514,477

5,083

560

112,840

893.588

12,609

1,024,680

3,462,288

2,072,542

1,415,216

7,014,287

490,818

14,455,151

(868,311)

(434,774)

(430,549)

(212,871)

262,280

33,011

69,847

(2,566,099)
1,183,153

(4,512,604)
1,548,291

Total Property. Plant and Equipment

2,861.340

1,671,339

1,167,354

6,524,929

290,556

12,515,518

Total Noncurrent Assets

2,877,786

1,683,033

1,302,281

6,866,152

300,743

13,029,995

Total Assets

3,607.712

2,154,127

1,698.728

9.244,151

302,034

17,006,752

126.371

89,955

36,794

Investments
Total Restncted Assets

997,524
2.218,063
3,215,587

NONCURRENT ASSETS:
Other Assets
Property, plant, and equipment
Land
Structures, Equipment and
Improvements .
Accumulated Depreciation
Conslmclion Work in Progress

DEFERRED OUTFLOWS
Total Assets and Deleired Outflows

$

3,734,083

$

2,244,082

See notes to basic financial statements.

28

$

1,735.522

-

_
$

9,244,151

_
$

302.034

253,120
S

17,259,872

 Business-type Activities - Enterprise Funds
Major Funds

Water

Sewer

Chicago
Midway
International

ChicagoO'Hare
International

Chicago

Airport

Airport

Skyway

Total

LIABILITIES
CURRENT LIABILITIES.
Voucher Warrants Payable
Due lo Other Funds

...

$
.

.

.

31,875

$

4,639
12,113

Accmed and Other Liabilities .
Unearned Revenue

11.196
82,296
26,746

26,869
20,386

Total Curreni Liabilities

152,113

64,007

130,427
130,427

Revenue Bonds Payable
Derivative InslrumenI Liability
Long-term Purchase Obligation

$

21,738

$

20,142
774

62.408

$

3.710

265

6 .

15

120,925
47,176

9,836

7,190
126,238

-

117,129
183,206

52,490

199,546

280

468,436

138,032

74,793

468,011

138,032

74,793

468,011

-

811,263

2,061,696
126,371
1.027

1,386,443
89,955

1,412,016
36,794

7,167,495

Total Noncurrent Liabilities

2.189.094

1,476,398

1,448,810

7,167,495

Total Liabilities

2,471,634

1,678,437

1,576,093

7.835,052

PAYABLE FROM RESTRICTED ASSETS
Curreni Liabilities Payable From
Restncted Assets
Total payable from restricted assets ..

811,263

NONCURRENT LIABILITIES:

-

-

-

-

12,027,650

280

13,561,496

1,682,121

1,682,121

290,556

2,388,310

253,120
1,027
12,281,797

DEFERRED INFLOWS
NET POSITION
Net InveslemenI
in Capital Assets

1,073,309

455,195

1,308

50,014

(82,226)

651,476

Restncted Net Position:

-

Debt Sen/ice
Capital Projects
Passenger Facility Charges

-

Contractual Use Agreement
Noise Mitigation Program
Other
Unrestncted Net Position
Total Net Posiliori

-

18^832
$

1,262,449

60.436
$

565,645

See notes to basic financial statements

29

-

11.624

$

807
5,117

121,001
135,025

26,234
124,576

115,332
120,624

36,725
36,572

234,130
31,511

159,429

$

1,409,099

-

11,624
173,130
140,142
141.566
245,200
270,855
(1.354.572)

(1,670,923)
$

(1,380,367)

$

2,016,255

 Exhibit 8
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF REVENUES, E X P E N S E S AND CHANGES IN NET POSITION
PROPRIETARY FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2012
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Business-lype Activities - Enterpnse Funds
Major Funds

Water
Operating Revenues'
Charges lor Services
Rent
aher

.

$

Sewer

562,572

$

-

252,943

$

-

Chicago
Midway

Chicago-

International

International

Chicago

Airport

Airport

Skyway

70,912

O'Hare

$

86,921

436,909

-

576,287

253,912

157,833

702.564

109,525

21,254

44,463

163.542

Repairs and Maintenance
Commodities and Matenals

49,104
1.671
29,137

3.085
57,527

15,011
37,990

74.307
88,784

Depreciation and Amortization

48,887

27,735

Total Operating Revenues

_

-

969

$

$

265,655

13,715

Total

1,323,336
352,576
14,684
1,690,596

Operating Expenses:
Personal Services
Contractual Services

-

-

-

68,183
31,845

31,709

Total Operating Expenses

338,352

Operating Income (Loss)

237,935

-

55,119

-

Capital Asset Impairment
General Fund Reimbursements
Other

216,762
21,601

-

-

-

338,784
141,507
185,972
29.137
359.124

10,621

-

-

21.601
99,892
172,224

16.833

123,546

141.310

169,416

688,542

10,621

1,348,241

112,602

(11,583)

14,022

(10,621)

342,355

1.021

2.292
(56,451)

(266.734)

Nonoperating Revenues (Expenses):
Investment Income (Loss) .

....

270

Interest Expense

(79,147)

-

Passenger Facility Charges
Other
Total Nonoperating Revenues
(Expenses)
Capital Grants
Nel Income (Loss)
Net Position (Deficil) - Beginning of Year ..
Nel Position (Deficit) - End of Year

(54,601)

.

$

21.612

25,197

2

-

(456,933)
198,466

-

43,916

154.550

(1,341)

(154)

2,126

19,565

18,646

38,842

(80,218)

(53,734)

(8,117)

(71,007)

18,648

(194,428)

2,500

2,500

4,681

73,538

160,217

61,368

(15.019)

16,553

8.027

231,146

1,102,232 •-

504,277

174,448

1,392,546

(1,388,394)

1.785,109

1,262,449

565,645

S

See notes to basicfinancialstatements.

30

$

159.429

$

1,409,099

-

$

(1,380,367)

83,219

$

2,016,255

 Exhibit 9
CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
PROPRIETARY FUNDS
Y e a r E n d e d D e c e m b e r 31, 2012
( A m o u n t s are in T h o u s a n d s of Dollars)
Business-type Activities - Enterprise Funds
Major Funds

Water

Chicago

Chicago-

Midway

O'Hare
Intemational
Airport

Intemational
Airport

Sewer

Chicago
Skyway

Total

Cash Flows from Operating Activities.
$

Received from Customers
Payments to Vendors
Payments to Employees
Transactions with Other City Funds

546,056

$

(84,738)
(109,525)

242,313
(28,740)
(43,280)

(80,972)

$

147.683

$

621.441

(26,720)

(65,722)
(36,136)
(8,510)

(224,786)
(143.905)
(58,987)

270.821

143,573

37,315

193,763

447,538

309,488

34,639

1,327,899
28,500

$

$
-

1.557.493
(403,986)
(332.846)
(175,189)

Cash Flows Provided By
Operafing Activities
Cash Flows from Capital and Related
Financing Activities.
Proceeds Irom Issuance of Bonds
Proceeds from Federal Govemment
Acquisition and Conslmclion of

.

-

...
(253,684)

Capital Assets

(149.442)

-

Capital Grant Receipts
Bond Issuance Costs
Payment to Relund Bonds

(59,859)
(91,514)

(28,429)
(55,427)

..

-

-

(31,876)

(1,372.342)

(23,366)
(65,227)
45,542

(140.620)
(381,764)

-

(8,250)

-

38

(835,393)

-

173,648
(32,385)

(23,591)

2,119,564
28,500

-

(366,583)
71,074
(6,981)

7,413

-

(35,595)

Deposit
Other

(65,684)

2,500
(1,973)

(2,604)

Pnncipal Paid on Debt
Interest Paid
Passenger Facility Charges
Noise Mitigation Program
Termination of Swaption

-

645,472

80,987
(11,558)
(1.439,813)
(252,274)
(593,932)
220,190
. (55,976)

15

(8,250)
15
2,164

2,126

Cash Flows (Used in) Provided By Capital
and Related Financing Activities

76,755

(127,274)

(699,554)

15

(745,776)

(212,113)
2,457

(162,467)
1.512

79,541
3,080

457,313
25,320

(403)
2

151,871

(209,656)

(160.955)

82,621

482,633

(401)

194,242

65,447

59,373

(7,338)

(23,158)

(386)

93,938

58,084

29,555

4.282

.. .

Cash Flows from Investing Activities'
Sale (Purchases) of Investments, Net
Investment Inlerest

32,371

Cash Flows (Used in) Provided By
Invesfing Activities
Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash and
Cash Equivalents
Cash and Cash Equivalents,
Beginning of Year .
Cash and Cash Equivalents,
End of Year .

$

123,531

$

88,938

See notes to basicfinancialstatements.
31

826,067

141,646
$

134,308

$

802,909

1,223
S

837

1,056,585
$

1,150,523

 Exhibit 9 - C o n c l u d e d
CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
PROPRIETARY FUNDS
Y e a r E n d e d D e c e m b e r 31, 2012
( A m o u n t s are in T h o u s a n d s of Dollars)
Business-lype Aclivities - Enterprise Funds
Major Funds
Chicago

O'Hare

International

International

Chicago

Aiiport

Airport

Skyway

Sewer

Water

Chicago-

Midway

Total

Reconciliation of Operating Income lo
Cash Flows Irom Operating Activities'
Operating Income (Loss)

$

237,935

$

112,602

$

(11,583)

$

14,022

$

(10,621)

$

342,355

Adjustments to Reconcile:
Depreciation and Amortizalion
Provision for Uncollectible Accounts

. . .

48,887

27.735

55,119

238,363

15,714

8,842

371

14,980

39.907

(42,570)

(22,658)

3,289

(5,716)

(67,655)

(3,100)

4,305

(12,790)

(3,275)

(14,860)

(8,549)

1,820

16.648

9,015

18,934

23,515

10,068

(14,182)

(75,409)

(56,008)

859

443

1,783

2,074

10,621

380.725

Change in Assels and Liabilities'
(Increase) Decrease in Receivables
(Increase) Decrease in Due From Other Funds
Increase (Decrease) in Voucher Wanants
Payable and Due to Olher Funds
Increase (Decrease) in Deferred Revenue
and Olher Liabilities
(Increase) Decrease in Inventories and
Other Assels
Cash Flows from
Operaling Aclivities

(1.011)

..

%

270.821

$

143,573

$

37,315

$

193,763

$

645,472

Supplemental Disclosure of
Noncash Hems:
Capital asset additions in 2012
have outstanding accounts payable
and accmed and other liabilities ....

65,787

63,913

See notes lo basicfinancialstatements.

32

33,248

148.476

311.424

 Exhibit 10
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF FIDUCIARY NET POSITION
FIDUCIARY FUNDS
December 31, 2012
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Pension
Trust

Agency

ASSETS
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investments
Investments, at Fair Value
Bonds and U.S. Government
Obligations
Stocks
Mortgages and Real Estate
Other
Cash and Investments with
Escrow Agent
Property Tax Receivable
Accounts Receivable. Net
Due From City
Invested Securities Lending Collateral

$

185.408
-

$

118,148
92,504

2,336.591
5,343,390
654,762
1,906,928
663.429
55,574
1.126.065

Total Assets

$

Deferred Outfiows

12,282,147

10,046
91,534
57.380
$

369,612

$

35,481
334,131

301

Total Assets and Deferred Outflows

12.282.448

LIABILITIES
Voucher Warrants Payable
Accrued and Other Liabilifies
Deferred Revenue
Securities Lending Collateral

$

356,780
1,126,065

Total Liabilifies

1,482,845

NET POSITION
Held in Trust for Employees

10.799.603

Total Net Position

$

See notes to basic financial statements.

33

10,799.603

-__
$

369,612

 Exhibit 11
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN PLAN NET POSITION
FIDUCIARY FUNDS - PENSION TRUST FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2012
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Total
ADDITIONS
Contributions:
Employees
City

$

Total Contnbutions

295.990
464,168
760,158

Investment Income:
Net Appreciafion in
Fair Value of Investments
Interest, Dividends and Other
Investment Expense

1,057,568
241.995
(49.831)

Net Investment Income

1,249.732

Securities Lending Transacfions:
Securifies Lending Income
Securifies Lending Expense

3.741
1,440

Net Securifies Lending Transactions

5.181

Total Additions

2,015,071

DEDUCTIONS
Benefits and Refunds of Deductions
Administrative and General

1,731.545
20,059

Total Deductions

1,751,604

Net Increase in Nel Position

263,467

Net Posifion:
Beginning of Year
End of Year

10,536,136
$

See notes to basic financial statements.

34

10,799,603

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
1)

Summary of Significant Accounting Policies

The City of Chicago (City), incorporated in 1837, is a "home rule" unit under State of Illinois (State) law. The City has
a mayor-council form of government. The Mayor is the Chief Executive Officer of the City and is elected by general
election. The City Council is the legislafive body and consists of 50 members, each represenfing one of the City's 50
wards. The members of the City Council are elected through popular vote by ward for four-year terms.
The accounfing policies of the City are based upon accounfing principles generally accepted in the United States of
America as prescnbed by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB). Effective January 1, 2012. the
City adopted the following GASB Statements:
GASB Statement No. 60, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Service Concession Arrangements. The
objective of this Statement is to improve financial reporting by addressing uses related to service concession
and resen/e fund (SCAs). which are a type of public-pnvate or public-public partnership. There was no
impact on the City's Financial Statements as a result of the implementation of Statement No. 60.
GASB Statement No. 62. Codification of Accounting and Financial Reporting Guidance Contained in PreNovember 30, 1989 FASB and AlCPA Pronouncements. This Statement incorporates into the GASB's
authoritative literature certain accounfing and financial reporting guidance that is included in the following
pronouncements issued on or before November 30,1989, which do not conflict with or contradict GASB
pronouncements:
•

Financial Accounfing Standards Board Statements and Interpretations

•

Accounting Principles Board Opinions

•

Accounting Research Bulletins of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants' Committee
on Accounfing Procedure

The Statement also supersedes Statement No. 20, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Propriety Funds
and Other Governmental Entities That Use Proprietary Fund Accounting. Those entities who chose to apply
post-November 30, 1989 FASB Statements and Interpretations that do not conflict with or contradict GASB
pronouncements can continue to apply those pronouncements as other accounting literature. The financial
reporting impact resulfing from the implementafion of GASB Statement No. 62 was not material.
GASB Statement No. 63. Financial Reporting of Defen-ed Outflows of Resources, Deferred Inflows or
Resources, and Net Position. Statement No. 63 standardizes the presentafion of deferred outflows of
resources and deferred inflows of resources and their effect on a government's net posifion. It alleviates
uncertainty about reporting those financial statement elements by providing guidance where none previously
existed. The financial reporting impact resulting from the implementation of GASB Statement No. 63 is
primarily the change in terminology from Net Assets to Net Posifion.
GASB Statement No. 64. Derivative Instruments: Application of Hedge Accounting Termination Provisions An Amendment to GASB Statement No. 53. Statement No. 64 clarifies whether an effective hedge
relafionship continues after the replacement of a swap counterparty or a swap counterparty's credit support
provider. This statement sets forth cnteria that establish when the effective hedging relafionship confinues
and hedge accounting should continue to be applied. There was no impact on the City's Financial Statements
as a result of the implementafion of Statement No. 64.
Other accounting standards that the City is currently reviewing for applicability and potential impact on the financial
statements include:
GASB Statement No. 65. Items Previously Reported as Assets and Liabilities, will be effective for the City
beginning with its year ending December 3 1 . 2013. The objecfive of this statement is to establish accounting
and financial reporting standards that reclassify, as deferred outflows of resources or deferred infiows of
resources, certain items that were previously reported as assels and liabilities and recognizes, as outflows of
resources or inflows of resources, certain items that were previously reported as assets and liabilities.
35

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
GASB Statement No. 66. Technical Corrections -2012- an amendment of GASB Statements No. 10 and No.
62, will be effective for the City beginning with its year ending December 31, 2013. The objecfive of this
statement is lo improve accounting and financial reporting for a governmental financial reporting entity by
resolving confiicting guidance that resulted from the issuance of two pronouncements. Statements No. 54,
Fund Balance Reporting and Govemmental Fund Type Definitions, and No. 62, Codification of Accounting
and Financial Reporting Guidance Contained in Pre-November 30, 1989 FASB and AlCPA Pronouncements.
GASB Statement No. 68, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Pensions, establishes new financial
reporting requirements for most governments that provide their employees with pension benefits through
these types of plans. Statement-No. 68 will bo effective for the City beginning with its year ending December
31, 2015. GASB Statement No. 68 replaces the requirements of GASB Statement No. 27. Accounting for
Pensions by State and Local Governmental Employers and GASB Statement No. 50, Pension Disclosures, as
they relate to governments that provide pensions through pension plans administered as trusts or similar
arrangements that meet certain cnteria. GASB Statement No. 68 requires governments providing defined
benefit pensions to recognize their long-term obligation for pension benefits as a liability for the first time, and
to more comprehensively and comparably measure the annual costs of pension benefits. The Statement also
enhances accountability and transparency through revised and new note disclosures and required
supplementary information (RSI).
GASB Statement No. 69. Government Combinations and Disposals of Government Operations, establishes
accounting and financial reporting standards related to government combinations and disposals of
government operations. Statement No. 69 will be effecfive for the City beginning with its year ending
December 3 1 , 2014. GASB Statement No. 69 requires disclosures to be made about government
combinations and disposals of government operafions to enable financial statement users to evaluate the
nature and financial effects of those transactions.
GASB Statement No. 70, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Nonexchange Financial
Guarantees, establishes accounfing and financial reporting standards for financial guarantees that are
nonexchange transactions (nonexchange financial guarantees) extended or received by a state or local
government. Statement No. 70 will be effective for the City beginning with its year ending December 31,
2014. GASB Statement No. 70 requires a government that has issued an obligafion guaranteed in a
nonexchange transacfion to report the obligation until legally released as an obligor. This Statement also
requires a government that is required to repay a guarantor for making a payment on a guaranteed obligation
or legally assuming the guaranteed obligafion to continue to recognize a liability until legally released as an
obligor. When a government is released as an obligor, the government should recognize revenue as a result
of being relieved of the obligation. This Statement also provides addifional guidance for intra-entity
nonexchange financial guarantees involving blended component units and requires disclosures to be made
about government combinations and disposals of government operafions to enable financial statement users
to evaluate the nature and financial effects of those transactions.
a)

Reporting Entity - The City includes the Chicago Public Library and the City-related funds of the Public
Building Commission. The financial statements for the City have been prepared in accordance with
accounfing principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP), applicable fo governmental
units, as required by the Municipal Code of Chicago (Code).
The City's financial statements include the following legal entities as fiduciary trust funds:
The Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago is governed by a five-member board: three
members are elected by plan participants and two are members ex-officio.
The Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago Is governed by an
eight-member board: two members are elected by plan participants, two are members ex-officio, two
members are appointed by the City Department of Human Resources, one member is elected by refired plan
participants and one member is elected by the local labor union.
36

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
The Policemen's Annuitv and Benefit Fund of Chicago is governed by an eight-member board: four members
are elected by plan participants and four are appointed by the Mayor.
The Firemen's Annuitv and Benefit Fund of Chicago is governed by an eight-member board: four members
are elected by plan participants and four are members ex-officio.
Financial statements for each of the pension plans may be obtained at the respective fund's office.
Related Organizations - City officials are responsible for appoinfing a voting majority of the members of the
boards of other organizations, but the City's accountability for these organizafions does not extend beyond
making appointments and no fiscal dependency exists between the City and these organizations. Therefore,
the Chicago Park District. Chicago Public Schools, Community College District No. 508, Chicago Housing
Authority and the Chicago Transit Authority are deemed to be related organizations.
b)

Government-wide and fund financial statements"- The government-wide financial statements (i.e., the
statement of net position and the statement of activities) report informafion on all of the nonfiduciary activities
of the government. For the most part, the effect of interfund activity has been removed from these
statements.
Governmental acfivifies. which normally are supported by taxes and intergovernmental
revenues, are reported separately from business-type acfivities, which rely to a significant extent on user fees
and charges for services.
The statement of activities demonstrates the degree to which the direct expenses of a given function or
segment is offset by program revenues. Direct expenses are those that are cleariy identified with a specific
function or segment. Program revenues include: 1) charges to customers or applicants who purchase, use or
direcfiy benefit from goods, services, or pnvileges provided by a given function or segment and 2) grants and
contribufions that are restricted to meefing the operational or capital requirements of a particular funcfion or
segment. Taxes and other items not property included among program revenues are reported instead as
general revenues. Separate fund financial statements are provided tor governmental funds, proprietary
funds, and fiduciary funds, even though the fiduciary funds are excluded from the government-wide financial
statements. Major individual governmental funds and major individual enterprise funds are reported as
separate columns in the fund financial statements.

c)

Measurement focus, basis of accounting, and financial statement presentation - The government-wide
financial statements are reported using the economic resources measurement focus and the accmal basis of
accounting as are the proprietary fund and fiduciary fund financial statements. Revenues are recorded when
earned and expenses are recorded when a liability is incurred, regardless of the timing of related cash fiows.
Property taxes are recognized as revenues in the year for which they are levied. Grants and similar items are
recognized as revenue as soon as all eligibility requirements imposed by the provider have been met.
Governmental fund financial statements are reported using the current financial resources measurement
focus and the modified accrual basis of accounting. Revenues are recognized as soon as they are both
measurable and available. Revenues are considered to be available when they are collectable within the
current period or soon enough thereafter to pay liabilifies of the current period. For this purpose, the City
considers revenues to be available if they are collected within 90 days of the end of the current fiscal period
with the exception of property tax revenue, which is deferred unless taxes are received within 60 days
subsequent to year-end. Licenses and permits, charges for services and miscellaneous revenues are not
considered to be susceptible to accrual and are recorded as revenues when received in cash. All other
revenue items are considered to be measurable and available only when cash is received by the City.
Expenditures generally are recorded when a liability is incurred, as under accrual basis of accounting, except
for interest and principal on long-term debt, the long-term portion of compensated absences, claims and
judgments and pension obligafions.

37

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
The City reports the following major governmental funds:
The General Fund is the City's primary operating fund. It accounts for and reports all financial resources
not accounted for and reported in in another fund.
Federal, State and Local Grants Fund accounts for the expenditures for programs, which include
general government, health, public safety, transportafion. aviation, cultural and recreational, and capital
outlays. The majority of revenues are provided by several agencies of the Federal government,
departments of the Illinois State government and City resources.
Special Taxing Areas Fund accounts for expenditures for special area operafions and maintenance and
for redevelopment project costs as provided by tax levies on special areas.
Service Concession and Reserve Fund accounts for monies committed for mid and long term uses.
The Mid-term portion is subject to appropnation for neighborhood human infrastructure programs, health,
and other initiatives. Whereas the Long-term portion is committed for future budgetary and credit rating
stabilizafion. These reserves were created as a result of the Skyway Lease and Parking Meter System
transacfions. The deferred inflows result from long-term concession and lease transacfions whose
proceeds are recognized as revenue over the term of the leases.
Bond, Note Redemption and Interest Fund accounts for the expenditures for principal and interest as
provided by property tax, utility tax. sales tax, transportation tax. and investment income.
Community Development and Improvement Projects Funds account for proceeds of debt used to
acquire property, finance construction, and finance authorized expenditures and supporting services for
vanous activities.
Within the governmental fund types, fund balances are reported in one of the following classifications:
Nonspendable - includes amounts that cannot be spent because they are either: a) not in a spendable
form; or b) legally or contractually required to be maintained intacL
Restricted - includes amounts that are restricted to specific purposes, that is, when constraints placed
on the use of resources are either: a) externally imposed by creditors (such as through debt covenants),
grantors, contributors, or laws or regulations of other governments; or b) imposed by law through
constitutional provisions or enabling legislation.
Committed - includes amounts constrained to specific purposes by a government itself, using its
highest level of decision-making authority (i.e. City Council); to be reported as committed, amounts
cannot be used for any other purpose unless the government takes the same highest-level action to
remove or change the constraint.
Assigned - includes amounts that are constrained by the City's intent to be used for specific purposes,
but that are neither restricted nor committed. Residual fund balances in these fund types lhat are not
restricted or committed are reported as assigned.
Unassigned - includes the residual fund balance that has not been restricted, committed, or assigned
within the general fund and deficit fund balances of other governmental funds.
The City reports the following major proprietary funds as business-type activities:
Water Fund accounts for the operations of the Chicago Water System (Water). The Water system
purifies and provides Lake Michigan water for the City and 125 suburbs. The Water Fund operates two
water treatment facilifies and 12 pumping stations wilh a combined pumping capacity of 3,661 million
gallons per day.

38

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Sewer Fund accounts for the operations of the Wastewater Transmission System (Sewer). The Sewer
system transports wastewater to the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago for
processing and disposal. This service is provided for the residents and businesses of the City and certain
suburban customers.
Chicago Midway International Airport Fund records operations of Chicago Midway International
Airport (Midway) that provides regional travelers with access to airlines that generally specialize in lowcost, point-to-point, origin and desfination passenger services. Midway Airport is conveniently located 10
miles from downtown Chicago.
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Fund records operations of Chicago-O'Hare International Airport
(O'Hare). the primary commercial airport for the City. The airlines servicing the airport operate out of four
terminal buildings. Three domesfic terminal buildings, having a total of 169 gates, serve domestic flights
and certain international departures. The Internafional Terminal, having a total of 20 gates and five
remote aircraft parking positions, serves the remaining international departures and all international
arrivals requiring customs clearance.
Chicago Skyway Fund records operations of the Chicago Skyway (Skyway) which provides vehicle
passage across the Calumet River, between the State of Indiana and the State of Illinois (State) through
the operafion of a tollway which consists of a 7 8-mile span connecting the Dan Ryan Expressway to the
Indiana Toll Road. Facilities include a single toll plaza consisting of a central office, maintenance garage
and toll collecfion area. In January 2005, the City entered into a long-term Concession and Lease
Agreement of the Skyway, granfing a private company the ability to operate and to collect toll revenue
during the 99-year term of the agreement. The City received a one-fime upfront payment of $1.83 billion.
Additionally, the City reports the following fiduciary funds:
Pension Trust Funds report expenditures for employee pensions as provided by employee and
employer contributions and investment earnings.
Agency Funds account for transactions for assets held by the City as agent for certain activifies or for
vanous entities. Payroll deductions and special deposits are the primary transacfions accounted for in
these funds.
As a general rule the effect of interfund activity has been eliminated from the government-wide financial
statements. Exceptions lo this general rule are payment-in-lieu of taxes and other charges between the City's
water, sewer, airports and skyway funds. Eliminafion of these charges would distort the direct costs and program
revenues reported for the vanous functions concerned.
Amounts reported as program revenues include; 1) charges to customers or applicants for goods and services, or
privileges provided, or fines, 2) operating grants and contributions, and 3) capital grants and contributions,
including special assessments. Internally dedicated resources are reported as general revenues rather than as
program revenues. Likewise, general revenues include all taxes.
Certain indirect costs have been included as part of the program expenses reported for the various functional
activities.
In the fund financial statements, proprietary funds distinguish operating revenues and expenses from nonoperafing items. Operating revenues and expenses generally result from providing services and producing and
delivering goods in connection with a propnetary fund's principal ongoing operafions. The principal operating
revenues of the water and sewer funds are charges to customers for sales and services. The airport funds
principal operating revenues are derived from landing fees and terminal use charges as well as rents and
concessions. Operating expenses for enterprise funds include the cost of sales and services, administrative
expenses, and depreciation on capital assets. All revenues and expenses not meeting this definition are reported
as non-operating revenues and expenses.

39

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
When both restricted and unrestncted resources are available for use. it is the City's policy to use restricted
resources first, then unrestricted resources, as they are needed.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make certain esfimates
and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and
liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the
reporting penod. Accordingly, actual results could differ from those estimates.
d) Assets, liabilities, deferred inflows, deferred outflows, and net position or equity
i)

Cash, Cash Equivalents and Investments generally are held with the City Treasurer as required by the
Code. Interest earned on pooled investments is allocated to participating funds based upon their average
combined cash and investment balances. Due to contractual agreements or legal restrictions, the cash
and investments of certain funds are segregated and earn and receive interest direcfiy. The City uses
separate escrow accounts in which certain tax revenues are deposited and held for payment of debt.
The Code permits deposits only to City Council-approved depositories, which must be regularly organized
state or national banks and federal and state savings and loan associations, located within Ihe City,
whose deposits are federally insured.
Investments authorized by the Code include interest-bearing general obligations of the City, State and
U.S. Government; U.S. Treasury bills and other noninterest-bearing general obligations of the U.S.
Government purchased in the open market below face value; domestic money market funds regulated
and in good standing with the Securities and Exchange Commission and tax anticipation warrants issued
by the City. The City is prohibited by ordinance from investing in derivatives, as defined, without City
Council approval. The City values its investments at fair value or amortized cost. U.S. Government
securifies purchased at a pnce other than par with a maturity of less than one year are reported at
amortized cost.
The City's four retirement plans are authorized to invest in bonds, notes, and other obligations of the U.S.
Government; corporate debentures and obligations; insured mortgage notes and loans; common and
preferred stocks; stock options; real estate; and other investment vehicles as set forth in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes. These investments are reported at fair value.
Repurchase agreements can be purchased only from banks and certain other institutions authorized to
do business in the State. The City Treasurer requires that securifies that are pledged to secure these
agreements have a fair value equal to the cost of the repurchase agreements plus accrued interest.
Investments generally may not have a maturity date in excess of ten years from the date of purchase.
Certain other investments are held in accordance with the specific provisions of applicable ordinances
Cash equivalents include certificates of deposit and other investments with maturities of three months or
less when purchased.
Deficit cash balances result in interfund borrowings from the aggregate of funds other than escrowed
funds. Interest income and expense are generally not recognized on these interfund borrowings.
State statutes and the City's Pension Plans' policies permit lending Pension Plan secunties to brokerdealers and other entifies with a simultaneous agreement to return the collateral for the same securities in
the future. Securities lent al year-end for cash collateral are presented as not categorized in the schedule
of custodial credit risk; securities lent for securities collateral are classified according to the category for
the collateral.

ii)

Receivables and Payables activity between funds are representative of services rendered, outstanding
at the end of the fiscal year, and are referred to as either "due to/from other funds" (i e.. the current
40

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
portion of interfund loans) or "advances to/from other funds" (i.e.. the noncurrent portion of interfund
loans). Any residual balances outstanding between the governmental activities and business-type
acfivifies are reported in the government-wide financial statements as "internal balances."
All trade and property tax receivables are shown net of an allowance for uncollectibles. The allowance is
based on historical trends. The estimated value of services provided but unbilled at year-end has been
included in receivables.
iii) Inventory includes government-wide inventories, which are stated at cost determined principally, using
the average cost method. For proprietary funds, the costs of inventories are recorded as expenses when
used (consumpfion method). Governmental fund inventories are accounted for using the purchases
method and represent nonspendable resources because they do not represent expendable available
financial resources.
iv) Assets Held for Resale includes land and buildings of $5.4 million, recorded at lower of cost or market in
the Federal, State and Local Grant Funds. These assets are purchased through the use of federal grants
and City resources and are intended to be resold.
v)

Restricted Assets include certain proceeds of the City's enterprise fund revenue bonds, as well as
certain resources set aside for their repayment. These assets are classified as restricted or committed in
the basic financial statements because they are maintained in separate bank accounts and their use is
limited by applicable bond covenants or specific City Council action. ,
The Water and Sewer funds maintain Rate Stabilizafion Accounts where any net revenues remaining
after providing sufficient funds for all required deposits in the bond accounts may be transferred upon the
direcfion of the City to be used for any lawful purpose of the specific fund.
The O'Hare and Midway funds maintain Passenger Facility Charge accounts as restncted as they are
subject to Federal Aviation Administration regulafion and approval, to finance specific eligible capital and
debt related activities.

vi) Capital Assets, which include property, plant, equipment, and infrastructure assets (e.g. roads, bridges,
sidewalks, and similar items), are reported in the applicable governmental or business-type activities
columns in the government-wide financial statements. Capital assets are defined by the City as assets,
or a network of assets, with an initial cost of more than $5,000 (not rounded) and an estimated useful life
in excess of one year Such assets are recorded at historical cost or esfimated historical cost if
purchased or constructed. Donated capital assets are recorded at estimated fair market value at the date
of donation.
The costs of normal maintenance and repairs that do not add to the value of the asset or matenally
extend assets' lives are not capitalized.
Major outlays for capital assets and improvements are capitalized as projects are constructed. Interest
incurred dunng the construction phase of capital assets of business-type activities is included as part of
the capitalization value of the assets constructed. The total interest expense (Governmental and
Business Activities) incurred by the City during the current fiscal year was $918 9 million, of which $126.4
million was capitalized as part of the capital assets under construcfion projects in proprietary funds.

41

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Property, plant, and equipment of the City are depreciated using the straight-line method, in the year
subsequent to acquisition or when placed inlo service, over the following esfimated useful lives:
Utility plant
Utilily structures and improvements
Buildings and improvements
Airport runways, aprons, tunnels, taxiways, and paved roads
Bridge infrastructure
Lighting infrastructure
Street infrastructure
Transit infrastructure
Equipment (vehicle, office, and computer)

2 5 - 100
50 - 100
1 5 - 40
5-40
1 0 - 40
25
1 0 - 25
40
5 - 20

years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years '

The City has a collection of artwork and historical treasures presented for public exhibifion and education
that are being preserved for future generafions. The proceeds from sales of any pieces of the collecfion
are used to purchase other acquisifions A portion of this collection is not capitalized or depreciated as
part of capital assets.
vii) Deferred Outflows represent the fair value of derivafive instruments that are deemed to be effecfive
hedges.
viii) Employee Benefits are granted for vacafion and sick leave, workers' compensafion and health care.
Unused vacation leave is accrued and may be partially earned over for one year Sick leave is
accumulated at the rate of one day for each month worked, up to a maximum of 200 days. Severance of
employment terminates all rights to receive compensafion for any unused sick leave. Sick leave pay is
not accrued. Employee benefit claims outstanding, including claims incurred but not reported, are
estimated and recorded in the government-wide and proprietary fund financial statements.- A liability for
these amounts is reported in governmental funds only if they have matured, for example, as a result of
employee resignations and refirements.
Employees are eligible to defer a portion of their salanes until future years under the City's deferred
compensation plan created in accordance with Internal Revenue Code Section 457. The deferred
compensation is not available to employees until termination, retirement, death or unforeseeable
emergency. Third-party administrators who maintain the investment portfolio administer the Plan. The
plan's assets have been placed in trust accounts with the plan administrators for the exclusive benefit of
participants and their beneficiaries and are not considered assets of the City.
The City IS subject to the State of Illinois Unemployment Compensafion Act and has elected the
reimbursing employer option for providing unemployment insurance benefits for eligible former
employees. Under this option, the City reimburses the State for claims paid by the State. Expenditures
for workers' compensafion are recorded when paid in the governmental funds. A liability for these
amounts is recorded in the government-wide and proprietary fund financial statements.
ix) Judgments and claims are included in the government-wide financial statements and proprietary fund
types. Uninsured claim expenditures and liabilities are reported when it is probable that a loss has
occurred and the amounl of that loss can be reasonably estimated. These losses include an esfimate of
claims that have been incurred but not reported. In the fund financial statements, expenditures for
judgments and claims are recorded on the basis of settlements reached or judgments entered within the
current fiscal year. Amounts that related to deferred compensatory time and reserves for questioned
costs are treated the same way.
x)

Long-term obligations are included in the government-wide financial statements and proprietary fund
types in the fund financial statements Long-term debt and olher long-term obligations are reported as
liabilities in the applicable governmental acfivities, business-type acfivities, or proprietary fund type
42

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
statement of nel position. Bond premiums and discounts, as well as issuance costs, are deferred and
amortized over the life of the related debt, except in the case of refunding debt transactions where the
amortization penod is over the term of the refunding or refunded debt, whichever is shorter.
The City enters into interest rate ,swap agreements to modify interest rates and/or cash flows on
outstanding debL For exisfing swaps, the net interest expenditures resulting from these arrangements
are recorded as interest expense. The fair value of derivative instruments that are deemed to be effective
is accounted for as deferred outflows. Derivative instruments that are deemed not effective are adjusted
to fair value with the change in fair value recorded to investment earnings. All interest rate swaps and
swaptions are approved by City Council.
In the fund financial statements, governmental funds recognize bond premiums and discounts, as well as
bond issuance costs, during the current period. The face amount of debt issued is reported as other
financing sources. Premiums received and discounts given on debt issued are reported as other
financing sources or uses. Issuance costs, whether or not withheld from the actual debt proceeds
received, are reported as expenditures.
Certain debt obligafions are to be paid from sales tax, motor fuel or special area taxes.
Long-term purchase obligafion represents an agreement with DiiPage Water Commission to construct
electncal generafion facilifies not to exceed $15.0 million. The payment of the obligation will be in the
form of credits against the charges for water supplied.
xi) Deferred inflows represent amounts to be recognized as revenue on a straight line basis over the life of
the related long-term lease and concession agreements.
xii) Fund equity in the government-wide statements is classified as net posifion and displayed m three
components;
(1) Net investement in capital assets - Consists of capital assets including restricted capital assets, net of
accumulated depreciation and reduced by the outstanding balances of any bonds, mortgages, notes
or any other borrowings that are attnbutable to the acquisition, construcfion, or improvement of those
assets.
(2) Restricted net position - Consists of net posifion with constraints placed on the use either by external
groups such as creditors, grantors, contributors, or laws or regulations of other governments, or are
legally restricted through consfitutional provisions or enabling legislation.
Restricted net position for business activities are provided in Exhibit #7, Statement of Net Position,
Proprietary Funds.
(3) Unrestricted - All other net position that do not meet the definition of "restricted" or "net investement in
capital assets."
2)

Reconciliation of Government-wide and Fund Financial Statements
a)

Explanation of certain differences between
government-wide statement of net position.
i)

the governmental

funds balance sheet and the

The governmental funds balance sheet includes a reconciliation between fund balance - total
governmental funds and net position - governmental activities as reported in the government-wide
statement of net position. One element of that reconciliation explains that "Other long-term assets are not
available to pay for current-penod expenditures and therefore are deferred in the funds." The details of
this $1,259.1 million are as follows (dollars in thousands):
43

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012

Deferred revenue - property tax and grants
Other assets - pension excess
Accounts payable - infrastructure retainage
Net adjustment to increase fund balance - lotal
governmental funds - to arnve at net assets governmental activifies

ii)

$

1.238,382
57,757
(36,994)

$

1,259,145

Another element of that reconciliation explains that "Certain liabilifies, including bonds payable, are not
due and payable in the current period and therefore are nol reported in the funds." The details of this
$16,566.7 million are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Long-term liabilifies:
Total bonds, notes and certificates payable
Pension and other postemployment benefits
Lease obligation
Pollution remediafion
Claims and judgments

$

Total Long-term liabilities

9,182,943
6.364.927
163,013
8,373
888,593
16,607,849

Bonds, notes and other obligations payable current
Other assets - issuance costs
Accrued interest
, Derivative instruments
Accrued and other liabilities - compensated absences

(95,479)
(74,603)
4,908
31,140
92,868

Net adjustment to reduce fund balance - total
governmental funds - to arrive at net assets governmental aclivities

$

16,566,683

b) Explanation of certain differences between the governmental funds statement of revenues,
expenditures, and changes in fund balances and the govcrnmcnt-wide statement of activities.
i)

The governmental funds statement of revenues, expenditures, and changes in fund balances includes a
reconciliation between net changes in fund balances - total governmental funds and changes in net
position - governmental activities as reported in the government-wide statement of activities. One
element of that reconciliation explains that "Governmental funds report capital outlays as expenditures.
However, in the statements of activities the cost of those assets is allocated over their estimated useful
lives and reported as depreciation expense." The details of this $278 6 million are as follows (dollars in
thousands):

Capitalized asset expenditures
Depreciation expense
Net adjustment to increase net changes in fund
balances - total governmental funds - to arrive at
changes in net assets - governmental activities

44

$

682,382
(403.747)

$

278,635

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
ii) Another element of that reconciliafion states that "Bond proceeds provide current financial resources to
governmental funds, but issuing debt increases long-term liabilifies in the statement of net position." The
details of this decrease of $150.8 million are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Proceeds of debt
Premium
Payment of refunded bond escrow agent
Principal retirement
Payment of cost of issuance
Interest expense
Net adjustment to reduce net changes in fund
balances - total governmental funds - to arrive at
changes in net assets - governmental activities

$

(728,638)
(36.166)
268,397
340,754
6,035
(1,133)

$

(150,751)

iii) A third element of that reconciliation states that "Certain expenses reported in the statement of activifies
do not require the use of currenf financial resources and therefore are not reported as expenditures in
governmental funds." The details of this decrease of $1,254.4 million are as follows (dollars in
thousands):
Claims and judgments
Pension and other post employment benefit liabilities
Pollution remediation
Vacation
Lease obligations
Inventory
Net adjustment to reduce net changes in fund
balances - total governmental funds - lo arrive at
changes in net assets - governmental activities

3)

$

,

$

(220,943)
(1,049.315)
2,862
12,376
3,774
(3,170)

(1,254,416)

Stewardship, Compliance and Accountability
a) Annual Appropriation Budgets are established for the General Fund and the Vehicle Tax. Pension,
Chicago Public Library and certain Miscellaneous, Special Events. Tourism and Festivals nonmajor Special
Revenue Funds, on a non-GAAP budgetary basis'
i)

Prior to November 15. the Mayor submits to the City Council a proposed budget of expenditures and the
means of financing them for the next year.

ii)

The budget document is available for public inspection for at least ten days prior to passage of the annual
appropriation ordinance by the City Council, which is also required to hold at least one public hearing.

iii) Prior to January 1, the budget is legally enacted through passage ofthe appropriation ordinance.
iv) Subsequent to the enactment of the appropriation ordinance, the City Council has the authority to make
necessary adjustments to the budget, which results in a change in total or individual appropriations. The
legal level of budgetary control is designated in the budget by objec* grouped by purpose except for the
Motor Fuel Tax Fund, which is subsequently re-appropriated by project. A separate Motor Fuel Tax Fund
Report demonstrates compliance with annual and project-length budgets required by the State. The
separately issued Supplement to the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report provides budgetary
informafion for all other budgeted funds. Copies of this report are available upon request.
45

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
v)

b)

c)

All annual appropriations unused and unencumbered lapse at year-end. Encumbered appropriations are
carried forward to the following year. Project-length financial plans are adopted for Capital Project Funds.
Appropriations for Debt Service Funds are established by bond ordinance.

Reconciliation of GAAP Basis to Budgetary Basis - The City's budgetary basis of accounting used for
budget vs. actual reporting differs from GAAP. For budgetary purposes, encumbrances are recorded as
expenditures but are included in "Unassigned" fund balance for GAAP purposes. For budgetary purposes,
proceeds of long-term debt and transfers in are classified as revenues. For budgetary purposes prior years'
resources used to cover current year budgetary expenditures are recorded as revenues. For GAAP
purposes, proceeds of long-term debt and transfers out are treated as other financing sources. Provision for
doubtful account expenditures are not budgeted. A reconciliation of the different basis of revenue and
expenditure recognition for the year ended December 31. 2012 is as follows (dollars in thousands):
General
Fund
2.920,656

Revenues. GAAP Basis
Add:
Proceeds of Debt
Transfers In
Prior Year's Surplus Utilized

$

Revenues, Budgetary Basis

$

3.079.620

Expenditures, GAAP Basis
Add:
Transfers Out
Encumbered in 2012
Deduct:
Payments on Prior Years' Encumbrances
Provision for Doubtful Accounts and Other

$

3.081.369

Expenditures, Budgetary Basis

$

55,000
31.617
72,347

26,965
16,605
(39,045)
(6,274)
3,079,620

Individual Fund Deficits includes the Chicago Skyway Fund, an Enterprise Fund, has a fund deficit of
$1,380.4 million which management anticipates will be funded through recognition of deferred inflows.
Federal State and Local Grants, a governmental fund, has a deficit of $206.1 million and will be funded by the
recognition of deferred grant revenues. Also, the Service Concession and Reserve Fund, a Special Revenue
Fund, has a deficit fund balance of $993.5 million which will be funded through the recognition of deferred
inflows.

46

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
4)

Restricted and Unrestricted Cash, Cash Equivalents and Investments
a)

Investments As of December 31. 2012, the City had the following Investments (dollars in thousands):
Investment Type;

I n v e s t m e n t Maturities (in Years)
More Than
L e s s Than 1

1-5

'6-10

10

Total

City Funds
U S . Treasunes

S

-

U.S. Agencies*

345,580

Commercial Paper

284.644

Corporate Bonds

$

$

2,490

$

857,328

-

44.151

Corporate Equities

2.621.259

-

232,284

881

26

Municipal Bonds

24.465

245.260

Supra nalional Bonds

10.024

42,232

$

145.684
-

39,904

284,644

104,812

-

421,151

-

183.334

44,722
3.969,851

907

20.715

473,774

-

-

-

10,024

4,590

-

-

1,469,082

Certificates of Deposit and
Ottier Stiort-torm
Total City Funds

1.464,492
$

2,174,237

$

3.103.419

$

1,083.056

$

313.443

$

6.674,155

"U.S. Agencies include investments in government-sponsored enterprises such as Federal National Mortgage
Association, Federal Home Loan Banks, and Federal Home Loan (Mortgage Corp.
P e n s i o n Trust Funds
U S. and Foreign
Government Agencies

$

Corporate Bonds

280,778

$

916,831

Corporate Equities

172.501

$

441.450
263,354

360.518

$

1,246,349
2,017.034

615.379

-

-

1.126.065

-

-

-

1.126.065

455,757
125,245

-

-

-

125.245

73,104

Real Estate

S

-

5,835,602

Pooled Funds

351,620
477,231
25.950

-

5,835.602
99.054
615,379

Securities Received from
Secunties Lending
Venture Capital

455,757

Certificates of Deposit and
Other Short-term
Other

39,610

39.610

Total Pension Trust Funds

$

9,468,371

S

854,801

$

533,019

Total

$ 11,642.608

S

3,958.220

$

1.616.075

S

704,804

$ 11.560,995

$ 1,018.247

$ 18.235,150

i)

Interest Rate Risk - As a means of limifing ils exposure to fair value losses arising from rising interest
rates, the City's investment policy limits all securities so purchased, except tax anticipation warrants,
municipal bonds, notes, commercial paper or other instruments represenfing a debt obligation of the City,
shall show on their face that they are fully payable as to principal and interest, where applicable, if any.
within ten years from the date of purchase.

ii)

Credit Risk - The Code limits investments in commercial paper lo banks whose senior obligafions are
rated in the top two rating categories by at least two national rating agencies and who are required to
maintain such rafing during the term of such investment. The Code also limits investments to domestic
money market mutual funds regulated by, and in good standing with, the Securifies and Exchange •
Commission. Certificates of Deposit are also limited by the Code to national banks which provide
collateral of at least 105 percent by marketable U.S. government securities marked to market at least
47

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
monthly; or secured by a corporate surety bond issued by an insurance company licensed to do business
in Illinois and having a claims-paying rating in the top rating category, as rated by a nationally recognized
stafistical rating organizafion maintaining such rafing during the term of such investment. The following
schedule summarizes the City's and Pension Trust Funds exposure to credit risk (in thousands):
Quality Rating
Aaa/AAA
Aa/AA
/VA
Baa/BBB
Ba/BB
BIB
Caa/CCC
Ca
C/CC
DID
P1/A1
Not Rated*
Total Funds

$

City
163.532
4.230,548
259,846
10,007

30.666

445.518
1.534,038

Quality Rating
Aaa/AAA
Aa//V\
A/A
Baa/BBB
Ba/BB
BIB
Caa/CCC
Ca
C/CC
DID
Not Rated
Other

Pension Trust Funds
134,000
$
173,641
300.095
308,998
127,983
149,359
29,880
1.573
999
3,471
313,968
867.806

$

$ 6,674,155

2,411,773

* Not rated is primarily composed of money market mutual funds
iii) Custodial Credit Risk - Cash and Certificates of Deposit This is the risk that in the event of a bank
failure, the City's deposits may nof be returned. The City's Investment Policy states that in order to
protect Ihe City's deposits, depository insfitufions are to maintain collateral pledges on City deposits
dunng the term of the deposit of at least 102 percent of marketable U.S. government, or approved
securifies or surety bonds, issued by top-rated insurers. Collateral is required as security whenever
deposits exceed the insured limits of the FDIC. The bank balance of cash and certificates of deposit with
the City's various municipal depositories was $532.3 million. 100 percent of the bank balance was either
insured or collateralized with securities held by City agents in the City's name.
iv) Custodial Credit Risk - Investments For an investment, this is the nsk that, in the event of the failure of
the counterparty, the City will not be able to recover the value of its investments or collateral securities
that are in possession of an outside party. The City has no custodial credit risk exposure because
investment securities are insured, registered and held by the City.

48

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
v)

Foreign Currency Risk - In the case of the Pension Trust Funds, is the risk that changes in exchange
rates will adversely affect the fair value of an investment or a deposit. The risk of loss is managed by
limifing its exposure to fair value loss by requiring their international securifies managers to maintain
diversified portfolios. The following schedule summarizes the Pension Trust Funds exposure to foreign
currency risk (in thousands):
Foreign Currency Risk
Australian dollar
Brazilian real
Brifish pound
Canadian dollar
Chilean peso
Chinese yuan
Columbian peso
Czech Republic koruna
Danish krone
Egyptian pound
European euro
Hong Kong dollar
Hungarian forint
Indian rupee
Indonesian rupiah
Japanese yen
Malaysian
ringgit
Mexican peso
Moroccan dirham
Now Israeli shekel
New Taiwan dollar
New Zealand dollar
Nigeria Naira
Nonwegian krone
Pakistan rupee
Peruvian Nuevo Sol
Philippines peso
Polish zioty
Qatari riyal
Singapore dollar
South African rand
South Korean won
Swedish krona
Swiss franc
Taiwan dollar
Thailand baht
Turkish lira
United Arab Emirates dirham
Total Pension Trust Funds

$

~$

49

89,116
41,595
353,039
103,772
5,333
(605)
5,120
1,421
25,158
420
452,912
172,221
472
32,856
19,054
307,725
13,056
25,976
143
8,696
23,085
3,218
1,555
21,313
269
1
3,503
3,604
2,259
31,025
37,723
51,593
44,158
106,680
3,774
21,703
12,230
1,039
2.026,212

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
vi) The following schedule summarizes the cash and investments reported in the basic
statements(dollars in thousands):
Per Note 4:
Investments - City
Investments - Pension Trust Funds

Per Financial Statements:
Restricted Investments
Unrestricted Investments
Investments with Fiduciary Funds
Investments with Escrow Agent
Invested Securities Lending Collateral
Investments Included as Cash and Cash
Equivalents on the Statements of Net Position

5)

$

6.674,155
11.560.995

$

18.235,150

$

2,840,691
1.797,020
10,344,175
509,800
1,126,065

$

18,235,150

financial

1,617,399

Property Tax

The City's property tax becomes lien on real property on January 1 of the year it is levied. The Cook County
Assessor (Assessor) is responsible for the assessment of all taxable real property within Cook County (County),
except for certain railroad property assessed directly by the State. The County Board has established a triennial
cycle of reassessment in which one-third of the Couniy will be reassessed each year on a repeating schedule
established by the Assessor
Property in the County is separated into nine classifications for assessment purposes. After the Assessor establishes
the fair market value of a parcel of land, that value is multiplied by one of the classificafion percentages to arrive at
the assessed valuafion (Assessed Valuation) for that parcel. These percentages range from 16.0 percent for certain
residential, commercial, and industrial property to 38.0 percent for other commercial and industrial property.
The Illinois Department of Revenue has the statutory responsibility of ensuring uniformity of real property
assessments throughout the State. Each year, the Department of Revenue furnishes the county clerks with an
adjustment factor to equalize the level of assessment among counties. This factor (Equalization Factor) is then
applied to the Assessed Valuation to compute the valuation of property to which a tax rate will be applied (Equalized
Assessed Valuation). The County Clerk adds the Equalized Assessed Valuation of all real property in the County to
the valuation of property assessed direcfiy by the State (to which the Equalization Factor is not applied) to arnve at
the base amount (Assessment Base) used in calculating the annual tax rates.
The County Clerk computes the annual tax rate by dividing the levy by the Assessment Base and then computes the
rate for each parcel of real property by aggregafing the tax rates of all governmental units having junsdiction over that
particular parcel. The County Treasurer then issues the tax bills. Property taxes are deposited with the County
Treasurer, who remits to the City its respective share of the collections. Taxes levied in one year become due and
payable in two installments during the following year on March 1 and August 1 or 30 days from mailing of tax bills if
later than July 1. The first installment is estimated and is 55.0 percent of the prior year's tax bill. The second
installment is based on the current levy, assessment and equalizafion and also refiects any changes from the prior
year
The City Council has adopted an ordinance beginning in 1994. limiting the City's aggregate property tax levy to an
amount equal to the pnor year's aggregate property tax levy plus the lesser of (a) five percent or (b) the percentage
increase in the annualized Consumer Price Index, all as defined in the ordinance. The ordinance provides a safe
harbor for that portion of any property tax debt service levy equal to the aggregate interest and principal payments on
50

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
the City's general obligation bonds and notes during the 12-month period ended January 1. 1994, subject to annual
increase in the manner described above for the aggregate levy, all as provided by the ordinance. Increases in the
debt service portion of each levy may, however, reduce amounts available within such levy to finance operations.
6)

Interfund Balances and Transfers
a)

The following balances at December 31. 2012 represent due from/to balances among all funds (dollars in
thousands):
Fund Type/Fund

Due From

Governmental Funds:
General
Federal, State and Local Grants
Special Taxing Areas
Service Concession and Reserve
Bond, Note Redemption and Interest
Community Development and Improvement Projects....
Nonmajor Governmental Funds

$

Total Governmental Funds
Enterprise Funds:
Water
Sewer
Chicago Midway International Airport
Chicago-O'Hare Internafional Airport
Chicago Skyway
Total Enterprise Funds
Fiduciary acfivities:
Pension Trust

165,078
29,694
258,238

Due To

$

139,397
281,434
11,534

30,068
67,799
93,854

97,857
205,273

644,731

735,495

20,607
18,840
14,437
28,482

11,196
12,113
20,142
3,710
15

82,366

47,176

55.574

Total Fiduciary activities

55.574

Total

$

782,671

$

782.671

The balances resulted from the time lag between the dates that (1) interfund goods and services are provided or
reimbursable expenditures occur. (2) transacfions are recorded in the accounting system and (3) payments
between funds are made.

51

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
b)

The following balances at December 31, 2012 represent interfund transfers among all funds (dollars in
thousands):
Fund Type/Fund

Transfer In

Governmental Funds:
General
Federal, State and Local Grants
Special Taxing Areas
Service Concession and Reserve
Reserve
Bond, Note Redemption and Interest
Community Development and Improvement Projects....
Nonmajor Governmental Funds
' .Total Governmental Funds

$

• $

31,617

Transfer Out

$

26,965

68,675
328

44,264
12,358

3,843
74,287

10,105
2,322
82,736

178,750

$

178,750

Transfers are used to move revenues from the fund that the statute or budget requires to collect them lo the fund
that statute or budget requires to expend them and lo move receipts restricted to debt service from the funds
collecting the receipts to the debt service fund as debt service payments become due.

52

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
N O T E S TO BASIC FINANCIAL S T A T E M E N T S
Y E A R E N D E D D E C E M B E R 31, 2012
7)

Capital A s s e t s
a)

C a p i t a l A s s e t s acfivity for the year ended D e c e m b e r 3 1 . 2012 w a s as follows (dollars in t h o u s a n d s ) :
Balance
J a n u a r y 1,
2012

Governmental activities:
Capital assets, not being depreciated:
Land

$

W o r k s of Art a n d Historical Collections

1,400,977

Disposals
and
Transfers

Additions

$

3,524

$

-

Balance
D e c e m b e r 31,
2012

$

51

466.267

614,211

(436,153)

644,325

1,880.376

617,786

(436,153)

2.062,009

Buildings and Other Improvements

2.446,349

43.497

Machinery and Equipment

1,339,484

54,347

6,965,900

413,971

10,751,733

511,815

Construction in Progress
Total capital assets, n o l being depreciated

-

1.404,501

13,132

13,183

Capital assets, being depreciated:

Infrastructure
Total capital assels. being depreciated

-

2.489.846

(28,186)

1.365.645

-

7.379,871

(28,186)

11,235,362

Less accumulated depreciafion for:
Buildings and Other Improvements
Machinery a n d Equipment
Infrastructure

747,256

64,955

1.025.874

112,317

-

812,211

(28.186)

1,110,005

3,279.011

226.475

Total accumulated depreciation

5,052.141

403,747

(28,166)

5.427,702

Total capital assets, being depreciated, net

5,699.592

108,068

;

5,807,660

Total governmental activities

$

7.579.968

$

1,012,637

$

-

725.854

$

12.043

$

(436,153)

3.505,486

$

7,869,669

Business-lype activifies:
Capital assets, not being depreciated;
Land

$

Construction in Progress

-

$

1,024.680

1.310,364

739.488

(501.561)

1,548.291

2.323,001

751.531

(501,561)

2,572,971

13.069.921

751.994

(20.564)

13,801,351

651,105

8.654

(5.959)

653,800

13.721.026

760.648

(26.523)

14.455,151

Less accumulated depreciation for:
Buildings and Other Improvements

3,928,965

250,195

3,943

4,183,103

Machinery and Equipment
Total accumulated depreciation

313.807
4.242,772

20.459
270.654

(4.765)
(822)

329,501
4,512,604

Total capital assets, being depreciated, net

9.478,254

489.994

(25,701)

9,942.547

Total capital assets, nol being depreciated
Capital assets, being depreciated:
Buildings and Other Improvements
Machinery and Equipment
Total capital assets, being depreciated

Total business-lype activities

$

11,801,255

$

1,241,525

$

(527,262)

$ 12.515,518

Total Capital Assets

$

19,381,223

$

1,967.379

S

(963,415)

$ 20.385,187

53

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
b)

Depreciation expense was charged to functions/programs ot the City as follows (dollars in thousands):
Governmental acfivities:
General Governmenf..
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Health
Cultural and Recreational
Total Depreciation Expense - Governmental Acfivities
Business-type Acfivities:
Water
Sewer
Chicago Midway International Airport
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport
Chicago Skyway
Total Depreciafion Expense - Business-type Activifies

8)

$

86,528
21,776
13,981
235,258
1,694
44,510

$

403,747

$

48,275
26,600
45,011 •
140,258
10,510

$

270,654

Leases
a)

Operating Leases

The City leases building and office facilities under noncancelable operating leases. Total costs for such leases
were approximately $18.4 million for the year ended December 31. 2012.
The future minimum lease payments for these leases are as follows (dollars in thousands):
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018-2022
2023-2027
2028-2032
2033-2037
2038 - 2042

$

18,093
12.231
7,322
2.950
2.288
9,141
1,959
312
216
152

Total Future Rental Expense

$

54,664

b) Capital Leases
During 2003, the City entered into lease and lease back agreements with third parties pertaining to 911 Center
Qualified Technological Equipment (QTE), with a book value of $143.3 million at December 31, 2003. Under the
QTE lease agreement, which provides certain cash and tax benefits to the third party, the City entered into a longterm lease for applicable assets back to the City under a sublease Under the sublease, the City is required to
make future minimum lease payments.

54

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
During 2005, the City entered into sale and lease back agreements with third parties pertaining to the City owned
portion of a rapid transit line with a book value of $430.8 million at December 3 1 . 2005. Under the lease
agreement, which provides certain cash and tax benefits to the third party, the City entered into a long-term lease
for applicable assets back to the City under a sublease. Under the sublease, the City is required to make future
minimum lease payments.

The future minimum payments for these leases are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Year Ending
December 31,
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018-2022
2023 - 2027
2028-2032

Total
$

104
9,000
9,000
9,000
9.000
35.631
76.370
167.164

Total Minimum Future Lease Payments
Less Interest
Present Value of Minimum
FiJlure Lease Payments

c)

315,269
152,256

_$

163,013

Lease Receivables

Most of the O'Hare land, buildings and terminal space are leased under operating lease agreements to airlines
and other tenants. The following is a schedule of the minimum future rental income on noncancelable operafing
leases as of December 31, 2012 (dollars in thousands):
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018-2022
2023 - 2027
2028 - 2032
2033 - 2036

$

84,203
83,796
66,513
66,510
66,789
133,707
8.867
9.656
5,738

Total Minimum Future Rental Income

$

525,779

Contingent rentals that may be received under certain leases based on the tenants' revenues or fuel fiow are not
included in minimum future rental income. Rental income for O'Hare. consisfing of all rental and concession
revenues except ramp rentals and automobile parking, amounted to $365.8 million, including contingent rentals of
$86.0 million.

55

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Most of the Midway land and terminal space is leased under operating lease agreements to airlines and other
tenants. The following is a schedule of the minimum future rental income on noncancelable operating leases as
of December 31, 2012 (dollars in thousands):

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017

$

30,900
29,803
27,282
26,529
26,529

$

141.043

:

Total Minimum Future Rental Income

Contingent rentals that may be received under certain leases based on tenants' revenues are not included in
minimum future rental income. Rental income for Midway, consisting of all rental and concession revenues
except aircraft parking fees and certain departure fees (turns) and automobile parking, amounted to $101.0
million, including contingent rentals of $40.4 million
9)

Short-term Debt
Matured bonds represent principal due on coupon bonds in which the coupons have not been presented for
payment. For the year ended December 31. 2012, there was minor acfivity; the balance remained at $0.7 million.

56

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
10) Long-term Obligations
a)

Long-term Debt activity for the year ended December 31, 2012 was as follows (in t h o u s a n d s ) :

December 31,

Amounts
Due
within

Reductions

2012

One Year

$

494,475

8,011,830

19.410

112,151

Balance
January 1,

Balance

2012

Additions

Governnnenlal activities'
Bonds, notes and commercial paper payable.
General obligafion debt and commercial paper...

. $

Tax increment

7.777.667

$

Revenue

728,638

-

131,561
776,027
8,685,255

728,638

S

97.228
23.200

5,715

770,312

17.150

519,600

8,894,293

137.578

Less unamortized debt refunding transactions

166,065

19,931

15.816

170,180

Add unamortized premium

196,637

36.166

56,983

175,820

-

Add accrefion of capital appreciation bonds

264,402

33.148

14,540

283,010

22,042

Total bonds, notes and certificates payable

8,980,229

778.021

575,307

9,182.943

159,620

5.386,668

1,017,243

38,984

6.364.927

166.787

8.957

12.731

163.013

Pollution Remediation

11,235

-

2.862

8.373

Claims and judgments

667.650

363.348

142,405

888.593

111.996

6,232.340

1.389.548

196,982

7,424.906

121,100

$

15,212.569

$ 2.167,569

$

. $

1,721,187

$

$

Other liabilities:
Pension and olher postemployment
benefits obligations
Lease obligations

Total olher liabilities
Total governmental activities

9,104

-

772.289

$

16.607,849

$

90,960

$

2.030.177

$

280,720

Business-type activities:
Revenue bonds and notes payable
Water

399.950

42,232

Sewer

1.112,022

280,249

28,497

1,363,774

29,690

Chicago-O'Hare International Airport

7.420.349

1.211.687

1,499,475

7,132,561

111,085

Chicago Midway International Airport

1,461.490

34.639

54,800

1,441.329

23,475

11,715.048

1,926,525

1,673,732

11.967.841

206.482

Less unamortized debt refunding transactions . ..

110,535

29,597

Add unamortized premium

141,020

58,550

84.188

9,114

4,493

Add accretion of capital appreciation bonds . . . .

17,080

123.052

(109,714)

309.284
8.750

88,809

Total business-type activities

$

11,829.721

$ 1,964,592

$ 1,551,431

$

12,242,882

$

215,232

Total long-term obligations

$

27.042.290

$ 4,132,161

$ 2,323,720

$

28,850,731

$

495,952

The Pension obligation liability will be liquidated through a Special Revenue Fund (Pension Fund) as provided by tax
levy and State Personal Property Replacement Tax revenues.

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
b) Issuance of New Debt
i)

Commercial Paper Notes
During 2012, the City issued $133.8 million in commercial paper notes for certain capital and operating
uses. The City has excluded commercial paper from current liabilities, as it intends and has the ability to
refinance the obligation on a long-term basis.

ii)

General Obligation Bonds
General Obligafion Bonds, Projeci Series 2012A ($179.9 million). Taxable Project and Refunding Series
20128 ($308.0 million),and Refunding Series 2012C ($107.0 million) were sold at a premium in May
2012. The bonds have interest rates ranging from 4.0 percent to 5.432 percent and maturity dates from
January 1, 2020 to January 1, 2042. Net proceeds of $627.1 million will be used to finance infrastructure
improvements; transportafion improvements; grants or loans to assist not-for-profit organizations or
educational or cultural institufions; or to assist other municipal corporations or units of local government,
or school districts; cash flow needs of the City; acquisition of personal property; acquisition, demolifion,
remediation or improvement of real property for industnal, commercial or residential purposes;
constructing, equipping, altenng and repairing various municipal facilities including fire stations, police
stations, libraries, senior and health centers and other municipal facilifies; enhancement of economic
development within the City by making grants or deposits to secure obligafions of not-for-profit or forprofit organizations doing or seeking to do business in the City; litigafion judgments or settlements
agreements involving the City, including escrow accounts or other reserves needed for such purposes;
payments of certain pension contribufions; providing for facilifies. services and equipment to protect and
enhance public safety, and other uses permitted by the Ordinance ($292.4 million), to refund certain
maturifies of bonds outstanding ($268.2 million), and to fund capitalized interest ($66.5 million). The
current refunding of the bonds increased the City's total debt service payments by $242.7 million, resulted
in a net economic gain of approximately $ 8 million and a book loss of approximately $19.9 million.
In February 2012. the City entered info a swap overiay agreement (i.e.. basis trade) associated with the
General Obligation Series 2005D variable rate bonds with PNC Bank. N.A. for a nofional amount of
$207.9 million. The agreement is effective January 1, 2031 through January 1. 2040, and the City will pay
SIFMA and receive 72.5 percent of one month LIBOR The City received an upfront payment of $4.0
million.
In February 2012, the City entered into a swap overlay agreement (i.e.. Constant Maturity Swap (CMS)
reversal) associated with the General Obligation Series 2003B variable rate bonds with PNC Bank, N A.
for a nofional amount of $144.6 million. The agreement is effecfive March 1, 2014 through November 1.
2014 and the City will pay 66.91 percent of 10 year LIBOR and receive 75 percent of one month LIBOR.
Together with the existing underlying swaps on the bonds, in which the City pays 4.052 percent and
receives 66.91 percent of 10 year LIBOR, the net effect is that the City will pay a fixed rate of 4.052
percent and receive 75 percent of one month LIBOR through November 1. 2014, after which fime the City
will receive 66.91 percent of 10 year LIBOR through expirafion (January 1, 2034). The City received an
upfront payment of $1.3 million.

iii) Enterprise Fund Revenue Bonds and Notes
Chicago O'Hare Internafional Airport Senior Lien Revenue Bonds. Senes 2012A-C (S728.9 million) were
sold at a premium in August 2012. The bonds have interest rates ranging from 1.0 percent to 5.0 percent
and maturity dates from January 1, 2013 to January 1, 2032. Net proceeds of $796.3 million and olher
monies $155.3 million will be used to refund certain General Airport Revenue Bonds matunfies of bonds
outstanding ($837.2 million), to fund debt service reserves ($114 2 million), and to fund capitalized
interest ($.2 million). The current refunding of the bonds decreased the City's total debt service payments
by $156.2 million, resulted in a net economic gain of approximately $118.2 million and a book loss of
approximately $19 7 million.
58

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Chicago O'Hare Internafional Airport Passenger Facility Charge Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2012
($452.1 million) were sold at a premium in September 2012. The bonds have interest rates ranging from
2.5 percent to 5.0 percent and maturity dates from January 1. 2014 to January 1, 2032. Net proceeds of
$493.7 million and other monies $55.9 million will be used to refund certain PFC maturifies of bonds
outstanding ($511.1 million) and to fund debt service reserves ($38.5 million). The current refunding of
the bonds decreased the City's total debt service payments by $100.3 million, resulted in a net economic
gain of approximately $73.5 million and a book loss of approximately $9.0 million.
Second Lien Water Revenue Project Bonds, Series 2012 ($399.4 million) were sold at a premium in May
2012. The bonds have interest rates ranging from 4.0 percent to 5.0 percent and maturity dates from
November 1. 2016 to November 1, 2042. Net proceeds of $444.4 million will be used to finance certain
costs of improvements and extensions to the water system ($400.0 million), to refire water commercial
•paper notes outstanding ($35.9 million), and fund certain capitalized interest ($8.5 million).
In 2012, the Water Fund drew $0.5 million from the Illinois Environment Protecfion Agency loan
agreement. The loan has no interest and has pnncipal matunty dates from June 2. 2012 to December 2,
2031.
Second Lien Wastewater Revenue Project, Series 2012 ($276.5 million) were sold at a premium in
September, 2012. The bonds have interest rates ranging from 3.0 percent to 5.0 percent and maturity
dates from January 1, 2014 to January 1, 2042. Net proceeds of $303.8 million will be used to finance
certain costs of improvements and extensions to the wastewater system ($300.0 million), and fund certain
capitalized interest ($3.8 million).
In 2012, the Sewer 'Fund drew $3.7 million from the Illinois Environment Protection Agency loan
agreement The loan has an interest rate of 2.5% with maturity dates from June 2 1 , 2013 to June 2 1 ,
2031.
In 2012, $30.6 million of Chicago O'Hare Internafional Airport Commercial Paper Notes Series 2005 were
issued. The proceeds were used lo finance portions ofthe costs of authorized airport projects.
In 2012, $34.6 million of Chicago Midway International Airport Commercial Paper Notes Series A, B. C &
D were issued. The proceeds were used to finance portions of the costs of authorized airport projects.
Annual requirements listed below for each year include amounts payable January 1 of the following year.
Bonds maturing and interest payable January 1. 2013 have been excluded because funds for their payment
have been provided for. Annual requirements to amortize debt outstanding as of December 31, 2012 are as
follows (dollars in thousands):
General Obligation
Year Ending
December 31.
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018-2022
2023-2027
2028-2032
2033-2037
2038-2041

Principal
$

Interest

112.132
214.375
236,206
251,617
274,802
1,534,410
1.475.610
1,568.684
1,186.826
918,641

$

$ 7.773,303

$

Tax Increment
Principal

408,456
409,006
403,012
392,344
380.870
1,711.157
1,371,842
1,023.299
577,348
163,143

$

6,840,477

$ 106,241

59

26.114
14.602
8,965
11,160
11,685
33,715

Interest
$

-

5,931
11,819
3,951
3,400
2,666
4,737

S

32,504

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Revenue
Year Ending
December 31,
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018-2022
2023-2027
2028-2032
2033-2037
2038-2041

Principal '
$

18,040
18,980
18.400
18.135
18.525
107,075
132.903
119,841
191.334
109,930

$ 753,163

Business-type Activities

Interest
$

36,140
35,200
34.228
33,289
32,355
147,318
121,499
135,032
.71,914
11,172

$ ,658,147

Principal
$

Interest

263.342
378,095
381.052
370.679
423.016
1,951.670
2,181,607
2,708,989
2,194,130
866,590

$

582,754
571,111
553.539
536.765
519.332
2,312,220
1,845,583
1,204.226
582,979
100,285

$11,719,170

$

8,808,794

Debt service requirements above exclude commercial paper issues as the timing of payments is not certain. For the
requirements calculated above, interest on variable rate debt was calculated at the rate in effect or the effective rate
of a related swap agreement, if applicable, as of December 31, 2012. Standby bond purchase agreements or letters
of credit were issued by third party financial .institutions that are expected to be financially capable of honoring their
agreements.
The City's variable rate bonds may bear interest from time to time at a fiexible rate, a daily rate, a weekly rate, an
adjustable long rate, or the fixed rate as determined by the remarketing agent, in consultation with the City. An
irrevocable letter of credit provides for the timely payment of principal and interest. In the event the bonds are put
back to the bank and not successfully remarketed, or if the letter of credit agreements expire without an extension or
subsfitufion, the bank bonds will convert to a term loan. There is no principal due on the potential term loans within
the next fiscal year.
d)

Derivatives
i)

Pay-Fixed, Receive-Variable Interest Rate Swaps
(1) Objective of the swaps. In order to protect against the potential of rising interest rates and/or
changes in cash fiows. the City has entered into various separate pay-fixed, receive-variable interest
rate swaps at a cost less than what the City would have paid to issue fixed-rate debt. The notional
amounts related to bonds maturing on January 1, 2013 have been excluded below because funds for
their payment have been provided for.

60

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012

Changes in Fair Value
Classification
Amount

Fair Value at
December 31, 2012
Classification
Amount

Notional
Amount

Govemmental Activities
Hedges'

Pay-lixed Interest Rate SWAPS..

Deferred
Outflow of
Resources

Investmenl
Income

7.777

Deferred
Outflow of
Resources

$(260,496)

$ 781,630

3.167

Investment
Revenue

(36,313)

199,040

1,979

Deferred
Outflow of
Resources

(253,120)

957,030

Investment Denvative Instruments:
Pay-fixed Interest Rate SWAPS
Business-type Activities
Hedges:

Pay-fixed Interest Rate SWAPS..

Deferred
Outflow of
Resources

Total..

$ (549,929)

(2) Terms, fair values, and credit risk. The objective and terms, including the fair values and credit
rafings. of the City's hedging derivative instruments outstanding as of December 3 1 , 2012, are as
follows. The nofional amounts of the swaps match the principal amounts of the associated debt. The
City's swap agreements contain scheduled reductions to outstanding notional amounts that are
expected to approximately follow scheduled or anticipated reductions in the associated "bonds
payable" category. The notional amounts related to bonds maturing on January 1, 2013 have been
excluded below because funds for their payment have been provided for. Under the swaps, the City
pays the counterparty a fixed payment and receives a variable payment computed according to the
London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) and/or The Securifies Industry and Financial Markets
Associaiion (SIFMA) Municipal Swap Index. The terms, including fair values of the swaptions as of
December 31, 2012, are as follows (dollars in thousands):

61

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
CounterAssociateil
Bond Issue

Nofional
Amounts

Effective
Dale

Fair
Values

Terms

Termination
Date

party
Credit
Ratinq

Hedging Instruments
Governmental Activities:

GO VRDB (Senes 2007EFG) . . . .

$

200.000

11/8/2007 Pay 3 998% receive SIFMA
$
1/1/2014 Pay SIFMA, receive 72 5% of 1 Mo LIBOR *

(60,127)
(19,839)

8/17/2005 Pay 4 104%, receive SIFMA

(69,532)

A2/A+
1/1/2042 Baal/A1/1/2042 Aa3/AA-

(14,089)
(5.918)

A3/A1/1/2040 A2/A•^
Aal/AAA2/A-^
1/1/2031 A2/A-I1/1/2040 A2/A

10/3/2002 Pay 3 575% receive 70% ot 1 Mo. UBOR

(51.858)

Aa3/A-^
1/1/2037 A3/A

113,240

6/27/2002 Pay 4 23%: receive 75 25% of 3 Mo. LIBOR

(32,559)

1/1/2034 Aa3/A-

38.900

9/1/1999 Pay 5 084% receive 67% of 1 Mo LIBOR

(5.474)

GO VRDB (Series 2005D)

222.790

GO VRDB (Nelahbortioods Alive 21
Program, Senes 2002B) .

206,700

Sales Tax Revenue Refunding Bonds
(VRDB Series 2002) .
Tax Increment Allocation Bonds
(Near North TIF. Series 1999A) . .

1/1/2014 Pay SIFMA; receive 72.5% ol 1 Mo. UBOR *
1/1/2030 Pay SIFMA: recave72.5%of 1 Mo. LIBOR •

1/1/2019 A3/A

Business-type Activities:
Chicago Midway International Airport
Revenue Bonds (Scries 20C4C&D)

148.500

232.560
Wastewater Transmission Variable
Rale Revenue Bonds (Series 2008C)....

99.670

Water Vanable Rate Revenue
Reftinding Bonds (Series 2004)

185.780

Water Vanable Rate Revenue
Relunding Bonds (Scries 2004) .
Second Uen Water Revenue
Refunding Bonds (Senes 2000)

12/14/2004 Pay 4 174% receive SIFMA Plus 05%
4/21/2011 Pay 4 247% receive SIFMA Plus 05%
Pay 3.886%, receive 95% of 3 Mo. LIBOR
(i( LIBOR IS < 3%) Of
1/3/2011 67% of 3 Mo. LIBOR (if LIBOR is > 3%)
Pay 3 886% receive SIFMA
(if LIBOR is<3%)
7/29/2004 or 67% of 1 Mo LIBOR (if LIBOR is > 3%)
4/16/2008

(21,552)
(15.242)

1/1/2035 A3/A1/1/2035 Aa3/AA-

(52,750)

1/1/2039 A2/A-1-

(27.195)

Aa3/A+
1/1/2039 A3/A

Pay 3 8694% receive SIFMA

(42,949)

11/1/2025 A2/A

190,520

8/5/2004 Pay 3.8669% receive SIFMA

(49,852)

11/1/2031 Aa3/AA-

100,000

4/16/2008 Pay 3.8694% receive SIFMA

(33,560)

11/1/2030 A2/A

(32,985)

1/1/2034 Aa3/AAAa3/A-H
3/1/2014 Aal/AA11/1/2014 A2/A

Investment Instruments
Governmental Activities:
8///2003

GO VRDB (Series 2003B)
Total

199,040

Pay 4.052% receive 66 91%of 10 Yr LIBOR
Pay 66 91% of 10 Yr LIBOR,
3/1/2011 receive75%oil Mo. LIBOR '
3/1/2014 receive75%oil Mo UBOR "

. $ 1,937,700

(2,070)
(1,257)

?

See Table 31 in Statistical Seciion for Counterparty Entities and additional details for credit ratings.
Type and objective for all the SWAPS is Ihe same, as mentioned earlier.
" Reflects SWAP Overlay agreement.
VRDB means variable rate demand bonds.

62

(549,929)

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
(3) Fair Value. As of December 31, 2012, the swaps had a negative fair value of $549.9 million. As per
industry convenfion, the fair values of the City's outstanding swaps were esfimated using the zerocoupon method. This method calculates the future net settlement payments required by the swap,
assuming that the forward rates implied by the yield curve correctly anticipate future spot rates.
These payments are then discounted using the spot rates implied by the current yield curve for
hypothefical zero-coupon bonds due on the date of each future net settlement on the swap. Because
interest rates are below the Fixed Rate Paid, the City's swaps had negative values. Note that the
combination of the negative fair value of $549.9 million and the unamortized interest rate swap
premium balance of $5.1 million related to investmenl denvative instruments and $36.3 million related
to governmental cash flow hedges represent the total fair value of the derivative liability in the
statement of net posifion.
(4) Credit Risk. The City is exposed to credit risk (counterparty risk) through the counterparties with
which it enters into agreements. If minimum credit rating requirements are not maintained, the
counterparty is required to post collateral to a third party. This protects the City by mifigating the
credit risk, and therefore the ability lo pay a termination payment, inherent in a swap. Collateral on all
swaps is to be in the form of cash or Eligible Collateral held by a third-party custodian. Upon credit
events, the swaps also allow transfers, credit support, and termination if the counterparty is unable to
meet the said credit requirements.
(5) 8as/s Risk. Basis risk refers to the mismatch between the vanable rate payments received on a swap
contract and the interest payment actually owed on the bonds. The two significant components
driving this nsk are credit and SIFMA/LIBOR ratios. Credit may create basis nsk because the City's
bonds may trade differenfiy than the swap index as a result of a credit change in the City.
SIFMA/LIBOR ratios (or spreads) may create basis risk. With percentage of LIBOR swaps, if the
City's bonds trade at a higher percentage of LIBOR over the index received on the swap, basis risk is
created. This can occur due to many factors including, without limitation, changes in marginal tax
rates, tax-exempt status of bonds, and supply and demand for variable rate bonds. The City is
exposed to basis risk on all swaps except those that are based on Cost of Funds, which provide cash
flows that mirror those of the underiying bonds. For all other swaps, if the rate paid on the bonds is
higher than the rate received, the City is liable for the difference. The difference would need to be
available on the debt service payment date and it would add addifional underiying cost to the
transaction.
(6) Tax Risk. The swap exposes the City lo tax risk or a permanent mismatch (shortfall) between the
floafing rate received on the swap and the variable rate paid on the underiying variable-rate bonds
due to tax law changes such that the federal or state tax exempfion of municipal debt is eliminated or
its value reduced. There have been no tax law changes since the execution of the City's swap
transactions.
(7) Termination Risk. The risk that the swap could be terminated as a result of certain events including a
rafings downgrade for the issuer or swap counterparty, covenant violation, bankruptcy, payment
default or other defined events of default. Termination of a swap may result in a payment made by
the issuer or to the issuer depending upon the market at the time of termination.
(8) Swap payments and associated debt. Bonds matunng and interest payable January 1, 2013 have
been excluded because funds for their payment have been provided for. As of December 31, 2012,
debt service requirements of the City's outstanding variable-rate debt and net swap payments,
assuming current interest rates remain the same, for their term are as follows (dollars in thousands):

63

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Interest
Rate

Variable-Rate Bonds
Year Ending
December 3 1 ,
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018-2022
2023 - 2027
2028 - 2032
2033 - 2037
2038 - 2042

ii)

Principal
$

Interest

Swaps, Net

22,070
36,320
37,865
57,465
60,150
390,265
383,250
445,040
360,745
133,855

$

4,844
4,866
4,818
4,759
4,563
19,706
13.566
9.035
3,754
441

$

$ 1,927.025

$

70,352

$ 1,066,486

71,650
70.701
69.379
67.786
65,663
291.232
213,664
144.946
60.522
10,943

Total
$

98,564
111.887
112,062
130,010
130.376
701.203
610.480
599.021
425,021
145,239

$ 3,063,863

Swaptions
During 2012. the City terminated all outstanding swapfions. as noted below.
In April 2012. the City terminated the swapfion transacfion with J.P. Morgan in relation to Chicago
Midway Internafional Airport bonds with an original notional amount of $397.7 million and a trade date
of October 27. 1999. The City paid $8.2 million to terminate the swaption. Note that $8.3 million of
Chicago Midway Airport Commercial Paper Notes Series 2003 were issued to fund the swaption
termination payment.
In May 2012, the City terminated three swaption transactions wilh J.P. Morgan in relation to Chicago
Sales Tax Revenue bonds with notional amounts of $69.3 million, $60.6 million and $23 3 million and
a trade date of June 2 1 , 2002. The City paid $0.54 million, $0,365 million and $0.02 million
respectively to terminate the swaptions. Note that $1.0 million of General Obligation Commercial
Paper Notes Series 2002 were issued to fund the Sales Tax Revenue Bonds swaptions terminafion
.payments.
In July 2012, the City terminated the swaption transaction with Goldman Sachs in relation to General
Obligation bonds with a total notional amount of $318.7 million and a trade date of December 18,
2003. The City paid a total of $4.9 million to terminate the swaption. Note that $4.9 million of
General Obligation Commercial Paper Notes Senes 2003 were issued to fund the swaption
termination payment.

e)

Debt Covenants
i)

Water Fund - The ordinances authorizing the issuance of outstanding Water Revenue Bonds provide for
the creation of separate accounts into which net revenues, as defined, or proceeds are to be credited, as
appropriate. The ordinances require that net revenues available for bonds, as adjusted, equal 120
percent of the currenf annual debt service on the outstanding senior lien bonds and that City
management maintains all covenant reserve account balances at specified amounts
The above
requirements were met at December 3 1 , 2012. The Water Rate Stabilization account had a balance in
restricted assets of $74.9 million at December 31, 2012.
The ordinances authorizing the issuance of outstanding Second Lien Water Revenue Bonds provide for
the creation of separate accounts into which monies will be deposited, as appropriate. The ordinances
64

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
require that net revenues are equal to the sum of the aggregate annual debt service requirements for the
fiscal year of the outstanding senior lien bonds and 110 percent of the aggregate annual debt service
requirements of the outstanding second lien bonds. This requirement was met at December 31. 2012.
ii)

Sewer Fund - The ordinances authorizing the issuance of outstanding Wastewater Transmission
Revenue Bonds provide for the creation of separate accounts into which net revenues, as defined, or
proceeds are to be credited, as appropriate. The ordinances require that net revenues available for
bonds equal 115 percent of the current annual debt service requirements on the outstanding senior lien
bonds. This requirement was met at December 31. 2012. The Sewer Rate Stabilization account had a
balance in restricted assets of $29.6 million at December 31, 2012.
The ordinances authorizing the issuance of outstanding Second Lien Wastewater Transmission Revenue
Bonds provide for the creation of separate accounts into which monies will be deposited, as appropriate.
The ordinances require that net revenues equal 100 percent of the sum of the current maximum annual
debt service requirements of the outstanding senior lien bonds and the maximum annual debt service
requirements of the second lien bonds. This requirement was met at December 31, 2012.

iii) Chicago Midway International Airport Fund - The master indenture secunng the issuance of Chicago
Midway International Airport Revenue Bonds requires that the City set rates and charges for the use and
operafion of Midway so that revenues, together with any other available monies and Ihe cash balance
held in the Revenue Fund on the first day of such year not required to be deposited in any fund or
account, will be at least sufficient (a) to provide for the operation and maintenance expenses for the year
and (b) to provide for the greater of (i) the amounts needed to be deposited into the First and Junior Lien
Debt Service Fund, the Operations & Maintenance Reserve Account, the Working Capital Account, the
First Lien Debt Service Reserve Fund, the Repair and Replacement Fund, and the Special Project Fund
and (II) an amount nol less than 125 percent of the Aggregate First Lien Debt Service for such fiscal year
reduced by an amount equal to the sum of any amount held in any capitalized interest account for
disbursement during such fiscal year to pay interest on First Lien Bonds. These requirements were met
at December 31, 2012.
iv) Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Fund - In 1983. the City Council adopted the General Airport
Revenue Bond ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of Chicago-O'Hare International Airport
General Airport Revenue Bonds in unlimited series for the purpose of financing the cost of improvements
and expansion of O'Hare and to redeem its existing outstanding bond obligations. The ordinance further
permits the issuance of second lien notes, bonds and other obligafions which are payable from, and
secured by. a pledge of amounts deposited in the junior lien obligation debt service account created
under the ordinance. The ordinance requires that net revenues in each year equal not less than the sum
of (i) the amount required to be deposited for such year in the debt service reserve fund, the maintenance
reserve fund, the special capital projects fund and the junior lien debt service fund, and (ii) 110 percent of
the aggregate first lien and second lien debt service for the bond year commencing during such fiscal
year reduced by an amount equal to the sum of any amount held in any capitalized interest account for
disbursement during such fiscal year to pay interest on bonds. This requirement was met at
December 31. 2012. The ordinance provides for the creation of separate accounts that are lo be credited
with revenues in a specified prionty. At the end of each year, any excess funds over amounts required in
accounts other than Special Capital Projects, Emergency Reserve and Airport Development accounts are
reallocated with the following year's revenues.
The Master Indenture of Trust securing Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Third Lien Obligations
requires that Revenues in each Fiscal Year, together with Other Available Moneys deposited with the
Trustee with respect to that Fiscal Year and any cash balance held in the Revenue Fund on the first day
of that Fiscal Year not then required lo be deposited in any Fund or Account, will be at least sufficient: (i)
to provide for the payment of Operation and Maintenance Expenses for the Fiscal Year; and (ii) to provide
for the greater of (a) the sum of the amounts needed to make the deposits required lo be made pursuant
to all resolutions, ordinances, indentures and trust agreements pursuant to which all outstanding First
Lien Bonds, Second Lien Obligations, Third Lien Obligations or olher Airport Obligations are issued and
65

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
secured, and (b) 110 percent the Aggregate First, Second and Third Lien Debt Service for the Bond Year
commencing during that Fiscal Year, reduced by any proceeds of Airport Obligations held by the Trustee
for disbursement during that Bond Year to pay pnncipal of and interest on First Lien Bonds. Second Lien
obligations or Third Lien obligations. This requirement was met at December 31, 2012.
The master indenture securing the Passenger Facility Charge (PFC) Revenue Bonds requires PFC
revenues, as defined, to be deposited into the PFC Revenue Fund. The PFC Revenue Fund is required
to transfer amounts no later than the twentieth day of each month to various funds, as defined, as
appropriate to meet debt service and debt service reserve requirements.
No-Commitment Debt and Public Interest Loans include various special assessment, private activity
bonds and loans. These types of financings are used to provide private entities with low-cost capital financing
for construction and rehabilitafion of facilifies deemed to be in the public interest. Bonds payable on nocommitment debt are not included in the accompanying financial statements because the City has no
obligation to provide for their repayment, which is the responsibility of the borrowing entities. In addifion,
federal programs/grants, including Community Development Block Grants and Community Service Block
Grants, provide original funding for public interest loans. Loans receivable are not included as assets
because payments received on loans are used to fund new loans or other program activities in the current
year and are not available for general City operating purposes. Loans provided to third parties are recorded
as current and prior year programs/grants expenditures. Funding for future loans will be from a combinafion
of Ihe repayment of exisfing loans and addifional funds committed from future programs/grants expenditures.

66

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
g)

Defeased Bonds have been removed from the Statement of Net Position because related assels have been
placed in irrevocable trusts lhat, together with interest earned thereon, will provide amounts sufficient for
payment of all principal and interest. Defeased bonds at December 3 1 , 2012. nol including principal
payments due January 1, 2013, are as follows (dollars in thousands):

Amount
Defeased
Emergency Telephone System-Series 1993
General Obligation Refunding Bonds - Series 1993B
General Obligation Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 1998
General Obligation Bonds-Series 2001A
General Obligation Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 2003A
General Obligation Project Bonds - Series 2003C
General Obligation Project Bonds - Series 2004A
General Obligation Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 2005A
General Obligation Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 2005B
General Obligation Direct Access Bonds - Series 2005E
General Obligation Projeci and Refunding Bonds - Series 2006A
General Obligation Direct Access Bonds - Series 2006
General Obligation Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 2007A
General Obligafion Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 2007C
General Obligafion Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 2008
Neighborhoods Alive 21 Program-Series 2001A
Neighborhoods Alive 21 Program - Series 2003
Lake Millenium Project Parking Facilifies Bonds - Series 1998
Near South Redevelopment Project Tax Increment - Series 1994A
Chatham Ridge Redevelopment Project Tax Increment - Series 2002
Special Transportation Revenue Bonds - Series 2001
Midway 2nd Lien Series 2010D-1
Midway 2nd Lien Senes 2010D-2

$

Total

$ 2,292,857

67

213,730
27,515
345.770
404,131
108,000
126,960
276,620
72,690
8,725
22,186
23,775
4,755
10,505
23.805
210
213,825
90,600
149,880
23,000
6,565
118.715
4,435
16,460

Outstanding
$

123,115
6.000
14.005
131,515
67,690
116,710
256,060
59,630
4,465
10,835
13,285
2,635
9,710
11.530
105
60,170
83.440
43.880
3,825
3.575
97,290
4,435
16,460

$ 1,140,365

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
11) Pension Trust Funds
a)

Retirement Benefit-Eligible City employees participate in one of four single-employer defined benefit pension
plans (Plans). These Plans are: the'Municipal Employees'; the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees';
the Policemen's; and the Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Funds of Chicago. Plans are administered by
individual retirement boards represented by elected and appointed officials. Certain employees of the
Chicago Board of Education participate in the Municipal Employees' or the Laborers' and Retirement Board
Employees' Annuity and Benefit Funds for which the City levies taxes to make the required employer
contributions. Each Plan issues a publicly available financial report that includes financial statements and
required supplementary informafion.
The financial statements of the Plans are prepared using the accrual basis of accounting. Employer and
employee contnbutions are recognized in the penod in which employee services are performed. Benefits and
refunds are recognized when payable.
Plan investments are reported at fair value. Short-term investments are reported at cost, which approximates
fair value. Securities traded on national or international exchanges are valued at the last reported sales price
at current exchange rates. Fixed income securities are valued principally using quoted market prices
provided by independent pricing services. For collective investments, the net asset value is determined and
certified by the investment managers as of the reporting dale. Real estate inveslmenis are generally valued
by appraisals or olher approved methods. Investments that do not have an established market are reported
at esfimated fair value.
The Plans have a securifies lending program. At year-end. the Plans have no credit risk exposure to
borrowers because the amounts the Plans owe the borrowers exceed the amounts the borrowers owe the
Plans. The contract with the Plans' master custodian requires it to indemnify the Plans if the borrowers fail to
return the securities (and if the collateral is inadequate to replace the securifies lent) or fail lo pay the fund for
income distribufions by the securities' issuers while the securities are on loan. All securities loans can be
terminated on demand by either the Plans or the borrower, although the average term of the loans has not
exceeded 131 days The Plans' custodian lends securities for collateral in the form of cash, irrevocable
letters of credit and/or U.S. government obligations equal to at least 102 percent of the fair value of securifies
or international secunfies for collateral of 105 percent. Cash collateral is invested in the lending agents' shortterm investment pool, which at year-end has a weighted average ririaturity that did not exceed 81 days. The
Plans cannot pledge to sell collateral securities received unless the borrower defaults. Loans outstanding as
of December 31, 2012 are as follows: market value of securifies loaned $1,122.8 million, market value of cash
collateral from borrowers $1,126.1 million and market value of non-cash collateral from borrowers $17.3
million.
The Plans provide refirement. disability, and death benefits as established by Slate law. Benefits generally
vest after 20 years of credited service. Employees who retire at or after age 55 (50 for policemen and
firemen) with 20 years of credited service qualify to receive a money purchase annuity and those with more
than 20 years of credited service qualify to receive a minimum formula annuity. The annuity is computed by
multiplying the final average salary by a perceritage ranging from 2.0 percent to 2.4 percent per year of
credited service. The final average salary is the employee's highest average annual salary for any four
consecutive years within the last 10 years of credited service.
State law requires City contributions at statutorily, not actuarially determined rates. The City's contribution is
equal to the total amount of contributions by employees to the Plan made in the calendar year two years prior,
multiplied by 1.25 for the Municipal Employees'. 1 00 for the Laborers', 2.00 for the Policemen's, and 2.26 for
the Firemen's. State law also requires covered employees to contribute a percentage of their salaries.

68

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
The City's annual pension cost for the current year and related information for each Plan is as follows (dollars in
thousands):
Municipal
Employees'
Laborers'
Policemen's
Firemen's
Total
Contribution rates:
City (a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
n/a
Plan members
8.5%
8.5%
9%
9.125%
n/a
Annual required contribution
Interest on net pension obligation
Adjustment to annual required
contribution

$

690,823
117,591

$

77.566
(10,377)

$

431,010
165,221

$

271.506
120,807

$ 1,470,905
393,242

(120,895)

10,668

(112,872)

(124,201)

687,519
148,859

77,857
11,853

483,359
197,886

268,112
81,522

1,516,847
440,120

Increase in net pension obligation....
538,660
Net pension obligation (excess),
beginning of year
1,469,886
Net pension obligation (excess),
end of year
$2,008,546

66,004

285,473

186,590

1,076.727

2,065,266

1,510,089

4,915,529

(63.708) ' $ 2,350.739

$ 1.696.679

$ 5,992,256

Annual pension cost
Contributions made

(129,712)
$

(347,300)

' Laborers' net pension excess is recorded in other assets in the statement of nef position.

Actuarial valuation date
Actuarial cost method
Amortizalion method
Remaining amortization period
Asset valuation method

Municipal
Employees'

Laborers'

Policemen's

Firemen's

12/31/2012

12/31/2012

12/31/2012

12/31/2012

Entry age normal Entry age normal
Entry age normal
Entry age normal
Level dollar, open Level dollar, open Level percent, open Level dollar, open
30 years
30 years
30 years
30 years
5-yr. Smoothed
5-yr. Smoothed
5-yr. Smoothed
5-yr. Smoothed
Market
Market
Market
Market

Actuarial assumptions:
Investment rate of return (a)
Projected salary increases (a):
Inflation
Seniority/Merit
Postretirement benefit increases
(a)

7.5%

7.5%

7.75%

8.0%

3.0
(b)
(f)

3.0
(c)
(f)

3.0
(d)
(g)

,3.0
(e)
(9)

Proceeds from a lax levy nol more ttian Itie amounl equal to ttie total amounl ot contributions by
tlie employees to the Fund made in the calendar year, two ^ a r s pnor to the year for which the annual

(b)

applicable tax is levied multiplied by 1.25 for (Municipal, 1.00 for Laborers'. 2.00 Policemen's and 2.26 for Firemen's
Service-based increases equivalent to a level annual rate increase of 1 4 percent o \ c r a full career.

(c)

Service-based increases equivalent to a level annual rate Increase of 1 2 percent o\«r a full career.

(d)

Scrvicc-based increases equivalent to a level annual rale increase of 2.8 perceni over a fiill career.

(e)

Service-tased increases equivalent to a level annual rate increase of 3.0 percent over a full career.

(0

3 0 percent per year beginning al the earlier of:
1) the later of ttie fiistof January of the year after retirement and age 60;
2) ttie later of Itie first of January of ttie year alter the second anniversary of retirement and age 53.

(g)

Uses 3 0 percent per year for annuitants age 55 or over, bom before 1955 with at least 20 years of service
and 1 5 percent per year for 20 years for annuitants age 60 or over, bom in 1955 or later

69

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
The following tables of informafion assist users in assessing each fund's progress in accumulating sufficieni assets to
pay benefits when due. The three-year historical informaiion for each Plan is as follows (dollars in thousands):

Year
Municipal Employees':
2010
2011
2012
Laborers':
2010
2011
2012
Policemen's:
2010
2011
2012
Firemen's:
2010
2011
2012

Annual
Pension
Cost

% of Annual
Pension Cost
Contributed

482,420
609,491
687,519

32.08 %
24.12
21.65

Net Pension
(Asset) /
Obligation

$

1,007,406
1,469,886
2,008.546

47,129
57,651
77.857

32.57
22.17
15.22

403,228
448,153
483,359

-43.28
38.83
40.94

1,791,146
2,065,266
2,350,739

215,666
247,031
268,112

37.53
33.55
30.41

1.345,927
1,510,089
1,696,679

(174,585)
(129,712)
(63,707)

SCHEDULE OF FUNDING PROGRESS
(dollars in thousands)

Year
Municipal Employees':
2010
2011
2012
Laborers':
2010
2011
2012
Policemen's:
2010
2011
2012
Firemen's:
2010
2011
2012

Actuarial
Value of
Assets
(a)

Actuarial
Valuation
Date

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
(AAL)
Entry Age
(b)

12/31/10 $
12/31/11
12/31/12

6.003,390
5.552,291
5,073,320

$'11,828,666
12,292,930
13.475,377

12/31/10
12/31/11
12/31/12

1,529,404
1,422,414
1,315,914

12/31/10
12/31/11
12/31/12
12/31/10
12/31/11
12/31/12

Unfunded
(Surplus)
AAL
(b-a)

Covered
Payroll
(c)

5,825,276
6,740,639
8,402,057

51 % $ •\ 1.541.388
45
1.605,993
38
1,590,794

2,030.025
2,152,854
2.336.189

500,621
730,440
1,020,275

75
66
56

3,718,955
3,444,690
3.148,930

9.210,056
9.522,395
10,051,827

5.491.101
6.077,705
6.902,897

1,198,114
• 1,101,742
993,284

3,655.026
3,851,919
4,020.138

2,456,912
2,750,177
3,026.854

70

$

Funded
Ratio
(a/b)

Unfunded
(Surplus)
AAL as a
Percentage
of Covered
Payroll
((b-a)/c)
378 %
420
528

199,863
195,238
198,790

250
374
513

40
36
31

1,048,084
1,034.403
1.015.171

524
588
680

33
29
25

400.404
425.385
418.965

614
647
722

'

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
The unfunded liability to the Plans poses significant financial challenges. The unfunded liability has
consistently increased in recent years, and actuaries for the Municipal Employees' Plan and the Laborers'
Plan indicate that the unfunded liability of those plans will confinue to increase for the foreseeable
future. Although the acfiiaries for the Policemen's and the Firemen's Plans project that the unfunded
liabilities of those Plans will decrease in the future, such a decrease will result from significantly increased
contributions to those Plans as a result of State Law. Furthermore, the contributions made by the City to the
Plans have been lower than the cash outlays of the Plans in recent years. As a result, the Plans have used
investment earnings or assets of the Plans to satisfy these cash outlays. The use of investment earnings or
assets of the Plans for these purposes reduces the amount of assets on hand to pay benefits in the future
and prevents the Plans from recognizing the full benefits of compounding investment returns. Since 2001,
the City has contnbuted to the Plans as required by Slate Law. However, this amount has not been sufficient
to fully fund the Normal Cost plus an amortized portion of the UAAL in each year as a result of a contnbution
limitation which has had the effect, and may have the effect in the future, of limifing the Pension Levy to an
amount insufficient to fully fund the Plans fo the amount of the Actuarially Required Contnbution. No
assurance can be made that the State Law applicable to the Plans will not be amended in the future.
b)

Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB) - Under State law, certain health benefits are available to
employees who retire from the City based upon their participafion in the City's pension plans. The Pension
Plans and the City agreed to share in the cost of the Settlement Health Care Plan (see Note 12). This single
employee defined benefit plan is administered by the City. Substantially all employees who qualify as
Municipal or Laborers' pension plan participants older than age 55 with at least 20 years of service and Police
and pension plan participants older than age 50 with at least 10 years of service may become eligible for
postemployment benefits if they eventually become an annuitant. Health benefits include basic benefits for
annuitants and supplemental benefits for Medicare eligible annuitants. The amounts below represent the
accrued liability of the City's pension plans related to their own employees and a subsidy paid to the City (see
Note 12). The plan is financed on a pay as you go basis (dollars in thousands).
Annual O P E B Cost and Contributions Made
For Fiscal Year Ending December 31, 2012
Municipal
Employees'
Contribution Rates City:

Annual Required Contribution
Interest on Net OPEB Obligation
Adjustment to Annual Required Contribution

Laborers'

Policemen's

Firemen's

Total

A portion of the City's contnbution from the tax levy is used to
finance the health insurance supplement benefit payments.
$

14,632
3,041

$

3,070
248

$

10,474
479

3i

4,276
398

S

32.452
4.166

1

(3,970)

(380)

(324)

(520)

(5.194)

13,703
9,522

2,994
2,562

10.573
9.766

4.154
2.622

31,424
24,472

Increase in
Net OPEB Obligafion

4,181

432

807

1,532

6,952

Net OPEB Obligation,
Beginning of Year

67,575

5,519

10,654

8,850

92,598

Annual OPEB Cost
Contnbutions l^ade

Nel OPEB Obligation,
End of Year

S

71.756

$

71

5,951

S

11,461

3;

10,382

:S

99,550

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Actuarial Method and Assumptions - Projections of benefits for financial reporting purposes are based on the
substanfive plan (the plan understood by the employer and plan members) and iricluded the types of benefits
provided al the lime of each valuation and the historical pattern of shanng of benefit costs between the employer and
plan members to that point. The actuarial method and assumptions used include techniques that are designed lo
reduce the effects of short term volatility in actuarial accrued liabilities and the actuarial value of assets, consistent
wilh the long term perspective of the calculations.

Actuarial Valuation Date
Actuarial Cost M e t h o d

Amortizalion M e t h o d
Remaining
Amortization M e t h o d
Asset Valuation M e t h o d

Actuarial a s s u m p f i o n s :
O P E B Investment
Rate of Return (a)
Projected Salary Increases (a)
Infiafion
Seniority / Merit
Healthcare Cost Trend Rate (f)

(
(
(
(
(
(

Municipal
Employees'

Laborers'

Policemen's

Firemen's

12/31/2012

12/31/2012

12/31/2012

12/31/2012

Entry A g e
Normal

Entry A g e
Normal

Entry A g e
Normal

Entry A g e
Normal

Level Dollar,
Open

Level Dollar.
Open

Level Percent,
Open

Level Dollar,
Open

30 years

30 years

30 years

30 years

No A s s e l s
(Pay-as-you-go)

No Assets
(Pay-as-you-go)

No A s s e t s
(Pay-as-you-go)

No A s s e t s
(Pay-as-you-go)

4.5%

4.5%

4.5%

4.5%

3.0%

3.0%

3.0%

3.0%

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

a ) Compounded Annually
b ) Service-based increases equivalent lo a level
c ) Service-based increases equivalent to a level
d ) Service-based increases equivalent lo a level
e ) Service-based increases equivalent lo a level
f ) Trend nol applicable - fixed dollar subsidy

annual rate of
annual rale of
annual rate of
annual rate of

increase
increase
increase
increase

of
of
of
of

1.4
1.2
1.8
1.8

percent
percent
percent
percent

over
over
over
over

OPEB COST SUMMARY
(dollars in thousands)
Annual
OPEB
Cost

Year
Municipal Employees' 2010
2011
2012

$

22,375
22.047
13,703

% of A n n u a l
OPEB
Obligation
42.68 %
43.16
69.49

Net
OPEB
Obligation
$

55.045
67.575
71,756

Laborers'

2010
2011
2012

3,559
3,479
2,994

72.68
74.15
85.56

4,619
5,519
5,951

Policemen's

2010
2011
2012

10.736
10.627
10.573

87.13
90.25
92.37

9,619
10,654
11,461

Firemen's

2010
2011
2012

4.354
4,372
4,154

60 74
60.12
63.13

7.107
8,850
10.382

72

a
a
a
a

full
full
full
full

career
career
career
career

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Actuarial valuations of an ongoing plan involve estimates of the value of reported amounts and assumptions about the
probability of occurrence of events far into the future. Examples include assumpfions about future employment,
mortality, and the healthcare cost trend. Amounts determined regarding the funded status of the plan and the annual
required contnbufions of the employer are subject to continual revisions as the results are compared with past
expectations and new estimates are made about the future. The schedule of funding progress, presents, as required,
supplementary information following the notes to the financial statements (dollars in thousands, unaudited).

Actuarial
Valuation
Date

Actuarial
Value of
Assets
(a)

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
(AAL)
Entry Age
(b)

Unfunded
(Surplus)
UAAL
(b-a)

Funded
Ratio
(a/b)

Covered
Payroll
(c)

Unfunded
(Surplus)
y^AL as a
Percentage
of Covered
Payroll
((b-a)/c)
10.19%

Municipal
Employees'

12/31/2012

Laborers'

12/31/2012

Policemen's

12/31/2012

Firemen's

12/31/2012

$

162.083

162,083

$ 1,590,794

38.653

38.653

198,790

19.44

168.811

168.811

1,015,171

16 63

46.206

46,206

418,965

11.03

12) Other Post Employment Benefits - City Obligation
The annuitants who refired prior to July 1, 2005 received a 55 percent subsidy from the City and the annuitants who
retired on or after July 1, 2005 received a 50, 45, 40 and zero percent subsidy from the City based on the annuitant's
length of actual employment with the City for the gross cost of refiree health care under a court approved settlement
agreement. The pension funds contributed $65 per month for each Medicare eligible annuitant and $95 per month for
each Non-Medicare eligible annuitant to their gross cost. The annuitants contributed a total of $67.8 million in 2012 to
the gross cost of their retiree health care pursuant to premium amounts set forth in the above-referenced settlement
agreemenL
The cost of health benefits is recognized as an expenditure in the accompanying financial statements as claims are
reported and are funded on a pay-as-you-go basis. In 2012, the net expense to the City for providing these benefits
to approximately 24.408 annuitants plus their dependents was approximately $97.5 million.
The City's net expense and the annuitants' contribution indicated above are preliminary and subject to the
reconciliation per the court approved settlement agreement.
Plan Description Summary- The City of Chicago is party to a written legal settlement agreement outlining the
provisions of the retiree health program. The Settlement Health Care Plans (the Plans), through June 30, 2013. The
agreement does not require or extend continuation of the Plans after June 30, 2013. Pursuant lo the Settlement, the
City administers a single employer defined benefit healthcare plan (the Health Plan), for which the City pays a portion
of the costs on a pay as you go method. Under the Setfiement agreement, the City of Chicago sponsors health
benefit plans for employees, former employees and retired former employees. The provisions of the program provide
in general, lhat the City pay a percentage of the cost (based upon an employee's service) for hospital and medical
coverage to eligible retired employees and their dependents for a specified period, unfil June 30, 2013 (see Note 17
for subsequeni update).
In addition. Illinois Compiled Statutes authorize the four respective Pension Funds (Police, Fire, Municipal, and
Laborers) to provide a fixed monthly dollar subsidy to each annuitant who has elected coverage under the Health
Plan through June 30, 2013. After that date, no supplements are authorized.
73

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
The liabilities for the monthly dollar supplements paid lo annuitants enrolled in the retiree medical plan by their
respeclive Pension Funds are included in the NPO valuafion reports of the respecfive four Pension Funds (see Note
11).
Special Benefits under the Collective Bargaining Agreements (CBA) - Under the terms of the latest collective
bargaining agreements for the Fraternal Order of Police and the International Associafion of Fire Fighters, certain
employees who retire after attaining age 55 with the required years'of service are permitted to enroll themselves and
their dependents in the healthcare benefit program offered to acfively employed members. They may keep this
(Coverage until they reach the age of Medicare eligibility. These retirees do not contnbute towards the cost of
coverage, but the Police pension fund contributes $95 per month towards coverage for police officers (which is
assumed to continue); the Fire Pension Fund does not contribute. Once CBA eariy retirees reach Medicare eligibility
age, their healthcare benefits are provided under the provisions of the Settlement Plan.
No extension of the CBA has been negotiated as of the end of the governing contract period (June 30, 2012), and
therefore this valuation assumes the expiration of the early retirement special benefits as of December 3 1 . 2012. but
includes the liabilities for continuation of payments to those members already refired under the CBA as of December
31. 2012.
Funding Policy - The City's refiree health plan is a single employer plan which operates on a pay as you go funding
basis. No assets are accumulated or dedicated to funding the retiree health plan benefits.
Annual OPEB Cost and Net OPEB Obligation - The City's annual other postemployment benefit (OPEB) cost
(expense) is calculated based on the annual required contnbution of the employer (ARC). The ARC (Annual
Required Contribufion) represents a level of funding, that if paid on an ongoing basis, is projected to cover the normal
cost each year and to amortize any unfunded actuarial liabilifies over a period of one year (the remaining year of
coverage under the Setfiement agreement).
The following table shows the components of the City's annual OPEB costs for the year for the Health Plan and CBA
Special Benefits, the amount actually contnbuted to the plan and changes in the City's net OPEB obligation. The Net
OPEB Obligation is the amount entered upon the City's Statement of Net Position as of year end as the net liability for
the other postemployment benefits - the retiree health plan. The amount of the annual cost that is recorded in the
Statement of Changes in Net Position for 2012 is the Annual OPEB Cost (expense).
Annual OPEB Cost and Contributions Made
(dollars in thousands)
Retiree
Settlement

CBA
Special

Health Plan

Benefits

Total

Pay As You Go
N/A

Pay As You Go

Pay As You Go

N/A

N/A

Contnbution Rates
City

Plan Members
Annual Required Contnbution
Interest on Net OPEB Obligafion
Adjustment to Annual Required Contnbution

$

Annual OPEB Cost
Contributions Made

194,291

58.456

2.353

1,463

(159,200)

(20,386)

$

252,747
3,816
(179,586)

37,444

39,533

76,977

97,531

18,430

115,961

Decrease in Net OPEB Obligation

(60,087)

21.103

(38,984)

Net OPEB Obligation. Beginning of Year

156,847

97,498

254.345

96.760

118,601

Net OPEB Obligation. End of Year

$

74

S

215.361

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
The Cily's annual OPEB cost, the percentage of annual OPEB cost contnbuted to the plan, and the net OPEB
obligation for fiscal year 2012 is as follows (dollars in thousands):
Schedule of Contributions,
OPEB Costs and Net Obligations
Fiscal Year
Ended
Settlement Plan
12/31/2012

Percentage of Annual
Annual
OPEB Cost OPEB Cost Contributed

Nel OPEB
Obligation

$

s

12/31/2011
12/31/2010

37.444

260 5%
202.4

48,954
82,874

129.6

96,760
254,345
304,483

CBA Special Benefits
12/31/2012

$

39.533

46.6%

s

118,601

12/31/2012
12/31/2011
12/31/2010

$

76,977
48,954
82,874

150.6%
202.4
129.6

s

215.361
254.345
304,483

Total

'

Funded Status and Funding Progress - As of January 1, 2012, the most recent actuarial valuation date, the
actuanal accrued liability for benefits was $471.0 million all of which was unfunded. The covered payroll (annual
payroll of active employees covered by the plan) was approximately $2,518.7 million and the ratio.of the unfunded
actuarial accrued liability to the covered payroll was 18.7 percent.
Actuarial valuations of an ongoing plan involve estimates of the value of reported amounts and assumptions about the
probability of occurrence of events far into the future. Examples include assumpfions about future employment,
mortality, and the healthcare cost trend. Amounts determined regarding the funded status of the plan and the annual
required contnbutions of the employer are subject to continual revisions as the results are compared with past
expectations and new esfimates are made about the future. The schedule of funding progress, presents, as required,
supplementary information following the notes to the financial statements (dollars in thousands, unaudited).

Actuarial
Valuation

Actuarial
Value of

Actuarial
Accrued

Date

Assets

Liability (AAL)

Unfunded
Actuarial
Accrued Liabilily Funded
(UAAL)

Covered

UAAL
as a
Percentage of

Ratio

Payroll

Covered Payroll

Settlement Plan
12/31/2011

$

S

191,378

$

191.378

0%

$ 2,518,735

7.6 %

CBA Special Benefits
12/31/2011

$

S

279,574

$

279.574

0%

$ 1,471,692

19 0 %

$

$

470,952

$

470,952

0%

$ 2,518,735

18 7 %

Total
12/31/2011

Actuarial Method and Assumptions - Projections of benefits for financial reporting purposes are based on the
siibstantive plan (the plan understood by the employer and plan members) and included the types of benefits
provided at the time of each valuation and the histoncal pattern of sharing of benefit costs between the employer and
plan members to that point. The actuanal method and assumpfions used include techniques that are designed to
reduce the effects of short term volatility in actuarial accrued liabilities and the actuarial value of assets, consistent
with the long term perspective of the calculations
75

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
For the Settlement Plan benefits (not provided by the Pension Funds) in the actuarial valuation for the fiscal year
ended December 31. 2012. the projected unit credit actuarial cost method was used. The actuarial assumpfions
included an annual healthcare cost trend rate of 10 5 percent initially, reduced by decrements to an ultimate rate of
10.0 percent. Both rates included a 3.0 percent inflation assumption. The plan has not accumulated assets and does
not hold assels in a segregated trust. However, the funds expected to be used to pay benefits are assumed to be
invested for durations which will yield an annual return rate of 1.5 percent. The Unfunded Accrued Actuarial Liability is
being amortized as a level dollar amount over one year.
For the Special Benefits under the CBA for Police and Fire, the contract expiration date of June 30. 2012 is reflected,
such that liabilifies are included only for payments beyond 2012 on behalf of early refirees already retired and in pay
status as of December 31, 2012. Assumptions and methods were selected lo reflect the expinng obligafion. The
projected unit credit method was selected. The actuarial assumptions included an annual healthcare cost trend rate of
10.5% in 2012. reduced by decrements to an ultimate rate of 5.0% in 2030. Rates included a 3% inflation assumpfion.
The plan has not accumulated assets and does not hold assets in a segregated trust. The funds expected to be used
to pay benefits are assumed to be invested for durations which will yield an annual return rate of 1.50%. The
remaining Unfunded Accrued Actuarial Liability is being amortized as a level dollar amount over five years.
Summary of Assumptions and Methods
Settlement
Health Plan

CBA
Special Benefits

Actuarial Valuation Date

December 31. 2011

December 31, 2011

Actuarial Cost Method

Projected Unit Credit

Projected Unit Credit

Level Dollar

Level Dollar

Amortization Method
Remaining Amortization Period
Asset Valuation Method
Actuarial Assumptions:
Investment Rale of Return
Projected Salary Increases
Healthcare Inflation Rate

1 year

5 years

Market Value

Market Value

1.50%
3.0%
10 5% in 2012 to 10 0% in 2013

1.50%
3 0%
10.5% inifial to 5.0% in 2030

13) Risk Management
The City is exposed to various risks of loss related to torts; theft of, damage to and destruction of assels; errors and
omissions; certain benefits for and injunes to employees and natural disasters. The City provides worker's
compensafion benefits and employee health benefits under self-insurance programs except for insurance policies
maintained for certain Enterprise Fund activities. The City uses various risk management techniques to finance these
risks by retaining, transferring and controlling risks depending on the risk exposure.
Risks for O'Hare. Midway, and certain other major properties, along with various special events, losses from certain
criminal acts committed by employees and public ofl'icial bonds are transferred to commercial insurers. Claims have
not exceeded the purchased insurance coverage in the past three years, accordingly, no liability is reported for these
claims. AH olher risks are retained by the City and are self-insured. The City pays claim settlements and judgments
from the self-insured programs. Uninsured claim expenditures and liabilities are reported when it is probable that a
loss has occurred and the amount of that loss can be reasonably estimated. These losses include an estimate of
claims that have been incurred but not reported. The General Fund is primanly used to record all non-Enterprise
Fund claims
The estimated portion of non-Enterprise Fund claims not yet settled has been recorded in the
Governmental Activifies in the Statement of Net Position as claims payable along wilh amounts related to deferred
compensatory lime and esfimated liabilities for questioned costs. As of December 31, 2012, the total amount of nonEnterprise Fund claims was $556.5 million and Enterprise Fund was $52.0 million. This liability is the City's best
estimate based on available informafion. Changes in the reported liability for all funds are as follows (dollars in
thousands):
76

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012

Balance, January 1
Claims incurred and
change in estimates
Claims paid on current and
prior year events

2012

2011

$ 554,797

$555,285

755,278

585.980

(701.590)

Balance. December 31

$ 608,485

(586.468)
$ 554.797

14) Expenditure of Funds and Appropriation of Fund Balances
The City expends funds by classificafion as they become available, and "Restricted" funds are expended first. If/when
City Council formally sets aside or designates funds for a specific purpose, they are considered "Committed'. The
Mayor (or his/her designee) may in this capacity, also set aside or designate funds for specific purposes and all of
these funds will be considered "Assigned". Any remaining funds, which are not specifically allocated in one or more of
the previous three categories, are considered "Unassigned" unfil such allocation is completed.
In addifion to the categones above, any amounts which will be used to balance a subsequent year's budget will be
considered "Assigned" as Budgetary Stabilizafion funds. The amounts may vary from fiscal year to fiscal year or
depending on the City's budgetary condition, or may not be designated at all. The funds may be assigned by the
Mayor or his designee, up to the amount of available "Unassigned" fund balance at the end of the previous fiscal year.
a)

Fund Balance Classifications

On the fund financial statements, the Fund Balance consists of the following (dollars in thousands):
Nonspendable for Inventory
$
Restricted for Grants and Donations
Restricted for Debt Service
Restricted for TIF & Special Service Area
Programs and Redevelopment
Restricted for Capital Projects
Committed for Debt Service
Committed for Budget and Credit Rating Stabilization
Committed for Repair, Maintenance and City Services . . .
Assigned for Future Appropriated Fund Balance
Assigned for Encumbrances
Restricted for Special Events
Unassigned
Total Government Fund Balance
$

20,885
27,821
313,623
1,499,414
487.762
156,836
624,849
100.442
160,395
16,605
4,291
(1,819,556)
1,593,367

At the end of the fiscal year, total encumbrances for the General Operaling Fund amounted fo $16.6 million, $19.1
million for the Special Taxing Areas Fund, $34.8 million for the Capital Projects Fund and $10.8 million for the Non
Major Special Revenue Fund.
15) Commitments and Contingencies
The City is a defendant in various pending and threatened individual and class action litigation relafing principally to
claims arising from contracts, personal injury, property damage, police conduct, alleged discriminafion, civil rights
actions and other matters. City management believes that the ultimate resolution of these matters will not have a
material adverse effect on the financial posifion of the City.
77

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
The City participates in a number of federal-and state-assisted grant programs. These grants are subject to audits by
or on behalf of the grantors to assure compliance with grant provisions. Based upon past experience and
management's judgment, the City has made provisions in the General Fund for questioned costs and other amounts
esfimated to be disallowed. City management expects such provision to be adequate to cover actual amounts
disallowed, if any.
As of December 3 1 , 2012. the Enterprise Funds have entered into contracts for approximately $565.5 million for
construcfion projects.
The City's pollufion remediation obligation of $8.4 million is primarily related to Brownfield redevelopment projects.
These projects include removal of underground storage tanks, cleanup of contaminated soil, and removal of olher
environmental pollution identified at the individual sites. The estimated liability is calculated using the expected cash
flow technique. The pollution remediation obligation is an estimate and subject to changes resulting from pnce
increases or reducfions. technology, or changes in applicable laws or regulations.
16) Concession Agreements

'

The major fund enfitled Service Concession and Reserve Fund is used for the purpose of accounting for the deferred
inflows associated with governmental fund long-term lease and concession transactions. Deferred inflows are
amortized over the life of the related lease and concession agreements. Proceeds from these transactions may be
transferred from this fund in accordance with ordinances approved by Cily Council that define the use of proceeds.
In February 2009, the City completed a $1.15 billion concession agreement to allow a private operator lo manage and
collect revenues from the City's metered parking system for 75 years. The City received an upfront payment of $1.15
billion which was recognized as a deferred inflow that will be amortized and recognized as revenue over the term of
the agreement. The City recognizes $15.3 million of revenue for each year through 2083.
In December 2006, the City completed a long-term concession and lease of the City's downtown underground public
parking system. The concession granted a private company the right to operate the garages and collect'parking and
related revenues for the 99-year lerm of the agreement. The City received an upfront payment of $563.0 million of
which $347.8 million was simultaneously used to purchase three of the underground garages from the Chicago Park
District. The City recognized a deferred inflow that will be amortized and recognized as revenue over the lerm of the
lease. The City recognizes $5.7 million of revenue for each year through 2105.
In January 2005. the City completed a long-term concession and lease of the Skyway. The concession granted a
pnvale company the right to operate the Skyway and to collect toll revenue from the Skyway for the 99-year term of
the agreement. The City received an upfront payment of $1.83 billion; a portion of the payment ($446.3 million)
advance relunded all of the outstanding Skyway bonds. The City recognized a deferred inflow of $1.83 billion that will
be amortized and recognized as revenue over the 99-year term of the agreement. The City recognizes $18.5 million
of revenue related to this transaction for each year through 2103. Skyway land, bridges, other facilities and
equipment confinue to be reported on the Statement of Net Posifion and will be depreciated, as applicable, over their
useful lives. The deferred inflow of the Skyway is reported in ttie Proprietary Funds Statement of Net Posifion.
17) Subsequent Events
As of December 31, 2012. the outstanding balance for Chicago General Obligation Commercial Paper Notes (G O.
CP) was $166 5 million. As of the date of this report, the City has paid $95.0 million of G.O. CP. issued $69.1 million
to fund various authorized capital projects, and had an outstanding balance of $140.6 million.
Since January 2013. the City Motor Fuel Tax Revenue Bonds have been downgraded by Moody's Investors Service
and Fitch Rafings. Moody's downgraded the rating from Aa3 lo A3 in March and from A3 to Baal in June. Fitch
downgraded the rating from A- to BBB+ in June. Moody's and Fitch currently have a negative outlook on the ratings.
In January 2013, the City entered into two swap overiay agreements (i.e.. Constant Maturity Swap (CMS) reversal)
associated with the General Obligation Series 2003B variable rate bonds with PNC Bank. N.A. (PNC) for a notional
amount of $48.2 million and The Bank of New York Mellon (BNYM) for a notional amount of $144.6 million. The
78

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
agreement wilh PNC is effective March 1, 2014 through January 1. 2019 and the agreement with BNYM is effective
November 1, 2014 through January 1. 2019. Under both agreements the City will pay 66.91 percent of 10 year
LIBOR and receive 75 percent of one month LIBOR. Together with the existing underiying swaps on the bonds, in
which the Cily pays 4.052 percent and receives 66.91 percent of 10 year LIBOR, the net effect is that the City will pay
a fixed rate of 4.052 percent and receive 75 percent of one month LIBOR through January 1. 2019, after which time
the City will receive 66.91 percent of 10 year LIBOR through expirafion (January 1, 2034). The City received a total
upfront payment of $7.5 million.
In February 2013. the City increased the Letter of Credit (LOG) support for the Chicago Midway International Airport
Commercial Paper Program from $85.0 million to $150.0 million. The $65.0 million LOG is provided by PNC B^nk.
While the City has City Council authorization to issue up to an aggregate principal of $250.0 million of Chicago
Midway International Airport Commercial Paper Notes (Midway CP Notes), the LOG support provides only for the
issuance of up to $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of Midway CP Notes. The Midway CP Notes are
authorized to be issued by the City for the financing and refinancing of certain projects (which may include payments
on certain related bonds and notes) at Chicago Midway International Airport.
In March 2013, the City entered into a Revolving Credit Agreement with Bank of America, N.A., which allows the City
to draw on the line of credit in an aggregate amount not to exceed $200.0 million. The City's repayment obligation
under the line of credit is a general obligafion of the City. The line of credit expires March 1. 2016.
In May 2013, the City issued $23.0 million aggregate principal amount of Midway CP Notes. The proceeds will be
used to finance a portion of the costs of authorized airport projects.
In May 2013. the City extended the OPEB benefits for refirees under the OPEB Settlement Health Care Plans from
June 30. 2013 until December 31. 2013, with a commitment to provide reduced subsidies after 2013, with a complete
phase out in five years. The liability associated with six additional months of payments for the remaining Settlement
Plan refirees is approximately $45 million. The liability associated with the five year phase out is unknown since the
level of subsidy and plan provisions are not yet determined.
In June 2013, the City entered into a loan agreement with the United States Department of Transportafion under the
Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act (TIFIA) program to complete the Wacker Drive
Reconstruction Project. The loan amount of $98.66 million will fund the Chicago Riverwalk along the main branch of
the Chicago River. The interest rate is 3.33% and the final maturity of the loan is 1/1/2048.
The 1996 Reauthorization Act, Tifie 49 United Slates Code §47134, authorized the Federal Aviafion Administration
("FAA") to establish the Airport Privatization Pilot Program (the "Pilot Program"), pursuant to which the FAA is
authorized to permit public airport sponsors to sell or lease an airport. The 2012 Reauthorizafion Act'increased the
number of airports that could participate in the program from five to ten. Only one of the ten airports can be a "large
hub" airport (having enplanements that equal or exceed one percent of the enplanements at all U.S. commercial
airports). On September 2006. the City applied to the FAA under the Pilot Program with respect to Chicago Midway
Internafional Airport ("Midway") with extensions requested periodically and most recenfiy in April 2012. The City is
currently pursuing bids for a lease of Midway under the provisions of the Pilot Program. The City is not under any
obligation to accept any bids, and it is not possible at this time to predict whether or not the City will enter into a lease
of Midway pursuant to the Pilot Program or when such a transaction might occur.

79

 REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
SCHEDULE OF OTHER POSTEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS FUNDING P R O G R E S S
Last Three Years (dollars are in thousands)

Actuarial
Valuation
Date

Municipal
Employees'
2010
2011
2012

12/31/2010
12/31/2011
12/31/2012

Laborers'
2010
2011
2012
Policemen's
2010
2011
2012
Firemen's
2010
2011
2012
City of Chicago
2010
2011
2012

Actuarial
Value
of Assets
(a)

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability (AAL)
Entry Age
(b)

Unfunded
Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
(UAiAL)
(b-a)

Funded
Ratio
(a/b)

0/

Covered
Payroll
(c)

Unfunded
(Surplus)
AAL as a
Percentage
of Covered
Payroll
((b-a)/c)

$ 1,541,388
1.605.993
1,590,794

14.50
10.16
10.19

199,863
195,238
198.790

20.69
19.63
19.44

1,048,084
1,034,404
1,015,171

15.72
16.04
16.63

223.564
163,242
162,083

223,564
163,242
162,083

12/31/2010
12/31/2011
12/31/2012

41,361
38.328
38.654

41.361
38.328
38,654

12/31/2010
12/31/2011
12/31/2012

164.796
165,955
168.811

164,796
165,955
168.811

. 12/31/2010
12/31/2011
12/31/2012

48,222
46,980
46,206

48,222
46,980
46,206

400,404
425.385
418.965

12.04
11.04
11.03

12/31/2009
12/31/2010
12/31/2011

533,387
390,611
470,952

533,387
390.611
470,952

2,546.961
2.475,080
2,518,735

20.94
15.78
18.70

$

80

/o

%

0/
/•

/o

  

APPENDIX 
CITY OF CHICAGO

ECONOMIC, DEMOGRAPHIC AND SUPPLEMENTAL. INFORMATION

 

 PAGE IONALLY 

ECONOMIC, DEMOGRAPHIC AND SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Set forth below is certain economic, demographic and supplemental information regarding the
City. Sources of informaiion are indicated immediately following each lable or section. Wilh respect to
nun-City .sources, the Cily considers these sources to be reliable but has made no independent
verification ofthe information provided and does not warrant its accuracy.
The C i t y
Chicago is the third largest cily in the United States and located in the second most populous
county in the country - Cook County, Illinois. On the shores o f Lake Michigan, the City has a 228 square
mile footprint and is 26 miles long.
Economy
Chicago'.s large and diverse economy contributes to a gross regional product o f more than $500
billion. Wilh 9.5 million people, 4.2 million etnployees, and over 270,000 businesses, ihc Chicago
metropolitan area is home to more than 400 major corporate headquarters, including 30 Fortune 500
headquarters, and 29 S&P 500 companies.
Since the 1850s, Chicago has been an important center for North American transportation and
distribution. Because o f its unique geography, Chicago's distribution network offers access lo air. rail,
and water, with two ports capable o f handling ocean-going ships and barges, and an airport system that
moves 1.5 million tons o f freight, mail, and goods annually. Chicago is also the only city where the
country's six largest freight railroad companies interchange tratTlc.
Manufacturing employs over 400,000 workers in the Chicago metropolitan area and makes up
nearly than 10 percent o f t h e regional economy.
Health care and life science-related businesses employ over 500,000 workers in the Chicttgo
metropolitan area. Five o f t h e nation's 15 major teaching hospitals are located in Chicago.
Health Ccire and life science-related businesses employ over 500,000 workers in the Chicagometropolitan area. Five o f t h e nation's 15 major teaching hospitals are located in Chicago.
Pnpijlation
Chicago is home to nearly 7..1 million people that live in more than one million households across
77 communities. Total nutnber o f households over piist 40 years has remained very stable at 1.2 million,
providing a stable and robust population base. City's population edged up 0.7% over the past two years
to 2.71 million while olher Midwest cities have seen declines.

D-l

 The population o f t h e United Slates, the State o f Illinois, Cook County and the City for the census
years from 1980 lo 2010 is set forth below.
Population
1980 — 2012
'Year

United States

1980
1990
2000
2010
2012 Estimate

226,545,805
248.709.873
281,421.906
308.745,538
313,873,685

State o f i llinuis
11,427,409
11,430,602
12,419,293
12.830,632
12,868,192

Cook County

City

5,253,655
5,105.067
5,376.741
5,194,675
5.231,351

3,005,072
2,783,726
2,896,016
2.695,598
2,714,856

Source U .S Census l?iirc;ui
More than 100 languages are spoken and more than 26 ethnic groups have populations greater
than 25,000. 33.6 perceni o f Chicago's residents have bachelor's degrees, which is higher than the
nalional averages o f 28 percent. The age distribution o f Chicago's population closely matches ils peer
cities, with the highest relative percentage o f t h e population between the ages o f 25 and 44.
Per C:ipita Income :ind Wages
The per capita personal income (estiinated annual earnings) for the Uniied States, the State o f
Illinois. Cook County and the Chicago MSA is set forth below for the years 2003 through 2012.
Per Capita Income
2003 — 2012
Year

United States

2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012

$32,676
34.300
35,888
38,127
39,804
40,873
39,357
40,163
42,299
43,741

State of Illinois
$34,726
. 36,184
37,702
40,194
42,271
43.338
41,544
42.074
44.119
45.857

Cook County
$36,554
38,559
40,549
43,541
46,264
47.752
46,161
45,318
47.008
48,943

City of Chicago
$37,151
38,635
40,553
43,369
• 45,556
46,230
43,907
44,294
46,305
48,305

.Source: U S Dcpanment orCoiiinicrce, bureau of teoiioniic Analysis Data a.s recorded in I'ebniary 2014.
Chicago's inedian household income is .$47,408, compared to $56,853 in Illinois and $51,914 in
the U.S., and Chicago ranks 36lh among other major metropolitan areas on the cost o f living inde.x.
Employment
Total employment for the State o f Illinois, the Chicago M S A , Cook Couniy and the City for the
years 2003 through 2013 is set forth below.

D-2

 Employment
2003-2013
Year

Chicago

Cook County

Chicago MSA

State of lllino

2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

1.215.104
1,212,169
1.198,929
1,228,075
1.249,238
1,237,856
1,171,841
1,116,830
1.120.402
1,144.896
1,153,725*

2,417.183
2,413.682
2,393,339
2,453,204
2,490,758
2,461,017
2,325,536
2,309,021
2,316.-502
2,367,143
2,385,399*

4.378,289
4.414.548
4,432,502
4.577,389
4,658,245
4,619,024
4,374,965
4,350,762
4,372,294
4,455,488
4,473.324**

5,916,830
5.968,561
6,033,421
6,225,095
6,322,029
6.248,336
5,937,296
5,925.554
5,942.809
6,007,953
5,975,726**

Source; U S LX;partnicnt of LatTor. Bureau of Labor Statistics. D.ila as recorded in Febmary 2014
•November 2013 data
••December 2013 data.
The percentage of total (nonfarm) employment by sector for the Chicago MSA, Stale of Illinois
and the United States for November 2008 versus November 2013 is shown in the following table.
Percentage of Total Non Farm Employment by Major Industry Sector
November 2008 v.s. November 2013

Sector
Trade, Transportation and Utilities
Government
Education and Health Services
Professional and Business Services
Leisure and Hospitality
Manufacturing
Financial Activities
Construction
Other Services
Infonnation
Mining and logging
Total

Chicago MSA
Nov-08
Nov-13
20.5%
20.5%
12.8%
12.3%
13.8%
15.2%.
16.1%
17.4%
8.9%
9.4%
10.2%
9.2%
6.9%
6.4%
4.4%
3.3%
4.4%
4.3%
1.9%
1.8%
0.0%
0.0%
100%
100%

Illinois
Nov-08
Nov-13
20.4%
20.4%
14.7%
14.3%
13.7%
15.2%
14.3%
15.4%.
8.8%
9.1%
10.9%
9.8%
6.5%
6.3%.
4.3%
3.3%.
4.4%
4.3%
1.9%
1.7%
0.2%
0.2%
100%.
100%

United States
Nov-13
Nov-08
19.2%
19.2%
16.1%
16.9%
15.5%
14.3%
13.7%
12.8%
10.2%
9.5%
8.7%
9.6%
5.7%
5.9%
4.3%
5.1%.
3.9%
4.0%
1.9%
2.2%
0.6%
0.6%.
100%
100%

.Source U S Department ofLabor, Rureau ofLabor Statistics Data as recorded in Ixbruary 2014
Chicago's average annual unemployment rale decreased from 11.3 percent in 2011 to 10.1
percent in 2012. while statewide. Illinois' unemployment rale dropped from 9.7 percent in 2011 to 8.9

D-3

 percent in 2012. In November 2013, Chicago's unemployment rale before seasonal adjustment was 9.6
percent, which is down from the November 2012 rate of 9.7 percent.
The annual unemployment rates (percent of population, not seasonally adjusted) for the United
States, the State of Illinois, Cook County, the Chicago MSA and the City is set forth below for the years
2003 through 2013.
Annual Unemployment Rates
2003 — 2013
Year

Chicago

Cook
County

Chicago
MSA

State of
Illinois

United
States

2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
201 1
2012
2013

8.1%.
7.5
7.1
5.3
5.7
6.9
10.9
11.6
11.3
10.1
9.6*

7.4%
6.7
6.4
4.8
5.2
6.4
10.4
10.8
10.3
9.3
8.6*

6.8%
6.2
5.9
4.5
4.9
6.1
10.1
10.4
9.8 •
8.9
8.3**

6.7%
6.2
5.8
4.6
5.1
6.4
10.0
10.5
9.7
8.9
8.6**

6.0%
5.5
5.1
4.6
4.6
5.8
9.3
9.6
8.9
8.1
7.4

Source. I.I.S. Department oI Labor, Bureau ol'l.abor Statistics Data as recorded in I'ebruary 2014
•November 2013 data
••December 2013 data

Employers
Chicago has a strong and vibrant business community. In 2012, there were over 600 corporate
expansions and relocations in the Chicago region, accounting for more than 50,000 created and retained
jobs. Tech companies accounted for more than 6,000 new jobs in 2012.

D-4

 The companies employing the greatest number of workers in the Cily as ofthe end of 2012 are set
forth below.
Chicago''s Largest Employers
2012
PercentHge
of
Number of
Employees

Kmploycr

J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A.
United Airlines
Accenlure L L P
Northern Trust Corporation
Jewel Food Stores, Inc.
Ford Motor Company
Bank o f America N T & SA
A B M Janitorial Services - North Central
American Airlines
Walgreen's Co.

8.168
7,521
5.590
5,448
4.572
4.187
3,811
3,398
3,076
2,789

Total City
Employment
0.76%
0.70
0.52
0.51
0.43
0.39
0.36
0.32
0.29
0.26

Source: City ol"Chicago, Department of Revenue, Lmployer's lixpense 'fax Returns.
Tourism
Chicago hosted 46.3 million domestic and overseas visitors in 2012, including 34.1 million
domestic leisure travelers, 10.9 million domestic business travelers, and 1.3 million overseas visitors. In
2012. visitors to Chicago spent more than $12.76 billion, generated $805.6 million in tax revenue, and
helped create over 132,000 jobs.
According to statistics compiled by Airports Council International in 2012, O'Hare ranked fifth
worldwide and second in the United States in terms of lotal passengers while Midway ranked 27"* in the
United States. According to CDA and USDOT survey data, O'Hare and Midway had 33,231.201 and
9,671,619 total enplaned passengers in 2012. respectively. O'Hare supports substantial international
service with intemational passengers constituting 14.9% of lotal enplaned passengers in 2012.
McCormick Place is North America's largest convention facility, and hosted close to 3 million in
2012.
There are over 37.000 hotel rooms in Chicago's central business district, and over 108,000 rooms
in the Chicagoland area.
In April 2014, Chicago will host the U.S. Travel Association's IPW, the world's largest U.S.
tourism marketplace for intemational inbound travel.
Transportation
Chicago has been an important center for North American transportation and distribution.
Chicago's distribution network offers access to air. rail, and water, with two ports capable of handling
ocean-going ships and barges, and an airport system lhat moves 1.5 million tons of freight, mail, and

D-5

 goods annually. Chicago is also ihc only cily where the country's six largest freight railroad companies
interchange traffic.
The Chicago Transit Authority operates the second largest public transportation system in the
nation, wilh: 1,781 buses operaling over 140 routes and 1,959 route miles, making 25,000 trips per day
and serving 12.000 bus stops; 1,200 rail cars operating over eight routes and 242 miles of track, making
2,145 trips each day and serving 144 stations; and 1.64 million rides on an average daily basis and over
550 million rides a year (bus and train combined).
Schools
The Chicago Public School system is the third largest school district in the nation, serving
approximately 404,000 students. CPS is comprised of 472 elementary schools, 106 high schools, 7
contract schools, and 96 charter school campuses. The City Colleges of Chicago operate seven colleges
and serve appro.ximately 120,000 students.
Government
The number of full-time employees ofthe City for the years 2006 through 2013 is included in the
following table.
City Full-Time Employees
2006 — 2013

Veiir

BuJ 2;ctrd KullI'ime K( uiv»leiil
P«sili(in.s

2006
2007
2008
2009
2010.
2011
2012
2013

40.297
40,207
39,921
37.419
36,889
36.448
33.708
33,554*

Source: Chicago Coniprehen.sive Animal I'inancial Repon I'or the year ended December 31, 2012.
• Lstiiiiate from Ihe City of Chicago 2013 Annual I'inancial Analysis.

The City has 1.27 million registered voters.
Arts & Culture
The city has more than 200 theater companies and is the only U.S. city wilh five Tony awardwinning theater companies. Chicago is home lo the Chicago Symphony, the Lyric Opera, and the Joffrey
Ballet. Chicago has over 35 museums and was voted the 112 art destination in the country by American
Slyle Magazine. The Chicago Cultural Center, the first free municipal cultural center in the country,
attracted more than 800 thousand visitors in 2012.

D-6

 Recreation
The Chicago metro area has 80 miles o f public shoreline and 94 beaches. Lincoln Park Zoo is
the oldest public zoo in the country, with an estimated annual attendance o f 3 million. Chicago has 552
parks, including Lincoln Park which is the second most visited city park in the country, attracting 20
million visitors annually. Chicago is home to nine major professional sports teams. Chicago has more
free festivals and events than any other city in the country. Millennium Park, a 25-acre park in the heart
o f downtown, attracts 4 million visitors annually.
Restaurants and Shopping
There are over 600 stores in and around Michigan Avenue.
There are more than 5.500
resLiurants in Chicago, including four that were awarded a Five-Star rating by Forbes Travel.
Housing Market
Home prices in the Chicago M S A housing market have strengthened through 2013. and City
residenlial home sales experienced ils 30th consecutive month o f year-over-year growlh by number in
December 2013.
According to the Freddie Mac Klousing Price Index, the Chicago M S A index went
from 103.54 in September 2012 to 114.08 in September 2013.
The Chicago M S A traditionally lags the national housing market. As experienced nationally, the
Chicago market is recovering and the property lax base remains robust. Recently, the number o f home
sales has increased while the number o f foreclosure lllings has decreased.
The monthly home sales and the median home sale prices for Chicago for the years 2009 through
2013 are shown below.
Chicago Monthly Home Sales

2009 — 2013

Januar\'
February'
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

2009
917
866
1,212
1407
1,557
1.981
1.975
1,927
1,918
2,012
1,859
1,767

2010
1,202
1,225
1,814
1,984
2,057
2,526
1.588
1,486
1.403
1,216
1,144
1,444

Source: Illinois Associaiion ofRealtors

D-7

2011
1,034
1,056
1,450
1,466
1,703
1,841
1,655
1,787
l,49«
1,312
1,429
1,576

2012
1,123
1,250
1,664
1.816
2,125
2,332
2,164
2,293
1,906
2,076
1,798
.1,849

2013
1,485
I,37K
1,894
2,331
2,762
2,623
2,«38
2,797
2,352
2,231
1,800
2,080

 Chicago Median Home Sale Prices
2009 — 2013

Januar>'

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

$205,000

$195,000

.t 150,000

$148,000

$159,000
158.000

February

218.625

176,500

150.000

140.000

March

219,000

209,000

163.200

172,000

187.500

April

218,000

225.000

182,000
200,000

222,000
234,000

May

225,000

230,000

169,000
190,000

June

242,050

* 2.''>4,250

207,000

217.000

254,900

July

245.000

196.500

210.000

200.000

250.000

August

•229.900

200.000

192,500

200,000

245.000

September

225,000

180,000

190,000

188,400

231,000

October

215,000

183,000

162.000

175,000

218,500

November

215,000

182,500

157.000

180,000

200.000

December

210,000

166,250

15.5,000

185.000

210.000

Source' Illinois Association ofRealtors

D-8

  

APPENDIX 

RETIREMENT FUNDS AND OTHER POST-EMPLOYM ENT BENEFITS

 

APPENDIX E
R E T I R E M E N T FUNDS AND O T H E R POST-EMPLOYMENT B E N E F I T S
T A B L E O F CONTENTS
Page
RETIRCMEN'I' FUNDS
General
Source Information
Background Information Regarding the Retirement Funds
General
The Retirement Funds
Overlapping Taxing Bodies
Certain Duties
Investments
Determination of Employee Contributions
Determination of City's Contributions
City Contributions to FABF
Cily's Required Contributions lo PABF and FABF Beginning with the Levy made in 2015
The Actuarial 'Valuation
:
General
Actuaries and the Actuarial Process
City's Contributions Not Related to GASB Standards
City's Contributions to PABF and FABF under P.A. 96-1495
Will Not Conform to GASB Standards
Actuarial Methods
Actuarial Value of Assels
Actuarial Accrued Liability
Actuarial Assumptions
Assumed Investment Rate of Return
Funded Status ofthe Retirement Funds
Projection of Funded Status and Insolvency
Report and Recommendations ofthe Commission to Strengthen Chicago's Pension Funds
Diversion of Grant Money to PABF and FABF Under P.A. 96-1495
GASB Statements 67 and 68
Legislative Changes
P.A. 96-0889
P.A. 96-1495
;
Pension Reform
OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFffS
General
:
'fhe Settlement
Cily Financing ofthe Health Plan
Actuarial Considerations
City Obligation
Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Funded Status
•.
Retiree Health Benefits Commission
Status of Healthcare Beneflls After the Settlement Period

E-1
E-1
E-3
E-3
E-3
E-4
E-5
E-6
E-6
E-7
E-8
E-9
E-9
E-IO
E-IO
E-10
E-11
E-12
E-12
E-12
E-13
E-14
E-14
E-15
E-24
E-31
E-32
E-33
E-33
E-33
E-34
E-34
E-35
E-35
E-36
E-36
E-36
E-36
E-37
E-37
E-38
E-38

 R E T I R E M E N T FUNDS
General
Pursuant lo the Illinois Pension Code, as revised from time to lime (Ihc "Pension Code"), the Cily
contributes lo four retiremenl funds, which provide bcnellls upon retirement, death or disability to
employees and beneficiaries. Such rcliremcnt funds arc, in order from largest Lo smallest membership:
(i) the Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago ("MEABF"); (ii) the Policemen's
Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago ("PABF'); (iii) the Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of
Chicago ("F.ABF"); and (iv) the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund
of Chicago ("LABF' and, together with MEABF, PABF and FABF, the "Retirement Fund.s").
The Retirement Funds are established, adminisfcicd and financed under the Pension Code, as
separate btxlics politic and corporate and for the benefit of the employees of the City and iheir
beneficiaries. The Cily's contributions to the Retirement Funds, and hencfits for annuitants of the
Retirement Funds, arc govemed by the provisions ofthe Pension Code. See "— DctenTiinal.ion of Cily's
Contributions" below. This Appendix describes, among olher things, the curreni provisions of the
Pension Code applicable lo the City's funding of the Retirement Funds; no a.ssurance can be made that the
Pension Code will not he amended in ihe future.
The Retirement Funds have been actuarially determined to be significantly underfunded. The
unfunded liabiliiies have increased in recent years, and actuaries for MEABF' and LABF indicate that,
under current law, the unfunded liabilities of those Retirement Funds will continue to increase for the
foreseeable future and jeopardize the solvency of MEABF and LABF. See "— Funded Status of the
Retirement Funds" and "— Projection of Funded Status" below. Furthermore, although Ihe actuaries for
PABF and FABF project that the unfunded liabilities of lho.se Retirement Funds will dccrea.sc in the
future, such a dccrea.sc is exp)ectcd to result from significantly increased Cily contributions to those
Retirement Funds as a result of the enactment of P.A. 96-1495, which is described and defined herein.
The increases in the City's contributions to PABF and FABF mandated by P.A. 96-1495 are expected lo
substantially burden the Cily's financial condition.
In 2010, the Illinois General Assembly enacted legislation lo address the pension benefits of
members who joined the Retirement Funds on or after January I , 201 I . See "— Legislative Changes"
below. While this legislation is expected to reduce Ihc Retiremenl Funds' unfunded liabilities over lime,
il is not expected lo materially reduce such liabilities in ihe near future.
With respect lo the unfunded liabilities as.sociaied with members who joined the Retiremenl
Funds before January 1, 2011, the only significant action laken to dale by the Illinois General Assembly
has been Ihe enactment of P.A. 96-1495 which, among olher things, significantly increased future
contributions to be made by the City to PABF and FABF. Sec "— Detemiination of Cily's Contributions
- City's Required Contributions lo PABF and FABF Beginning wilh the Levy made in 2015" below.
P.A. 96-1495 has hecn projected to require an increase in the Cily's contributions lo PABF and FABF by
more than $584,000,000, or 200%, starling in 2016 and increasing by approximately three percent each
year thereafter. See "TABLE 13 - PROJECTION OF FUTURE FUNDING STATUS - FABF' and
"TABLE 14 - PROJECTION OF FU TURE FUNDING STATUS - PABF' below. Given the substantial
burden these increa.sed contrihuiions would place on the Cily's financial condition, the Cily is exploring
options which would reduce the near-term burden of such increa.sed contributions.

E-1

 As discu.s.sed under " — Pension Reform" below, ihe Cily believes that reductions in Ihc benefits
provided by each of the Retirement Funds are necessary, in combinaiion w i l h any increa.ses in employer
and employee contributions, to adequately address the unfunded liabilities o f t h e Retirement Funds. Any
reduction in benefits would require action by the Illinois General Assembly to modify ihe Pension Code.
No assurance can be given lhat any proposal lo modify benefits w i l l be enaclcd. Furthermore, given the
Illinois Pension Ciau.se (defined below) ol the Illinois Conslitulion, no a.ssurance can be given lhat
legislation to modify benefits, if enacted, w i l l be upheld upon a legal challenge. See " — Background
Information Regarding the Retirement Funds — General" below.
The Retirement Funds' .sources of funding are the Cily's contributions, the employees'
contributions and investmenl income on the Retirement Funds' assels. The C i l y ' s and employees'
contribution levels arc determined pursuant to the Pension Code. There is no mechanism in the Pension
Code by which ihe funding can self-adjust, becau.se contributions are nol affected by a change in benefits,
as.seis or investments, bul only by a change in curreni payroll, as described in " — Determination of City's
Contributions" below.
The financial health of ihe Relircinent Funds and the projected impact of the Retirement Funds'
underfunding on future contributions lo be made by ihc Cily has impacted the rating agencies'
determination o f t h e C i l y ' s creditworthiness. On April 17, 2013, Moody's Investors Service ("Moody'.s")
issued a relea.se (the "Release") announcing a new approach lo analyzing slate and local govcrnmcni
pensions. The method o f evaluating public pension plans established in the Release is intended to be a
method of standardizing infomiation among public pension plans and does nol impact the C i l y ' s required
contributions, the value o f t h e Retirement Funds' assels, or the liabiliiies owed hy the Rcliremcnt Funds.
The City does not endorse Ihe method of analysis adopted by Moody's in the Release.
Moody's new pension analysis w i l l include, among other things, adjusting pension plan Actuarial
Accrued Liabilities by using certain common assumptions, such as the discount rale and anioilization
peritxi. Certain other actuarial assumptions, such as mortality and salary growth rates, were not
standardized across governmental plans. To accomplish their review, Moody's has slated lhat it w i l l use
a discount rale ba.scd on Citibank's Pension Liability Index di.scount rale as o f a pension plan's valuation
dale. Such a discount rale w i l l be lower than the discount rale currently u.sed by the Retirement Funds
and is clo.ser lo the discount rale for a typical pension plan in the private sector. The City estimates lhat
Moody's new method of analysis would result in the following Funded Ratios, as hereinafter defined, of
Ihe Retirement Funds (based on data as of December 3 1 , 2012): 25.2% for M E A B F , 38.4% for L A B F ,
20.3% for PABF, and 15.8% for FABF. See Tables 5 through 8 below for infomiation on the Retirement
Funds' historical Funded Ratios. For information regarding the Retirement Funds' di.scount rale, .see " —
Actuarial Assumptions —Assumed Investment Rale of Relurn" below. The Release can be obtained from
Mt)0tiy"s; provided, however, that the Release is nol incorporalcd herein by such reference.
On July 17, 2013, Moody's downgraded Ihe ratings of the Cily's general obligation bonds and
sales lax revenue bonds from " A a 3 " lo " A 3 , " ihe C i l y ' s water and sewer senior lien revenue bonds from
" A a 2 " to " A I , " and the Cily's waler and sewer second lien revenue bonds from " A a 3 " to " A 2 , " each wilh
ti negative outlook. Moody's indicated in the ratings tiction report associated w i l h these downgrades (the
"Rating Report") that Ihe downgrades "renecl Chicago's very large and grt.wing pension liabilities and
accelerating budget pressures associtited wilh those liabilities." The Cily makes no prediction as lo
whether Ihe Moody's rating action described above w i l l result in additional downgrades, or the impact
that the financial condition of Ihe Retiremenl Funds w i l l have on Moody's or any other rating agency's
judgment of the C i l y ' s creditworthiness or on the C i l y ' s future financing crisis. The Rating Report can be
obtained from Moody's; provided, however, that the rcpoil is nof incorporated herein by such reference.

E-2

 On .September 13, 2013, Slandaid & Poor's Ratings Group ("S&P") affirmed the City's "A-1-"
general obligation bond rating, but changed its outlook on the Cily's general obligation debt from "stable"
to "negative." In changing the City's general obligation bond outlook, S&P cited the City's pension
liabilities. Furthennore, S&P indicated that the increased conlribulions required by curreni .stale law
could result in ratings downgrades for the Cily if the Cily subslanlially reduces ils reserves lo make these
increased payments.
On November 8, 2013, Fitch Ratings Inc. ("Fitch") reduced Ihe Cily's general obligation bond
and sales tax bond ratings from "AA-" to "A-" and the rating on the Cily's commercial paper notes from
'"A+" to "BBB+." Filch assigned a negative outlook to each of these ratings. In announcing these ratings
downgrades, Fitch cited, among olher things, the Cily's pension liabilily and Ihc "strong legal protection
to pension benefits" in Illinois.
In addition, other rating agencies may have established, or may establish in the future, methods
for evaluating the financial health of the Retirement Funds and their impact on Ihc City's creditworthiness
that are different from the information provided in this Appendix.
Source Information
The information contained in this Appendix relies in part on infomiation produced by the
Retirement Funds, their independent accountants and their independent actuaries (the "Source
Informaiion"). Neither the City nor ihe Cily's independent auditors have independently verified the
Source Information and make no representations nor express any opinion as fo the accuracy of the Source
Informaiion.
Furthermore, where ihe tables in this Appendix present aggregate infomiation regarding Ihc
Retirement Funds, such combined information resuhs solely from Ihe arilhmelic calculation of numbers
presented in the Source Information and may not conform to the requirements for the presentation of such
informaiion by the Governmenial Accounting Standards Board ("GASB") or the Pension Code.
Certain of the comprehensive annual financial reports of the Retirement Funds (each, a "CAFR"
and together, the "CAFRs"), and certain of the actuarial valuations of the Retirement Funds (each, an
"Actuarial Valuation" and together, the "Actuarial Valuation.s"), may be obtained by contacting the
Retirement Funds. Certain of these reports may also be available on the Retirement Funds' websiles
(www.meabforg; www.chipabl.org; www.labfchicago.org; and www.fabforg); provided, however, that
the contents of these reports and of the Retirement Funds' websiles are not incorporated herein by such
reference.
Background Infonnation Regarding the Retirement Funds
General
Each of the Reliretnent Funds is a single-employer, dcfincil-benefit public employee retirement
.system. "Single-employer" refers lo the fact that there is a single plan sponsor, in this ca.se, the Cily.
"Defincd-bencfil" refers lo Ihc fact that Ihe Rcliremcnt Funds pay a periodic benefit to relireil employees
and survivors in a fixed amount dclermined at the time of retirement. 'I'he amount of the periodic benefit
is generally dcicmiincd on the basis of service credits and salary. Eligible employees receive ihe defined
benefit on a periodic basis for life, along with certain benefits to .spouses and children thai survive Ihe
death of the employee.

E-3

 To fund ihe henefils to be paid by a defined benefit pension plan, both employees and employers
make contributions lo the plan. Generally in a dcfined-benefit pension plan, employees coniribule a fixed
percentage of their annual salaiy and employers contribute the additional amounts required (which
amounts may be determined pursuant lo sialute, as in the ca.sc of Ihe Cily), when combined wilh ihe
investment earnings on plan as.seis, lo pay the benefits under Ihc pension plan. See "'Table 1 Membership," "— Delennination of Employee Conlribuiion.s" and "— Delerminaiion of Cily's
Contributions" below.
The benefits available under the Retiremenl Funds accrue throughout the lime a member is
employed by the Cily. Although the benefits accrue during employment, certain age and .service
requirements mu.si be achieved by an employee lo generate a retiremenl or .survivor's periodic defined
benefit payment upon reliremenl or lemiinalioii from ihe City. The Retirement Funds also provitle certain
disability benefits and retiree healthcare benefits to eligible members.
Section 5 of Article XIII of the Illinois Constitution (Ihe "Illinois Pension Clause") provides as
follows:
"Membership in any pension retirement system of Ihc Stale, any unit of lcx;al government
or school district, or any agency or inslrumenlaiity thereof, shall be an enforceable
contractual relationship, the henefils of which shall nol be diminished or impaired."
For a discussion of the Illinois Pension Clause in the context of possible pension reform related to ihc
Retirement Funds, see "— Pension Refomi" below.
For purpo.ses of this Appendix, references lo "employee" or "member" are references lo Ihe
employees ofthe City, llic employees of Ihe Retirement Funds participating in the Retirement Funds, and
with regard lo MEABF, certain employees and annuiianis of the Chicago Board of Education who arc
members of MEABF as described below.
7/11? Retirement Funds
Municipal Employees" Annuiry and Benefit Fund of Chicago. MEABF is established by and
administered under Article 8 of the Pension Code. MEABF provides age and service retirement benefits,
survivor benefits and disability benefits to all eligible members and survivors. MEABF is administered
under the direction of a five-member board of truslces (the "MEABF Board"), who.se members are
responsible for managing and administering MEABF for the benefit of ils members. In addition to City
employees, MEABF's membership includes non-instructional employees of ihe Chicago Board of
Education ("CBOE Employees"). With respect to MEABF, the tenns "employee" and "member" include
the CBOE Employees. The CBOE Employees account for almost half of MEABF's meniber.ship. The
Mayor of the City, ihe Cily Clerk, the City Treasurer, and members of the City Council may participate in
MEABF if such persons file, while in office, wrillen application lo the MEABF Board.
Policemen"s Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago. PABF is eslabli.shed by and administered
under Article 5 of the Pension Code. PABF provides retirement and disability benefits to the police
officers ofthe City, their .surviving spouses and their children. PABF is administered by an eight-member
hoard of trustees (the "PABF Board"). Members of the PABF Board are charged with administering the
PABF under the Pension Code for the benefit of its members.
Firemen "s Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago. FABF is established by and administered under
Article 6 of the Pension Code FABF provitles retirement and disability benefits lo fire service employees

E-4

 and their survivors. FABF is governed by an eight-member board of trustees (the "FABF Board").
Members of the FABF Board are statutorily mandated to discharge their duties stilely in Ihe interest of
FABF's participants and beneficiaries.
Laborers" and Retirement BoariJ Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago. LABF is
established by and administered under Article 1 1 of the Pension Code. LABF provides relireiiieiit and
disability benefits for employees of the Cily who are employetl in a title recognized by the Cily as labor
service and for the survivors of such employees. LABF is governed by an eight-member board of trustees
(the "LABF Board" and, together wilh the MEABF Board, the PABF Board and the FABF Board, ihe
"Retirement Fund Boards"). Members of the LABF Board are sialutorily mandalcil lo discharge their
duties solely in the interest of LABF's participants and beneficiaries.
The membership of the Retirement Funds as of December 3 1, 2012, was as follows:
T A B L E I - MEMBERSHIP
Retirement
Fund
MEABF
PABF
FABF
LABF
Total
.Source:

Active
Members

Inaclive/ Entitled
to UenelUs

31,.326
12.026
4.740
2.865
50.957

13.465
664
60
1.408
15,597

Ketirecs and
Kenetlciiiries
24.120
12,966
4.613
3,976
45,675

Totals
68.911
25,656
9,413
8.249
112.229

CAFR.v of llie Kelirciiieiil Kinds as of December .11. 2012

Overlapping Tu.xing Brjdit'S
The City's lax ba.se overiaps wilh numerous other units of government, including ihc Chicago
Board of Education, the Chicago Park District ("CPD"), the County of Cook, and the Slate of Illinois
(collectively, all such olher units are referred to herein as the "Governmental Units"). Certain of the
Governmental Units maintain Iheir own defined benefit pension plans (collcclively, all such olher plans
are referred to herein as the "Olher Retirement Fund.s"), many of which are also significantly
underfunded. The underfunding of these Olher Retirement Funds places a substantial additional potential
burden on the City's taxpayers, who bear the burden of funding a portion of the contributions of the
Governmental Units.
On December 5, 2013, Governor Pat Quinn signed Public Act 98-0599 inlo law (the "Stale
Pension Reform A c f ) . The Stale Pension Reform Act provides for certain cost-.saving and olher reforms
to the State's four largest pension plans, including, bul not limiled lo, changes to the employer
contribution formula, cost of living adjustments, reiireincnl ages and employee contributions. Such
changes arc scheduled lu lake effect on June 1, 2014. The .Stale Pension Reform Act has been challenged
by five separate lawsuits on behalfof various classes of annuilaiils, curreni and former workers, anil hihor
organizations, alleging, among other things, that the legislation violates the Illinois Pension Clause. On
March 3, 2014, the Illinois Supreme Court consolidated four of these lawsuils and ordered that Ihc
consolidated lawsuit proceed in Sangamon Couniy Circuit Court. 'I'he fifth lawsuit was filed after such

E-5

 consolidation. The Cily makes no picdiclion as lo whether the filing of these lawsuils or their oulcome
will impact the Cily's pension refonn efforts.
On January 7, 2014, Governor Pal Quinn signed Public Act 98-0622 into law (the "CPD Pension
Refonn Act"). The CPD Pension Reform Act provides for certain cost-saving and olher refomis to
CPD's pension plan, including, bul nol limiled lo, changes lo the employer conlribution fonnula, cost of
living adjustments, retiremenl ages and employee conlribulions. Such changes are .scheduled lo take
effect on June J, 2014. To dale, no lawsuit has been filed challenging the CPD Pension Refomi Act. The
Cily makes no prediction as to whether lawsuils will be filed challenging the CPD Pension Reform Act,
or whether the filing of any such lawsuit or ils outcome will impact the City's pension refortn efforts, nor
docs Ihc City make any prediction as lo whether Ihc outcome of Ihe four lawsuits against the Slate
Pension Reform Act will impact the CPD Pension Reform Act.
For more informaiion on these Other Retirement Funds, plca.se refer lo the Slate's Commission
on Govcrnmcni Forecasting and Accountability ("COGFA") website at hllp://cgfa.ilga.gov/honie.aspx;
provided, however, that the conlenls of the COGFA website arc not incorporated herein by such
reference. The Cily believes the information on COGFA's websile lo be reliable; however, the Cily lakes
no responsibility for the continued accuracy of the Internet adtlress or for the accuracy or timeliness of
infomiation posted on the website.
Certain Duties
Each Retirement Fund Board is a fiduciary of ils respective Retirement Fund and is authorized lo
perfomi all functions necessary for operation ofthe Reliremenl Funds. The Pension Code authorizes each
Retirement Fund Board to make certain autonomous decisions, including decisions regarding the
investment of funds, Ihe inanagcment of assets, the disburscmcnl of benefits, and the hiring of .staff,
financial advisors and asset managers.
Each Retirement Fund Board is authorized to promulgate rules and procedures regarding their
administration of henefils and olher mailers in accordance wilh the Illinois Adniinislralive Procedure Act,
and their decisions in awarding, limiting, or denying benefits are subjecl to the Illinois Administrative
Procedure Act. Certain aspects of the Retiremenl Funds, however, including the defined benefits and the
empltiyer and employee contribution levels, are established in the Pension Code and may be amended
only by an amendment to the Pension Code.
'The Pension Code provides that the expenses incurred in connection wilh the administration of
the Reliremenl Funds are nol construed lo be debt imposed upon the Cily. ,Such cxpen,ses are the
obligation ofthe Retirement Funds exclusively, as separate bodies politic and corporate
The Illinois Attorney General and annuitants may bring a civil action lo obtain relief for
violations of a fiduciary duty lo the Rcliremcnt Funds or any act or practice which violates any provision
of the Pension Code.
Investments
Each Retirement Fund Board manages Ihe investments of ils respective Retiremenl Fund. Slate
law regulates the types of investments in which the Reliremenl Funds' assets may be invested.
Furthermtire, the Reliremenl Fund Boards invest the Retirement Funds' assels in accordance with Ihe
pmdent person rule, which rec uires members of the Rcliremcnt Fund Boards, who are fiduciaries of the

E-6

 Reliremenl Funds, lo discharge their duties wilh the care, prudence and ililigence lhat a prudent person
acting in a like capacity and familiar with such mailers would use in a similar situation.
In carrying oul iheir investment duty, the Reliremenl Fund Boards may appoint and review
investment managers as fiduciaries lo manage the investmenl assets of the Retirement Funds. .Such
investmenl managers arc granted di.scretionary authority lo manage Ihc Retirement Funds' as.seis.
Additional informaiion regarding Ihc Retirement Funds' investments and investment management may be
found on ihe Reliremenl Funds' websites; provided, however, lhat the conlenls of such websites urc not
incorporated into this Appendix by such reference.
Table 2 provides information on the invcsiment returns experienced by each of the Retirement
Funds.
T A B L E 2 - INVESTMENT R A T E S O F RETURN, 2003-2012

Fiscal
Year

MEAUF

FA»F

2003

19.6%

28.3%

17.5%

21.2%

2004

10.3

I2.S

11.5

1 I.O

2005

6.6

9.5

7.8

7.3

2006

12.7

14.0

1 1.2

12.1

2007

7.3

II.O

8.0

8.8

2008

(28.7)

(.33.8)

(29.2)

(27.8)

2009

19.4

23.7

21.5

21.5

2010

13.7

17.7

15.5

12.7

LABF

PABF

201 I

0.1

(2.0)

(0.3)

0.8

2012

12.9

16.2

14.6

12.4

7.5

8.0

7.5

Rale'"

7.75

Source-

Ttie audiieil fiii;inci.il M.nitnieiiis of the FABF ,-is nf Oeeciiihcr 31 of ilic yc.irs 2(K)3-2()I2: and for MEABF. LABF and PABF. Ihe
CAFKs of Ihe respective Keiircnieiit FuntI for ttie fiscal yt;irs eiiiliiig Oeeciiibcr3l. 2IX)3.20I2

(1)

Reflecis Ihe ussuincd rale of relurn for each finid as ot Oecenihcr 31. 2t)I2. as discussed in lurlhcr detail utiilcr "Acluari.il
Avviiiiipiioiis—AsMiiried Invcvtinetn K.ue of Kcli.rn" below.

Determination of Employee Contributions
Cily employees who are members of the Reliremenl Funds are required to coniribule lo their
respeclive Reliremenl Fund as set forth in ihc Pension Code.
Members of MEABF contribute 8.5% of their salaty lo MEABF (ctinsisling of a 6.5%
contribution for employee benefits, a 1.5% contribution for spouse benefits, and a 0.5% contribution for
an annuity increase benefit).
Members of PABF contribute 9.0% of their salary to PABF (consisting of a 7.0% contribution for
emp>loyee benefits, a 1.5% contribution for spou.se benefits and a 0.5% conlribution for an annuity
increase benefii).

E-7

 Members of FABF coniribule 9.125% of their .salary to FABF (consisfing of a 7.125%
conlribulion for employee henefils, ;i 1.5% contribution for spouse benefits, a 0.375% contribution for an
annuity increa.sc benefii and a 0.125% conlribulion for disability benefits).
Members of LABF contribute 8.5% of Iheir salary lo LABF (consisting of a 6.5% conlribulion for
employee benefits, a 1.5% conlribulion for spouse benefits, ami a 0.5% conlribulion for an annuity
increa.sc benefii).
For each Retirement Fund, if an enipK)yee leaves without i ualifying for an annuity, accumulated
empUiyee contributions are refunded.
Determination of City's Contributions
Under Ihe Pension Code, ihe Cily's contributions lo fund the Retirement Funds are determined
pursuant lo a statutory formula on an annual basis. The Pension Code provides that the Cily's
contributions to the Retirement Funds are lo be made from the proceeds of an annual levy of property
taxes for each i>f the Reliremenl Funds (collectively, the "Pension Levy") by the Cily solely for such
purpo.se. The Pension Levy is exclusive of and in addition to the amount of property lax which the Cily
levies for olher purposes.
The amount of the Pension Levy may nol exceed the product of a multiplier established in Ihe
Pension Code for each Rcliremcnt Fund (each, a "Multiplier") and the amount contributed by the City's
employees two years prior lo the year in which the lax is levied (the "Multiplier Funding"). For levy
years 2011 and 2012, Ihe Multiplier Ibr each Retirement Fund was as follows: 1.25 for MEABF; 2.00 for
PABF; 2.26 for FABF; and 1.00 for LABF. The Cily's conlribulions arc made as govemed by the
Pension Code and are not based on the Actuarially Required Contribution (as hereinafter defined). See
"—The Actuarial Valuation—Cily's Conlribulions Nol Related lo GASB Standards" below.
The Pension Code provides lhat the Refirement Fund Boards must each annually certify lo fhe
Cily Council a delerminaiion of the required Cily conlribution lo the Retirement Funds. In making ils
request for the Cily's annual conlribulion, each Retirement Fund, acting through ils Rcliremcnt Fund
Board, tinnually approves and then submits a resolution to the Cily Council requesting that the City
Council levy for a particular conlribution amount. The Cily has generally paid the amounts so requested.
See "City Conlribulions to FABF' below.
In lieu of levying all or a jiortion of the annual Pension Levy, the City is pennitted under ihe
Pension Code to deposit with the City Treasurer olher legally available funds to be u.sed for the same
purpo.se as the Pension Levy (collectively, the "Olher Available Funds"). In recent years, the Cily has
utilized these provisions by depositing with the Cily Treasurer certain amounis paid by the Slate to the
City from the Personal Property Replacement Tax Fund ("PPRT') of the Stale pursuant to Seciion 12 of
the Revenue Sharing Act of Ihe Slate The City's distributive share of PPRT is not required to be used for
this purpose but it can be used by the City for corporate purposes. Since 2003, the amount of PPRT
contributed by the Cily to the Rcliremcnt Funds in the aggregate has averaged approximately $78,387,000
annually. In 2011, 2012 and 2013, the amounis of PPRT contribulcd to the Retirement 1-iinds in the
aggregate were approxim;iiely $108,153,000, $101,875,000 and $126,629,000, respectively. For iho.se
same years, the Cily's lotal di.slributive share of PPRT was $144,3.32,846, $139,461,000 and
$159,559,000, respeclively. 2013 PPRT infonnation is ba.sed on unaudiied City data. As such, Ihe 2013
data is subject to change.

F.-8

 For putposes of this Appendix, references lo "Pension Levy" may include the Olher Available
Funds of the City.
The City's contributions to the Retirement Funds have equaled the Multiplier Funding and certain
other amounts required by the Pension Code and have not been in excess of that amount. The Cily's
contributions in accordance wilh the Pension Code, which are generally lower than the Actuarially
Required Contribution, as described below, have contributed lo the significant underfunding of the
Rcliremcnt Funds. Moreover, the Cily's conlribulions in accordance wilh the Pension Code have had the
effect of deferring ihe funding of the Reliremenl Funds' liabiliiies, which increa.ses the costs of such
liabilities and the a.s.socialed financial risks, including the risk thai each Retirement Fund will nol be able
lo pay ils obligations as they become due. Any significant increa.ses in the Cily's contributions to the
Rcliremcnt Funds can be expected lo place further strain on the Cily's finances.
C//y'.v Conlribulions to FABF
For levy year 2014, the FABF has requested certain amounis which the City has detennined are
not required by the Pension Code. The amount requested by the FABF Board in excess ofthe amount Ihc
City has determined lo be the statutory requirement for 2014 was $18,147,000. The FABF Board has
made similar requests for amounis in excess of the amounl the Cily has determined to be the statutory
requirement in each ofthe last several years. In each such year, including the current year, the City has
indicated that il will ni.il contribute amounis in excess of Ihc amount the City has determineil to be the
statutory contribution requirement to FABF.
City's Required Contributions to PABF and FABF Beginning with the Levy made in 2015
On December 30, 2010, Governor Pat Quinn signed into law Public Act 096-1495 ("P.A.
96-1495") which, among other things, created a new meihcxi of determining ihe contribution lo be made
by Ihe Cily lo PABF and FABF. P.A. 96-1495 requires that, beginning in 2015, the Pension Levy each
year for PABF and FABF will be equal lo the amount necessary to achieve a Funded Ratio (as hereafter
defined) of 90% in PABF and FABF hy the end of fiscal year 2040 (the "P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan").
Pursuant lo the P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan, Ihc Pension Levy for PABF and FABF will be
calculated as the level percentage of payroll necessary lo reach the 90% Funded Ratio target by 2040. In
Cook and DuPage Counties (in which the City is l(x;alcd), property taxes (including the Pension Levy)
levied in one year become payable during the following year in two installments. As such, Ihe Pension
Levy for PABF and FABF made in calendar year 2015 will be payable in calendar year 2016. •
The P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan, if implemented, would significantly increase the City's required
contributions lo PABF and FABF beginning in 2016 and, if implcmcnled, would impo.sc a significant
financial burden on ihe Cily. The City is exploring options lo change the P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan to
reduce the ncar-lemi burden on the City's financial condition imposed by dramalically increased
conlribulions to PABF and FABF under P.A. 96-1495, including shifting all or a portion of such burderi
lo future years. -Any change lo the P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan which would reduce the conlribulions
required of the Cily would have the efi'cct of increasing the unfunded liabilities and decreasing the
Funded Ratio with respect lo PABF and FABF when compared to Ihe pmjecied unfunded litibilities and
Funded Ratio as set forth in Tables 13 and 14 below. Furthermore, any such change would require
legislative action by the Illinois General Assembly.

E-9

 Illinois Hou.se B i l l 3088 (''HB 3088") contains a pnipo.sed amendment that would: (i) delay
implementation of Ihe acluarial funding required by the P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan unlil tax levy year
2022, and instead require the Cily to continue contributing to PABF and F A B F under the Multiplier
Funding system ihrough lax levy year 2021; and (ii) provide that P A B F and F A B F achieve a 9 0 % Funded
Ratio by 2061 rather than 2040 as currently required by P.A. 96-1495 (collectively, the "96-1495 Delay
BiH"). I f enacted, ihc 96-1495 Delay Bill would increase the cost of PABF's and FABF's respeclive
liabilities, as well as the associated financial risks, including the risk that the P A B F and F A B F w i l l
become insolvent. For more infomiation regarding Ihe possible insolvency of Ihc Retiremenl Funds, see
"Projection o f Funded .Slalus and Insolvency" below.
No assurance can be given that a bill modifying the P.A.
96-1495 Delay B i l l , w i l l be enacted inlo law.

96-1495 Funding Plan, including the

P.A. 96-1495 does nol affect the manner in which the Cily contributes lo M E A B F and L A B F .
The Actuarial Valu<itiim
General
In addition lo the process outlined above, ihe Pension Code requires that the Retiremenl Funds
annually submit lo the Cily Council a report containing a detailed stalemenl of Ihe affairs of such
Retiremenl Fund, ils income and expenditures, and assets and liabilities, which consists of the Acluarial
Valuation. The Acluarial Valuation measures the financial position and determines the Actuarially
Required Contribution (as defined below) of such Retirement Fund for reporting purposes pursuant lo
G A S B Statement No. 25 ( " G A S B 25").
A description of the statistics generaled by the Retirement Funds' actuaries in the Actuarial
Valuations follows in the next few paragraphs.
This informaiion was derived from ihe Source
Infomiation.
G A S B , which is part of a private non-profit corporation known as the Financial Accounting
Foundation, promulgates standards regarding accounting and financial reporting for governmenuil
enlilies. These principles have no legal effect and do not imjio.se any legal liabilily on the Cily. The
references to G A S B principles in ihis Appendix do not suggest and should nol be conslRicd lo suggest
otherwise
Actuaries and the Actuarial

Process

G A S B standards re(]uirc disclosure of an "Actuarially Required Conlribulion," which is a
financial reporting requirement bul nol a funding requirement. One of the primary purposes of the
Acluarial Valuations is to determine the Actuarially Required Conlribution, which is ihe annual
conlribution amounl that GASB standards would calculate is needed lo fully fund the Retirement Funds.
G A S B pronouncements refer to this concept as the "Annual Required Contribution"; however, this
Appendix refers to the concept ;is the Actuarially Required Contribution lo denote the fact lhat the
Actuarially Required Conlribution is the amounl an actuary would calculate pursuant lo G A S B standards
to be contributed in a given year, to differentiate it from the amount the Cily w i l l be required lo contribute
under the Pension Code.
The Actuarially Required Conlribulion consists of iwo componenls: (1) that portion of the
present value of pension plan benefits which is allocaletl to Ihe valuation year by the actuarial cost

E-IO

 method (as described in "— Acluarial Methods — Acluarial Accrued Liabilily" below), tenned ihc
"Normal Cosf; and (2) an amortized portion of any UAAL (ilcllncd below).
In producing the Actuarial Valuations, the Retirement F'unds' actuaries use demographic data
(including employee age, salary and .service credits), economic assumptions (including estimated future
salary and interest rales), and decrement assumptions (including employee turnover, mortality and
reliremenl rales) lo calculate, as of the valuation dale, the Normal Cost, the Acluarial Accrued Liability
(defined below), the Acluarial Value of As.scls (defined below), and the actuarial present values for the
Reliremenl Fund. The Retirement Funds' actuaries u.se this data to dclerminc Ihe tollowing fiscal year's
Actuarially Required Conlribulion. The Retirement Funds' Acluarial Valiiiitions are publicly available
and may be obtained from the Retirement Funds. .See "— .Source Informaiion" above.
The Acluarial Accrued Liabilily is an estimate of the present value of the benefits each
Retirement Fund mu.st pay lo current and retired employees as a result of Iheir past employment with the
Cily and participafion in such Retiremenl Fund. The Acluarial Accrued Liability is calculated by use of a
variety of demographic and other data (such as employee age, salary ;ind .service credits) and various
assumptions (such as estimated salary increases, inleresl rales, employee turnover, retirement dale and
age, mortality and disabilily rates). The Actuarial Value of As.scls refiects Ihc value of the investments
and other as.seis held by each Retirement Fund. Various methods exist for calculating the Acluarial Value
of Assets and the Acluarial Accrued Liabilily. For a di.scussion of the methods and assumptions used lo
calculate the Retirement Funds' Acluarial Accrued Liabilily and Actuarial Value of Assets, see "—
Acluarial Method.s" and "— Acluarial Assumpiioii.s" below.
Any shortfall between the Acluarial Value of As.sefs and the Actuarial Accrued Liabilily is
referred to as the "Unfunded Actuarial Accrued Liabilily" or "UAAL." The U A A L represents the present
value of benefits attributed to past service lhat are in excess of plan a.s.scts. In addition, the actuary will
compute the "Funded Ratio," which is the Actuarial Value of Assets divided by fhe Acluarial Accmed
Liabilily, expressed as a percenlage. The Funded Ratio and the UAAL provide one way of measuring the
financial health of a pension plan.
City's Conlribulions Not Related to GASB Standards
The Cily's conlribulions lo the Retirement Funds are not based on the conlribution standards
promulgated by GASB for reporting purposes. Instead, the Cily's contributions arc based on the formulas
and amounts established in the Pension Code. Whereas GASB's contribution standards arc actuarially
based, the conlribulion amounis required by the Pension Code, wilh the exception of the P.A. 96-1495
Funding Plan discussed above, arc not actuarially ba.sed. See "— Determination of City's Conlribuiion.s"
above.
The difference between the Cily's actual contributions and the Actuarially Required Conlribution
(as calculated by the Retirement Funds' actuaries) for fi.scal years 2003-2012 is shown in "Table 4 Informaiion Regarding Cily's Contributions - Aggregated" below. The Retirement Funds' Actuarially
Required Contribution is equal to ils Normal Cost plus an amortization of ibe Reliremenl Funds' UAAL
over a 30-year period. MEABF, LABF and FABF amortize the UAAL on a level dollar basis, whereas
PABF amortizes the UAAL on a level percent of payroll basis. Both methods of calculating the
Actuarially Required Contribution arc acceptable under the standards promulgated by GASB.

E-11

 C/rv''v Contributions
lo PABF and
GASB Financial Reporting Benchmarks

FABF

under

P.A.

96-1495

Will

Not

Conform

to

As di,scus.scd above, beginning wilh the pcopcrly lax levy made in 2015 (and collectible in 2016),
the Pension Levy for PABF and FABF is rc( uired to be calculated pursuant to P.A. 96-1495. 'The P.A.
96-1495 Funding Plan differs from the manner of calculation GASB requires for financial reporting
purpo.scs. The primary difference between GASB's financial reporting standards and the P.A. 96-1495
Funding Plan is lhat ihe goal ofthe P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan is for PABF and FABF lo reach a Funded
Ralio of 90% by 2040. GASB's financial reporting slandurds require amortiziilion of the entire U A A L
towards attainment of a 100% Funded Ratio.
Actuarial Methods
The Retirement Funds' actuaries employ a variety of acluarial melhods lo arrive al the Acluarial
Value of Assets and the Actuarial Accrued Liabilily.
Acluarial Value of A.s.sets
The Retirement F'unds calculate their respective Acluarial Value of As.seis by smoothing
invcsiment gains and losses over a period of live years, a method of valutition referred lo as the "Asset
Smoothing Method." Under the Asset Smoothing Method, the Rcliremcnt Funds recognize in the current
year 20% of the investmenl gain or loss realized in that year and each of the previous four years. The
Asset Smoothing Method is an allowable method of calculation according to GA,SB.
The Asset Smoothing Methtxl lessens the immediate impact of market fiuctuations on the
Actuarial Value of Assets, which is used to calculate fhe U A A L and the Funded Ratio, that may otherwise
occur as a result of market volatility. However, asset smoothing delays recognition of gains and losses,
thereby providing an Acluarial Value of Assels that does nol reficct the true value of pension plan assels
at the time of measurement. As a result, presenting the Acluarial Value of Assets as detemiincd under the
As.set Smoothing Method might provide a more or less favorable presentation of the curreni financial
position of a pension plan than would a method that recognizes investment gains and losses annually.
Table 3 provides a comparison of the assets of Ihe Refirement Funds (as aggregated) on a fair
value basis and afier application of the A.ssel Smoothing Method.

E-12

 T A B L E 3 - ASSET S M O O T H E D V A L U E O F ASSETS VS. F A I R V A L U E O F NET ASSETS'"
AGGREGATED

Source:

Fiscal
Year

Actuarial Value
of Assets'"'

2003
2(M)4
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012

$13,297,599
13,108,645
13,086.060
13.4.-^5.692
14.254,816
13,797.344
13,051,349
12,449.863
11.521.138
10.531.447

Fair Value of
Net Assets
$12,277,994
12,952,096
13,245.445
14.164.347
14.595,514
9,844.339
10.876.846
11,408.555
10.536,135
10.799.603

Actuarial Value as
a Percentage of
Fair Value
I08..10%
I0I.2I
98.80
94.86
97.67
140.16
119.99
109.13
109.35
97.51

2IX)3 Ihiuugh 2010 dala is from ihc Actuanal Valualiuns of Ihe Kcliienienl Fluids as of Oeceniber 31. 21)10, and CAFKs of llic
Keiirenieni Funds lor the I'lscil ytai cndiim Oeeeniher 31. 2010. 2011 and 2012 d;ita is .sourced from the Acluarial Valuations of the
Reliremenl Funds as of Oeccniher 31. 2011 and Deceinl>er 31. 2012. respectively

(1)

In Ihou.sands uf dollars Dala is presented in the agi^regale lor Ihc Kcurenicnl Funds.

(2)

The Acluarial V,iluc ol As.seis is calculated ihrouiili use of Ihc Asset Sinooiliing Method.

Actuarial Accrued Liability
As the final step in the Actuarial Valuation, the actuary applies a cost method to allocate the total
value of benefits lo past, present and future periods of employee service. This allocation is accomplished
by Ihe development of the Acluarial Accrued Liabilily and the Normal Cost. Currently, all of the
Retirement Funds use the entry age normal actuarial co.st method (the "EAN Method") wilh costs
allocated on the basis of earnings. The EAN Method is a GASB-approved acluarial cost method.
Under the EAN Method, the present value of each member's projected pension is assumed to be
funded by annual installments equal lo a level percent of the member's earnings for each year between
entry age and assumed exit age. Each member's Normal Cost for the curreni year is equal to the portion
of the value so determined, assigned lo the current year Therefore, fhe Nomial Cost for the plan for Ihe
year is the sum of Ihc normal costs ofall active members.
P.A. 96-1495 requires that, beginning in 2015, PABF and FABF calculate Ihe Actuarial Accrued
Liabilily pursuant to the projected unit credit actuarial cost method (the "PUC Method"). Under the PUC
Method, Normal Cost represents ihe acluarial present value of that porlion of a member's projected
benefii lhat is allribulable lo service in the current year, based on future compensation projected to
retirement. Under Ihis method, the Acluarial Accrued Liabilily equals the acluarial present value of that
ponion of a member's projected benefit that is attributable to service to date, again, on the basis of future
compensation projected lo retirement.
Under either cost method, the Acluarial Accrued Liabilily is the portion of ihc present value of
benefits assigned by the cost mclhod to yetirs of .service up lo the valuation date, i.e., for past service.

E-13

 This value changes as the member's salary changes and years of .service increases, and as some members
leave and new members are hired. Future Normal Cost is the portion of the prescni value of benetlis
assigned to future years of service and is assumed to be funded annually.
As compared to Ihe EAN Mclhod, the PUC Method will produce a more back-loaded growth in
liabilities beeau.se the PUC Mclhod allocates a higher portion of retiremenl costs clo.ser lo the time of
retirement. Therefore, the PUC Mclhod results in a slower accumulation of assels, which in turn requires
smaller initial, and larger future, contributions (assuming funding is actuarially based, as is the P.A. 961495 Funding Plan). Deferring conlribulions in this manner increases the cost o f t h e liabilities and the
associated financial risks for PABF and FABF.
Actuarial Assumptions
The Acluarial Valuations of the Retirement Funds use a variety of assumptions in order lo
calculale the Actuarial Accrued Liabilily and the Actuarial Value of Assels. Although several of the
assumptions are the same across all of ihe Retirement Funds, each Retirement Fund determines, wilhin
acluarial slandards, Ihc assumptions lo be used in its Acluarial Valuation unless a specific assumption is
fixed by the Pension Code. No assurance can be given that any of the assumptions underlying the
Acluarial Valuafions will refiect the actual results expciienced by the Retirement Funds. Variances
between the assumptions and actual results may cau.se an increase or decrease in the Actuarial Value of
As.sels, the Acluarial Accrued Liability, the UAAL, the Funded Ratio or the Actuarially Required
Conlribulion. Additional information on each Retirement Fund's actuarial assumptions is available in the
2011 Acluarial Valuations, wilh respecl to PABF and FABF, and the 2012 Acluarial Valuations wilh
respect to MEBF and LABF. See "— Source Infonnation" above.
'The actuarial assumptions used by the Retirement Funds are determined by the individual
Retiremenl Fund Boards upon the advice of the actuaries. The Retirement Funds periodically perfomi
experience studies to evaluate the actuarial a.ssumptions in u.se. The purpose of an experience study is to
validate that the acluarial assumptions uscil in the Actuarial Valuation continue lo retisonably esiimale the
actual experience of the pension plan or, if necessary, to develop recommenilalions for modifications to
the acluarial assumptions to ensure their continuing appropriateness.
As.sumed Investment Rate of Return
The Acluarial Valuafions assume an invesimcnl rale of relum on Ihe assels in each Reliremenl
Fund. As desci;ibcd in Table 2 above, the Rctircmciif Funds all assumed an average long-tenn investment
rale of relurn of 8.00% for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2011. Due to ihc volatility of the
marketplace, however, the actual rate of relurn earned by the Retirement Funds on iheir assets in any year
may be higher or lower than Ihe assumed rale. .See Table 2 for ihe rales of relurn earned on the
Retirement Funds' assels for the last ten fiscal years. Changes in the Retirement Funds' assels as a result
of market performance will lead lo an increa.se or dccrea.sc in the UAAL and the Funded Ratio. As a
result of the Retirement Funds' use of the Asset Smoothing Method, however, only a portion of these
increa.ses or decreases will be recognized in ihc current year, with the remaining gain or loss spread over
the remaining four years. .See "— Acluarial Meihixls — Acluarial Value of Asset.s" above.
Beginning wilh calendar year 2012, the Reliremenl Fund Boards of MEABF, LABF and PABF
reduced ihe assumed invcsiment rate of relurn lo be useil by their respeclive actuaries in preparing future
actuarial valuations. For MEABF and LABF, the assumed investment rate of return has been decreased
to 7.5% beginning with calendar year 2012. For PABF, the assumed investment rate of relum was

F.-I4

 decreased to 1.15% for calendar year 2012 and 7.50% beginning with calendar year 2013. FABFcontinues to assume an investment rate of return of 8.0%. For a discussion of the rate to be used by
Moody's in analyzing public pension plans, see "— General" above.
The assumed invcsiment rate of retum is used by each Retiremenl Fund's actuary as the discount
rate lo determine Ihe present value of future payments lo such Reliremenl Fund's members. Such a
delennination is part of the actuary's process to develop the Acluarial Accrued Liability. Reducing Ihc
assumed investment rale of return will, taken independently of olher changes, produce a larger Acluarial
Accrued Liability for each Retirement F'und. Furthermore, as di.scus.sed above, an increa.sc in the
Actuarial Accrued Liability will, laken independently, increase the UAAL, decrease the funded ratio and
increase the Actuarially Required Contribution.
These changes lo the assumed inveslnienl rate of return will nol impact conlribulions by the Cily
lo MEABF and LABF because these Retirement Funds are funded pursuant lo ihe statutory Multiplier
Funding system. However, beginning in 2016, the Cily's contributions fo PABF are expected lo increase
even further as a result of the change in the a.ssumed investment rate of relurn, taken independently of
other factors, because PABF's UAAL will increa.sc as described above and the P.A. 96-1495 Funding
Plan requires an amortizalion of the UAAL to reach Ihe 90% funding target by 2040..
Funded Status of the Retirement Funds
In recent years, the City has contributed to the Refirement Funds the full amounl of Multiplier
Funding and certain olher amounis dclermined by the Cily to be required by the Pension Code through a
combinaiion of property tax revenues (ihrough the Pension lx.\y) and PPRT funds.* However, these
amounts have nol been sufficient lo fully fund the Retirement Funds' Actuarially Required Conlribution.
Moreover, expenses related to the Health Plan (as defined below) arc paid from the City's conlribulions,
which has the effect of reducing the Acluarial Value of Assets and decreasing the Funded Ralio.
Furthermore, the income from all sources (including employee contributions, Cily conlribulions
and invesimcnl earnings) to the Refirement Funds has been lower than the cash outlays ofthe Reliremenl
Funds in recent years. As a result, the Retirement Funds have liquidated inveslmenis and used assels of
the Refirement Funds to satisfy these cash outlays. The use of invcsiment earnings or as.seis of ihc
Retiremenl Funils for these purposes reduces the amount of assets on hand to pay benefits in the future
and prevents the Retirement Funds from recognizing the full benefits of compounding investment returns.
Table 4 provides information on the Actuarially Required Contribution, the City's actual
contributions in accordance wilh the Pension Code and the percenlage of the Actuarially Required
Conlribution made in each year

As discus.scd under "— Determination of Cily's Contributions'' above, the Cily and FABT' have disagreed over
whether certain amounts arc required under the Pension Code. In addition, pursuant to the Pension Code, the City
did not make any contributions to or levy the Pension Levy I'or LABF in fiscal years 2001 through 2006 because
LABF had funds on hand in excess of its liabiliiies. Ihc Pension Code provides that the Cily will cea.sc to make
contributions lo LABF in such a situation.^ The City continued to levy the Pension Levy for ihe other Retirement
Funds during those years.

E-15

 FABLE 4 - INFORMATION REGARDING CITY'S CONTRIBUTIONS'" - AGGREGATED

Fiscal
Year
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007"'
2008"
2009"
2010"
2011"
2012"

Actuarially
Required
Contribution

Actual Employer
Contribution'"

Percentage of
Actuarially Required
Contribution
Contributed"'

$343.291
345.398
423.515
394.899
395.483
416.130
423,929
425.5.'i2
416.693
440.120

$451.239
.545.232
698.185

785.111
865.776
886.215
990,381
I.I 12,626
1.321,823
1.470,905

76.1%
63.3
60.7
.50.3
45.7
47.0
42.8
38.2
31.5
29.9

.Soun;cs.

Actuarial Valuations of Ihe Kclirciiicnl Funds as of Oeccniher 31. 2010. December 31. 2011 .»id December 31. 2012. CAFRs of the
Ketireiiieni lumls for the fiscal year ending Decenibcr 31. 2010. and CAFRs ofthe Cily for llie fiscal year ending December J l . 2011
and December 31.2012.

tn

In thuusantis of ilollars. Dat.i is presenteil in the .'iggreeaie lor the Reliremenl Fuiuls and uses assumptions and melhoils employed by
e;ieh of llie Reliremenl Fund.s. For the dala presented as of Dcceiiitvr 31. 21X11 through Deeemtver 31. 20fJ6. conlribution iiil'orniation
includes amounts related to olher posl-eiiiployinenl henefils Beginning in 2(K17. as a result of a change in GASB standards,
eonlribution infnniiation is prcsenled exclusive of .imuunts relalcd lo olher ]>{\st.employment benefits.

(2)

Includes the portion of Ihe I'I'RT contribulcd lo Ihe Rcliiemenl Funds in each of ilie years 2002-2010

(3)

The eslimaled multiplier thai would h.ive bi'cii necessary for c.ich Retirement Fund to make the lull Actuarially Required Conlrihuiioii
in 2012 were .is follow.s 4.4.'5 lor MbABF: r)..^2 for t-ABF; 44 lor I.AIJI-; and fi.73 for FADI'. Beginning with the levy iii.idc in
21) I.S (ami colleelible in 2010). ihe City's coiilnbiitioiis lo l^ABF and FAIIF will nol be calculated in acci^'dance wilh Ihe Multiplier .is
deseribed in "— Deieriiiin.ilion of Cily's Conlribuiion.s" above.

(4)

neginniiig in 2007. as a result of a change in GASU sl.iiulards. the iiil'oniialion in tins Table 4 iloes nol include olher posl-employment
beiielils. which the Cily's Comprehensive Annual Fin.incial Reptirt pieseiiis sep.'ir.ilely.

The confinued decline in the percenlage ofthe Actuarially Required Conlribulion contributed by
the City, as shown in Table 4 above, results, in part, from the fact thai Ihc actuarial liabilily continues to
grow and as a resull of the delayed recognition of gains and losses resulting from ihc Retirement Funds'
use of the Asset Smoothing Method for financial reporting purposes. See "— Actuarial Method.s—
Acluarial Value of A.s,sels" above.
The City contributed approximately .S463 million to Ihe Retirement Funds in Fiscal Year 2013.
This contribution is divided among the Refirement Funds as follows: MEABF - .$159.1 million; LABF .$14.5 million; PABF - $204.8 million; and FABF - $84.6 million. The amount of the Cily's 2013
contribution lo the Reliremenl Funds is provided by the Cily and is unaudited. This infonnation is
preliminary and no assurance can be given that the infonTialion will nol change once an audit is
completed.
As of the end of fiscal year 2010, Ihe Reliremenl Funds had an aggregate UAAL of
approximalely $15,315 billion on a fair value basis and $14,274 billion on an acluarial basis (using the
Asset Smoothing Method). The respective Funded Ratios tor these UAALs are 42.7%' and 46.6%. The
UAAL increased between the end of fi.scal year 2009 and the end of fiscal year 2010 primarily as a result
of (i) insufficient contributions compared to the Actuarially Required Conlribulion and (ii) investment
los.ses brought on by the severe global economic downturn.

E-16

 As of the end o f fiscal year 2011, ihe Reliremenl Funds had an aggregate U A A L of
approximately $17,284 billion on a fair value basis and $16,299 billion on an actuarial basis (using the
Asset Smoothing Method). The respective Funded Ratios for these U A A L s arc 37.9% and 41.4%.
As of the end of fiscal year 2012, the Reliremenl Funds had an aggregate U A A L o f
approximately $19,084 billion on a fair value basis and $19,352 billion on an actuarial basis (using the
Asset Smoothing Method). The respeclive Funded Ratios for these U A A L s arc 36.1 % ;ind 35.2%.
The following tables summarize the financial condition and the funding trends of the Retirement
Funds.

E-17

 (O od c>
n in oo
^

^ i n

m.
*n
oo - r O l
oo

oo

od"

\ o </", 1^.
O
f^l QC
ly*, 1/^, I/".

Ol
OC
in
00

vr-,
O

o- oy 3 rn

o

ON

Ol
r*-.

«-l
CN

oo

MD

o

CN

Ol

cn
•n

00

•n
oo

o-

>i-,

p. r-_

n
o\

c
>n
o

rn
r-' o

CO

m oo
mom

O

<>

o*

S

p

v£3 — o o
v C OC O
r I f*-. —

877,

r I

\o'

NO

Ol
00
MD
NO

vo

p

r-i
ON
V,

O

ri

VO

o

O-

«n. tJ;
o in vo

m tn n Ol oo
r- r— Ov O rn
0 * ^ 0 1 ^

tn r*^ od od
— O — ON
ON m oo m c,-^
Ol

ON v o

—.

oi r i ON o" —'
'n cs\ m, ^ •<t
m O l Ol r~t n o i o^ vo

C NO m vo ^
o^ vo o - r - £=;
rn

vo

O

oo m oo

O

Ol

o oo

'/n
r^i
rt

•n
oo
O
rn

— oo O l
oo 0 \ ' O
ON

tr-^

oo

Ol^

GT"

s ?s

024)

O r*"'

CD
t
NO

NO

O

<

NO

Ol

O
00
r*-, W",

ON
POI

n
ON

oo ON _^ ^

NO
NO

»n o

oo

'n

NO

oo
rNO

-T
NC

o

ON
vn

oo n:

in
r 1
Ol

NO

m
O

o>

^

m ^
o-

?; 3 S
!

s=

, '\o t n

^2
Ol

O
m

0 0 —' v o

un ON in r„
— t r - NO

.

rr-' oi rn !£!

NO OC
vO

— ^

r^', 'vO O -

00

ttl t s
o
Ol
O;
»n
oo
Tl-

o-

NO
Ol
ON

p
oo

r-

ON

ON

o

\6 oo
ON

in

o
o
o

p

o

—
MD —

p

OI

V".

» n ON O

oc — m
00

r-;

»r; r*^ od

»n »n r—

o

o04

Ol

om

oo

00

vd

oo

r-l

Ol
Ol

OS

cr"
r-

o

— ir.

in

IT-,

o^
'n
m

(/)

OO

oo
oo

o

Ol

Ol

ON

\o

tn

od

ON*
Ol

yr.

vo oo — Ol
•^t — ON r - C>
—; — Ov (TTN r i

O^ vd
NO" oi
o
r^. vo o-

lU

oo
oo
oo

vd
'n
m
vd
oo

oo

od
NO

Ol

t

m.

Ol

oo

I/)

vd

ON

O-

2 -I
o c:

r i
r^r
—' O l n

l >

m Ol r<-, 00 r— »n
Ol o rn r-^ od od

_ OJ

rn od in in o
-zr o NO vc rm oo m

ON

r*~.

Ol
ON
m,
00

: 4j —i
1
y

r^, -TT
O oo

m

ON

o

CC
LU

c

•5
<

o

o

rt

< <

rt

c:
rt
U-

<
< <
< 3<
-1

>
Ac

J

rt

UJ

Va

<

ctuai

rt

e t As

_rt

c c

rt

'a?
_p

.5

e:
-a •a
-o
un

U .S ^

(H

*(
Q. u •

'• iiiS -u^ « !'
o ^

alio (

rt

>

ling

o
(J

5

struti

ibut

C

i and

o

x: g

t

• - = ^J
° y -o ^

O vC

\d o-*' r i "

pon

-o

-

= O S r
S O rj 1

.3

U

O

o o ^C.
r n
v>
t/-, r-t C N

oi

to

o

oo

alio (

ns

00

ON
ON

Iltl

Ol

OO
O;

—

; 5 1; ° .;

I S- 5! 5 1

Acer

^•^

od

m,
m

° S ,i

^ o;
2
S c/3
c c;
c51
2 S! :

•

vo — o t n -.CI
O- O vo Ol t?^
p 'n r-; ON

5 2•

5
6 -E. '

, ^

ro- rn
vo oo

I

_
Irt I
=
t3 :
^3 T3 ;

a..i

u. a

m mj CN — \ 0 vO
r n n 00 ON
v d ON O I O l

airV

ON

CI

1 -5 i

<n TT vo ON

vd ON Ol o i

• D
OC
v~,

ontr

<

V~l

O

— — ^

U
PQ

.= <
p I

00
Ol
Tj-

oi »/^' oi
V)

NO

ires

z

NC'

lend

O ;j
Z C/5

_ —

,056.

< ; . .

r - CO un
oo ON oo
oo m O l

Ol

ON o o oo
ol

,534

I—I

H

5^

o

t/1

Z O
. S.P>

o

oo ON ON

vd ON C T r*-C

oo

tn

vO T t

r-^ r i rn
o" od oo" od o ON
ON vo in o^

Valu

o Z

Ol Ol
- t V^.
ir,
o f ON
r", r-»
— —

uari

o3
o

uu

- s«S
H 5CJ
o £
—
v>
"

rJ
3 l »J

—

i-

 r I oo
Ov o i

oo i n
oo ON
oc r~~
r n -T od

vo
r-

o
Cl

oo r-i —
' n o^ r n

NO

NO
00

o
rn
r^.
ri
cn
00

m Ol Ov
Os oo r n
od t n CN
r-.
o 00
m o* vd
to

—^

oo
CN
oq

u

P

r i Ol
O CC.
ON

m
m

vd

p
O

—
•d

n

Ol

>n ON
O «n VO
cn m VC
O^
•n
oirn
m
oo

NO

r^i r J on
r j i n vo —

rl
o

r 1 t n oOl Ov
o l ON
r n oc'

i n oo
m »n
oo «n

—

in

•n

o\
o
'n
in
o-

—'

rn
00

ON
vo
CN

m
rn

O 'n vO v n
ON ON oo o I?
sq r ^ •00
04 vd r-" rn
Ol
rn
'n m p
r n ON vd vd

rt
O
r i

vd
m
O
ri

o r•oo o
<^ rn
o ON
—
Ol or-_
r n ov i n 'n
oo
in
m

m
O
OG O

i^;
r-<
om

£^

oo

oo

ooo

o
tn
p
vd

OC OI Ol
o- O i n O l

00

Ol
r-.
rn
oo

OO C^l
OO O;
r*-, od i n
t/^

0\

o

oo

o\

ri
n
Ol
O
"n

ON

O
O)

o
o
OJ
o

v
—
—
m

o~ o
o ri

<
u

tr-, ON
—• Ov
m
r-

m
oo o
oo m
-r

oT

tn

tn

_
rg

ON o
o '\D

O;

r-'

ON

a:

00

H
b

o

o- n
<s
vq p r-_
rn o
ooo
in

oo 'd- CC

(JO

O
p

c«

rn
00
'cr
r^.
rJ
r*-.

^ 2
o <
u ^o

•n,
vO
CN
—

ON t n o
oo r - O'
vo r^ p
i-T
—

ON

<n

Z

oo

— o
^o
p vq o-_
oi ON"

—
vO

ON'

rn

om
oo

m

in

00

r^.
00

1-^

oo
O*

fa

vo
O ri
m vq ON
o-" r J ON'
O
O
TJ'^r

l o , r~r^i N C

—

m

00

ON

O

m
O
'n

O-

in

O Ov
\0 vo

—

rn

Ol

—

rn

m

,o

vq
od

Os
O
oo
in
vO
OC
rn
t/)
m
oo
Oi
rn
ON
vO

oo

r- O;
CP C
i n5
\q
od ir ni t n\
oo oo
Os
oq
r n cn

.C

'<
<

u

•n O
oo oON
m, oq E5
»n
ON
o^"
ri o
r-^
ON r n
m
'rr
ON ON o-_ ON m
m
rn
r
n
oo

—\

rn
cn
0\
rn

oo

c

r*

^ is

n
iu

OJ
VO

Q.

od

CI o-

fo

o

(J

in

p
—;
r-' rn r n

Os
tn
in

o

vo cn O
Cs r n i n
I?
r~vq
CN
od
vd _J
m OO oo -d- i n VC
O i n oq i n
NO r l of

—'•

>

1

Q

<

a

—

IS
S

E P.
a

His
e= U

OJ

5 CJ .E 2

rt

2

<

>
rt

13

2
£ .5
,

o
rt

—

,

>
Z3

.rt—. rt

•5
£ "
5
c o
LU

—.

E S
5 i5

3

II
o
U

UU

<

p

tn
in
~—
o

>

c

in

o
OJ

p

O

•<^-

o- o 'n
m o
o
r- ON rn
oi
od
^' OJ
VO o
r-_ O; oo
cn
rn
rn
00
Ol
r-1
Tf

I

i j

a>

—
o'

—, _
Ov

ON
oo

,

O l r n Cv
oo >n
NO rn

vo
o-

p
oi
Ov

ri
1 ^

(/>

o o
cS vo
p O; O;
od r i vO
o
m
O
VC

oo
O — Ol oo
— — CJ vo
— ON cn r n

•o T
o~
i n oi n «n
oq •rl
oo
rn oi
^ cd
ON oo oo
oo m
p
''n
od i n -/

oo

m
rn

Q
cn

=

«n
OC

r-

oo

H

z o
££

p
vd o —T oo

—'.OJ
cn
r j r-i
^ oo'
oo

TT

o
Z
Q M -<
c/i t^o
Z

<

o
o
p

S4.I

z
o

ON

ON

tn

yeai

-r
—
NO

< <

D

o —

<
C
rt

<

DC
-o -o

<
<

(L> OJ
-a
a c

•o

C3

I-

—

o

 00

-t

r".

00
00

in

rn

rn

Os

O

of

r-:

ON

in

0-

od

0
mi

r n oi

01

r- £^

ON

in
00

00

m,

01

r i

0

01

^ IT;

^^

00

o
o

O

00

•
00

ON O

,742

OC

o-

r-i

OJ
Ov

in
00

r-

00
yr,
Ol

vO

rn

OC

o

oi

od
OJ

o
p

ON

ov

od

tn

od

vd

—

00

in

r--

ON m -rr m
— VO lo, -:r

p

r--) r»-,

in

m

»n,

o-

vO

m r<-. ON O
01 00 — vO

c^
0
0

c»

—"*

—

rn

O-

ON

to,

o
O
r*-,

m

Ol - r m —

C3S
1/1

O

CQ

TT

r*~.

Os

O

rr-v

o

—

00

<

Tt
O*

o-

in
Ov
vq
u-T

m

vo

M

ON NO
vo
01 p
—T r~-"

Tt
otn
tn

bi

l>
vq

•5 g
a s
S

CN r - r i

r^, f*~. m

CN

E
H

O 2

r~

' Z "=
CO

C3V T f
r-^ ^
^

vo

CS

[i;

1%
3^ i

^

vo

^

ts

O

•o
c

0\
v-i
VO

n
r i

—
o-

vo
O

01 ON -^J-

oON O J
—
'(t o d

01^ v q
00

oi

<s

OI_

_J
00

r~
vo

<s

^t

0

I

l/l

U

vo
Tf

o - ON
ON r i

r—•

vq —; p

iri
0
0

V,

o
vo
vd
ON

r01
vq
rn

^
I>
^
tri

tn

O

m

ON

vo
tn,

0-

ov

r i ON 0 0

tn,
•vO

r-

o

oi

'n

01

—•

NO

oi

ON

VO

ON
o-

t<-,

001

C\

0"
vC

0

r<

—

•*

00

to

r-

0

0-

rn

vd
0
r^i

\0

P I

I

UJ

n
a)

01
00
. 00

00
O

Ov
OVO

Q

—

CC

_

01

—

C5m
oi

<

—

*^
•<t

r^"

0
CS
1/5

tn
vo
NO

-rt
m
01

in
CN

..

Tj00

ON

01' O" ON
rJ- vO Tj01

Ol
OJ

vo
in

—'.

o^

tn

0

CO
0
0
Ov

-'J <^ •

)S
01 O^ O l —

^

r-^

o^ r*"i

Q

U-

=

00

trt

rt

o

3

rt

G

r-v

o
C

E 5

^
rt
a

3

ion:

rt

3
oni

"5
0
0

0
OC

o

—

V
-f
r^. ON r J
rn
C-v  r*-. o ^ o
00
—
t/i

00

f^7 — '

^
I?Ov
o

vO_
r-i
0

-

3

Tj-

NO 00
01
01 O vo 00

0

p
rt

-

O

<
^
O

00

t/)

Z

>" H
Z
<
u

03

01
vO
—

u

(C/)

CQ

rt

e

to

0
u

TJ

3

U
tiO

IS
o

u

>

u

<

men

5^ V3
PS

vo
O
00

»/r»

onir

O

—
or i

0
0

Me

E- og
^

0
01
—

—

OJ

^

E

_
0

C

•0
c
UJ

_
rt

crt:
M

Sii

^

ti ^
CJ
X [— 03

rt
tJ

^

'.J

OJ

<
0
(U
3

^
•

.a s >
>
- - t. S
rt

"rt

rt

• CQ < H

„

— -o

rt
3

<

o o

S 5
r-i <t

,—t
<

I — ' o n
<
-a
-a

D

D

u,

D-

lyo

s i . ^U-

 fs
,—1

o
<M

o
vo

CN m
in —
tn,

NO
Tf vO
ON
oi r f NO"
Tf
rf

O
vo

tn

ol

rn

o-

Cv ON
vO

_ l
Ol

tn,

r-

Tf
ON o i
r-.
t n ON t n
vo" rn O
rf
m

^
—

O m m
vd »n7 ^

—

ov
c^l

C3v
o
t—1
o rn

o

Ov

rn

m
ON

vo
OC

rT
Tf

—

ON

Ol

—'

o
cso

ca
<
>-)
u
X

—;

oo

o
m
oq

_I
Or—
l

Ol

ON

OC m
vO
T f i n TT

o

o oo
rs
oo
o

o
.

CO

H o

Z
Q r» ^
cn
Z CO
OS U>

o < O
u K
u >- H
_
<: J

Z

vo
t-~ vo

o o"
o
fS m

r- t n
NO
oq vq
r^.
rn

ol

vo o

o
o
«s

C3\"

VO
00
Ov

vo
rn
r-^
m
o vo_
1/1

5j

u

VC

•*

rn

o
9

rN

IS

c/1
LO

o
r*l
O
O
IS

oo

00

Tf

Tf O O
tn. m,
Tf • q OI Tf

m

Cv i n

,

un O
od »n tO nl
TT

"

tn
Ol^

c\
CO
OC3
00

cn

.

a

>

to
T t OO

tn

r*-j

, Ol
OO

o
Tf
m

tn.

oo

Tf

^

OJ

oo
m
oq
rn
ON

O l ON

m
rn

oi

—' mi

r-'
Ol

m

rr,
rn

00

,
oo
m

od

_

Tt
m.
O r-. rn
OO

p
oq
o* oi oi

o

O

o

m
ON CO OO
t n oi
O

»n

o

rVD
in

od

—

vO 00

m.

o-

T f r--j
O l O l T f Ov
Tf m r- oo

od un
NO

ON

G>
1 —

Ol

vd oi
NO

o-

Ol

NO

tn

r-;
CC

>.Vi

oo

o

oo

vo
vq
a\
m.
00

CN

C\ tn. NO vO
tn
m
ON NC -r
O l NC OC m,
ON Tf r-^
T f r- m O l ON ON

m

VC

tn
ON
tn. m
t n Ol"
m Tf

C
aj

<u u p

O S g.

ON

r*~,
ON

ca

r- od

P,

2
>.
XI < S

vq vo_
in

_r

^

DO

rn
oi
tn
tn

r^, O l m
vo
ON vo
tn o
OJ r^.
OI m
V~, r f .
NO
od
^ C\
<>
O
l
O
o- vo
vO

</>

oO

(/)

Tf

irt
S

C " E
P O ^

t/>

VO
r*~^,

I

CO
-

OO

LT;

p

u :

P I

m.
vo

vo

S 2 5

r 1 Ol
tn.
O l OJ
O oo
NO
Tf
p vq
Tt
rn od T f
od
O
vo vo l O o ON
vO_^ o-

o ON »n
o m
Ol o
1-^ O
&l
r n vd t n
ON
00
o
vq r—'

ON

Ii'
2

oo

oo

CQ < •

oo

oi

o o~
r-

OO

_
m »n —
oq
O l Tf o-

ON
oo
r>
1
r- O l
m vq c
r^ od >n o od r-^
O
l
•n, O
»n 0\ ON
O; oo

vq
oo

ov

o*

O l ON

r-

o^

oo

•

tn.

oo

oo

o

tn.
OO ON
Tf ON rn
CV O l oi

NO

_

Tf
o CN
o- NO
vq

Os

—

00

rn

Ol
o
oq vO m rn
o oj' O o t n
m vO
o ton
m o
Ol

Ol

',

o od
m
p_

O

ON

00

OO O l

Ol

oo

—^

tn

_oo

ol
OC
rr^

VTj

—•

ON
Ol

Ol

vO O l
Ov

ON'cn NO vd
oi oi
m m o"
vo

Tf

oo

r-

r-'
Ol

r-

rn

ov
ov
tn.
p_
of
Ol

o
Tf

oo
oq

o^
oo

—

OI

oo

m
Tf

o^
o^

vd"

—T r-i
oo

oo

•
—
•
—
o

,

00

o- O l ov
NO »n
•n rn ON
Ol m i n

oo

,vo vo
ON O
m
— in
od
—

ol
Tf

in

ol

—•

m
m
_' or

r-.

rn
r".

oo

p
ov'
m

—
vo" i n

'-^

00

NO
Tf

o
vq

1

i/>

in

„

CQ

on

—

-t tn

f - ^

vo
o-

r-'.

„

vo
m~

vo cn
Ol
VC_ rrrn o"

cn

</>

z u ^
Z fa-

,

o~

ON

l>i

b

<

,

o
o^
rn

oo

OC oo

O

90

o

oo
Ol
r-. ON
tn

00

H

z
o

</-.

c»

r»

—

OO

l/>

Ov
O
O

oq

ON r-*
ol
m

rn

vd

Tf
ON VO

Tf OS rv 
OC
ON

OO

in

o

o-

O

^—'

rj "

"

r. -5

•5 u. o •
tJ vo

o' -p S
rt

-a

>»

rt

•' > a

S E

o
1>

<

s

(J ^
o
ou
1/
CQ

O

1^

> <

o

c

_ _ u- _<

V c

•m <

; ca —
I
CQ 0

i ; ti

< <

tSi 2S
1 •o -a
< "O - a

< i §

3

PL LU

 m,
r-i
-t

CO
so

rr^.
O

—
m

OO
•rt
-f
—

ri
o
cr-, r - j <>rj
' n Cv
p
r^, rn
r'i

in,

OC O
ON' O^
ri —

ON

—

OO

oo

r^i

O

—

O

r^, OO

—

O-

O

r^, OC oo i n
O

in

Tf

m.

—

o o CT> r-j
OO" ON r J
c d O oo
C3s

"tr

rn
—

r-t

—

o

J

r~.
vO

CX
rj
1^,
O;

00
vo
vq

rn m

Cv
rt
—

C3N CTs r T

O-

CJv
-J-

f'.
Ol

in
—

r-J

vo
rt

w-T

~ *^

Q
U
Z
oa

—

f&

—
ON ^

Ov

r^, ^ :
r- ^

^

^

rt

-t

5

oJ

oo

OJ

O

m
O

rOv

ON

^
ON

^

rl

o vo m ^
«? ov -4-. ^

oo

r>J

r-

O

^

•o

o
rt

TO

^

o

X)

<o

c

p
vD
VD

?

r j
od

rn
r-

H
Z
U3

a
z
O
w <^
S
< o
O u s
z - J HZ
o < «
H (J
»—(
3 (/)
z
o
u

u

C3S
vO

>v

Q
Z

u
S o

u
Oi
jr

o

h.O

CO

;s

d

•5

oo

m

VD

—

iS,

CN
r-,
ri

oo
ov
o

oo
Os
-r

V^
-

Tt

O

r^i

1>
3
rt

1>
JO
rt

H

^

"rt

o

>•

o
o

3

Ac

O

CO o

vo

11.
m
r-

o
v£j

—
tr-,

O
Cv

NO

<j\

oq

CN
r^* r -

— \o

rs  C3N oo —
in
CTs

>n

m

1^ eo
oo-

oo

Tt

CJ
m

oo oo

ri

m

oo r*-,

Os

CO

n~, Ov

m
r^,
-d-

—
rrj

oO
—

'n
r'.

o

m

o

in

O

tj",

rn

tr,

vo

m,
-T
vo
OC
C

—
in
—
—
CDN oo
c i oe:
m

vD
r^
rJ
O

I>
o'"^
r-.

H
W r<S

o

2 t;
-r
- i
oo
rj

oo

r-.

OS Tf
p
in
oo
m

ON
-^f
own

r-

m,
—
—

r-

o

ri

vO
rn
VD

—
cn
ri

ir,
rn
ON

OC

»n
Os
ri

u-i
Tf
r<-,

r—
y-i
Ol

'drJ

o

Ol

tji

S Ji.

^.
r<-r (~.r OCJ OC
— Ol

vO

*.v:

^c> r^,
•
!5
^

C

rt

OS
B —

•5 .£

vo

1-1

;<
U
Z

<:
z

•ct
tn

vO
ri

r^; r i

—;

r-V o ' r~'

U
sa

o
Ov
ir,

—
o
(3\

rJ_
cn

r-^ - t
OCJ NO

Il

c —

1/3 H

^

< J'

oo
0\
rr
m

-< ^•

H

i-S'-S
> -a .
I

••'-

rt

^

vo

,

-I-

=
J

c

E

o

<

rj

J

> p —
o ...
o

> <

E =

o

« -e v->
S "S.

3

o

c

rt rt

a: ci
c:

^

o

- CQ

<

^

O

1)

< < -o
< << <

-o

3

3

E a- iSr -=

g 2 C
o o

S

r^ r i

—

,
S E a
i P § £ -9
I O J Z 1> c^
c/1 H 3
U

 p

Ol

o

od

Tf

o
ON

Ol
Ol

Ol

Ol

—.
Tf"

m

p

O

od

vo
o^
Ol Ol

Tf
Tf

Ol
Tt
Tf
Tf

o p
o o i oONi
oo
Tf

wn

<

tn

o _ —
— 1=: 3

J

<<

Q
Z

XT i n

Ol

ON

£ 'u ^ oo m
— m in
C3N NO Os oo oo Ol
£ 5 « OJ OI r-i Ol rn m

t n oq

p

O^ ON o
Tt- CN o
Tf T f v o

rn

rn
oo
oq vq
OJ o f
oo

M

Ol

,739

u

rn
Ol

oo O N oo
t n O - oo oo
m
rn T f
tn O
o
oo vo CJO
oo
oq p^
r4' r n r~j m

<s
o

C3S

oo vo
cn

cn

OIL

Z

rn

,716

S = .2
o»
r--,
Ov

Si i s

m
Ol
OJ

rn

H

l i . E 73

Ofi .3

U

VDOOmvoONCvvDO-Ov

X

T3

—'

O

3

u

->

L.

5 \S

o

^5 ^

bb
Q
W rs,
<t. ,-(
I—I o
M (S CO

o
u
o

Of

^ o .2 o ' n vo m Tf
rn vo Tt Ol
c a 2 — ' T t o o — r-^oivd—^
NO vo vo o t n tn
m
3 efi H

t/5

a. '

3s
—

o

JD

1 ^•H r 4= o

H

Z
tn o
oo
vo
m m C30
CJv
oq
cd o i
n
' n trn^
o
N
O
OJ
m
r-" od od od
tn

M

CC

3

i-J

K
H
Z

in

^

o

—

•J 3

< >

Ol
vO
OV
rn
ov
O
t t

Oi
r-i

o

z

-J .2

< !;

Q
Z

VC
vo
r l

CO c n
O l OS

cn
v\ oo
Tf

<3S

r f o i I/-' od T f
cn i n CS
o
r-i
»o oq Os_ r l
r-' DC5 oo oo" d
oo
,418,

O

U . rvi

oo
Ol
tn
rn
tn.

Cs_ O l

TT

^ < 1 i=

ON ON
vO O l
CO O v
vd r n
ON o o

^ I 5^
U

5

vo o
vd O N "

o o
vO

CDS
in
TT C s
OS r r i

P S> ^
§ .2 -5
— >

-O
u
3

>.
^
"H.
E

«2 -a -3
"o J3 c
t/j c
^
"
n

3

>
Q

u

T f vO
C3S OS
Os_
p-.' r s i
r j I/-.
OS

p

CM

ri

CO
Tf
Oj
cn

C3V SO
Tf
00.

Tf

Tf
<3v T f
IT-. 0 0
T f Ov'

f t
n-,

vd CO
o
00

0 5 u

c/3

d d

a

o

_

od oo

o

od

CN

Tt

•'3
4) ->
C on m OmN oOl^
od

C3
CJ

>-

^
rt

m
O
O
Ol

o"
OJ

OJ

OI

m

_•;

oF
Ol

—

OI_

o

o

m
OJ

^*

Tf

OJ

rt
_

O

_v c o —
.2 o i2 t

3

=

<

*j"

rt

- J

M 3 'S
2

f

'u
e^n —

svd '3 < £
S 6I ^e "c
u, ca — rt

S il E £

oi o
rn oo ro m

Ol"
ON 1 ^

^

1 -s .S -s

U

OO

CJN

u

NO

„

- ^^ I

v o " OS
r - , OS

r - i CO
vq O vq oq
cd vO" t n
_J oC
o oo c n ot nl OO N; i n T f
p
o.
p^
Ol
r n rn r n T f rn rn o i
5rn

> <

LO

Ei 5 J

cn
O
VD_

Tf

o

^'

CN

J

gl ^g

> •£

CN
CN
m,

o
3
-

Tf
VC

rt

=
^

2 o " u
•o o " .=
i^ E "5 —

vi

U4

IE

n

Tf

m
•"3- cn wn m
Tf

WJ
—

01 TD

Tf
OO

c\ P
od o i
OS m .
O J cn
vd OS

^

o
u

I < OJ
4J
^
— ~ 00

'•

^
u
^

o

^

ft>

o o
t! -a
!^
S
.rt
iJ
u

- -

Ol

ovo"
r j

Ol
t n vo o - oo O N o
o o O o o O O
O
oO l o
O
o
o
o
o
O l OJ O l OJ OJ O J OJ OJ

_ -o jrt u_

S

o o

to 5<

f-» o» U . U-

Qt)

CJ

t_

i-

oa t- u_ u.

 A variety of factors impact the Retirement Fund.s' U A A L and l-unded Ratio. A lower return on
investmenl lhan that assumed by the Reliremenl Funds, and insufUcient contributions when compared lo
the Normal Cost plus inleresl w i l l all cause an increase in the U A A L and a decrea.se in the Funded Ralio.
Conversely, higher returns on investment than assumed, and contributions in excess of Normal Cost plus
interest w i l l decrease the U A A L and increase Ihe Funded Ratio. In addition, legislative amendments,
changes in acluarial assumptions and certain olher factors (including, but not limited lo, higher or lower
incidences of reliremenl, disability, in-,servicc mortality, retiree mortality or terminations lhan assumed)
w i l l have an im )acl on the U A A L and the Funded Ratio.
Projection of Funded Status and Insolvency
The Retirement Funds' funding level has decreased in reccni years due lo a combination of
factors, including: adverse market conditions and investment retums as a result of the financial
downturns experienced in 2001 and in 2008 and beyond; and contributions that arc lower lhan the
Actuarially Required Contribution.
The following projections (collectively, the "Projections") are based upon numerous variables
lhat are subjecl to change. The Projections arc forward-looking stalemenls regarding future events ba.sed
on the Retiremenl Funds' acluarial assumptions and assumptions made regarding such future events,
including lhat there are no changes to the current legislative structure and that all projected conlribulions
to the Reliremenl Funds are made as required. No assurance can be given thai these assumptions w i l l be
realized or that actual events w i l l not cause material changes lo the data presented in this subsection.
The Projections are based on the 2012 Actuarial 'Valuations of ihe Reliremenl Funds and are
provided lo indicate expected trends in the funded status of Ihc Reliremenl Funds under current law.

E-24

 TABLE J1 - PROJECTION OF FUTURE FUNDING S l ATUS - MEABF "
M:irket

Fiscal
Year

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
(a)

Market
A.ssets
... (b)

Unfunded Accrued
Actuarial Liabilities
(UAAL)

('••'?)..,.

Market
Funded Ratio
(b/a)

.$ 9.644,885
10.369,287
11,141.945
11,965,813
12.844,259
13,780.851
14,752,599
15,84^1,284
16.979,565
18,190,824
19.483,231
19,922,976
20,330,539
20,714,947
21.075.196
21,409.418
21,715.387
21.992,990
22.243,068
22,467.127
22,667,597
22,846,617
23.006,737
23.150,602
23.280,753
23.400,356
23,512.563
23.622,082
23,734.828
23.855.936

33.65%
31.09
28.40
25.60
22.63
I9.4R
16.25
12.48
8.60
4.48
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.(K)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

• •' '.r.V <

2014
20)5
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
202.3
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043

.$14,536,-397
15.048,196
15,560,462
16,082,630
16,601.674
17.114.069
17,616.057
18,104,.325
18.576,408
19.044.224
19,493.710
19,922.976
20,330,539
20,714,947
21.075.196
21.409,418
21,715.387
21,992.990
22,243,068
22.467.127
22,667.597
22,846.617
23,006,737
23,150,602
23,280.753
23.400.356
23,512.563
23,622.082
23.734.828
23.855.936

$4,891,512
4,678.909
4.418.517
4,116.817
3.757.415
3,333,218
2,863,458
2,260,041
1.596,843
853.400
10,479
-

Employer
Contribution

- •• .$156,091
162,992
168.394
174,085
179.934
185,880
191.946
198,105
204.365
210,645
217,119
224.610
231.509
238,478
245,611
252.856
260,223
267,721
275,.359
282.999
290.786
298.804
307,058
31.5,512
324,231
333.228
342,489
352.018
361.889
372.010

.Source.

Kor liical ymrs 2014-202.'!. Ciabriel Rix:ilcr Sinilh & Compjiiy. Cl.ibricl Kwik-r Sriiiih & Ciinip.iiiy is ilic consnliing .icliury for ihu
Kclirani:iii l-uiiils. Dcgiiining wiih fi.sciil year 2025, llie Cily has ailjusial Ciabnel Rocdcr Sniiih & Ciimp,iny"s projections by using
ihrfeieiii assuiiiplions In p.irliciil.-u', ilie Cily Ins assiiiiicd ih.il il will c'oniiniie lo conlnbiilc lo MEABF pursuant to Ihe Multiplier
Fiiniliiig System upon the in.s<i veiicy of MEABF Projection deiiveil Irom acluarial dala as of December .31. 2012

(I)

111 thousands of dollars.

E-25

 TABLE 12 - PROJECTION OF FUTURE FUNDING STATUS - LABF

Fiscal
Vear

2014
2015
2016''
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
Source;

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability

$2,463,253
2.519.158
2.573.437
2.628.859
2.682.630
2,7.34,485
2.783,726
2,830.103
2,873.247
2,913.025
2.948.881
2.980.541
3,007,674
3,029,960
3,047,254
3,059,371
3,066.267
3.068.479
3,066.566
3,061,130
3.053,004
3,042.845
3,031.278
3.019.032
3,006,471
2,993.998
2.982.375
2.972.440
2,964.758
2,959,792

Market
Unfunded Accrued
Actuarial Liabilities
(UAAL)
^._..,.(a-b)_____

Market
A.ssets

$1,318,110
1,280.233
1.234,100
1.182.049
1.120.849
1.049.746
967.528
873.379
766.264
645,342
509,366
357.263
187.822

-

$1,145,143
1.238.925
1.339.3.37
1,446,810
1.561.781
1,684.7.39
1,816.198
1,956,724
2.106,983
2,267.683
2.439.515
2.623,278
2.819,852
3,029.960
3,047,254
3.059,.37l
3.066,267
3.068.479
3,066,566
3,061,130
3,053.004
3,042,845
3,031,278
3.019.0.32
3.006.471
• 2.993.998
2.9X2.375
2.972.440
2.964.758
2,959.792

Market
Funded Ratio
(b/a)

Employer
Contribution

53.51%
50.82
47.96
44.96
41.78
38.39
34.76
30.86
26.67
22.15
17.27
1 1.99
6.24
0.00
0.00
0.(X)
0.00
0.00
0.00
O.IXJ
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

$14,472
15.267
15,-582
15,972
16.425
16.9-32
17.480
18.057
18.660
19.280
19.935
20.620'
21.313
22.217
22,758
23.-540
24.3-14
25.175
26.030
26,866
27,715
28.587
29.474
30.343
31.151
31.937
32.710
33.476
34,216
34.931

For fiscal ye.irs 2014-2027. G.ibriel Roeder Smith & Coiiip;iny. (labriel Roeder Smith & Ci)inp:iiiy is the ci)n.sulling aclu.iry for the
Rctircniem Fiuid.t. Beginning with fiscal year 202K. the Cily has adjusted Gabriel Roeder Smith & Company's projections by using
tliffcient assumptions.

In p-irlicular. the (*ity has assumed thai il will cominue lo coniribule lo L A B I - piirsuain to the Multiplier

Funding Sysieni upon the insolvency of I.AUF. Proieclioii derived froin aciti.in.il data as ot December .11. 2012
(I)

In thousands of dollars.

C-26

 TABLE 13 - PROJECTION OF FUTURE FUNDING STATUS - FABF"
Market
Actuarial
Accrued
Liability

Fiscal
Vear
\y

2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040..
2041

(iO

Market
Assets
(b)

Unfunded Accrued
Actuarial Liabilities
(UAAL)

Market
Funded Ratio

, .^..-Jl'/p)
::...=

_..

$4,308,913
4.452.548
4.594.292
4,732..564
4,865.986
4.993,722
5.115.953
5.233,558
5,346.933
5,4.56.021
5.560,197
5.659.686
5.7.52.106
5,837,310
5,917,012
5.993.837
6.067,128
6.135.774
6.200,107
6,260.250
6.318,352
6,375.454
6,432.317
6,491.291
6.554.092
6,623.040
6.697.483
6.777,096

$ 941.185
891.353
972.576
l.055,.322
1,1.39,769
1.226.299
1.316.101
1.410.714
1,512.021
1,622,484
1.743.090
1.875.596
2.020.813
2.180.795
2.356,907
2.549,978
2,7-59,815
2,985.293
3,227,475
3,487,783
3.768.672
4,071,910
4,399,407
4,755.142
5.142,726
5.566.252
6,027.735
6.099.386

$3,367,728
3.561.195
3.621,716
3,677,242
3,726,217
3.767.423
3.799,852
3.822.844
3.834,912
3.833.537
3.817,107
3.784.090
3.731.293
3,656.515
3,-560,105
3.443.859
3.307.313
3,150.481
2.972.632
2,772,467
2.549,680
2.303,544
2.032.910
1,736.149
1,411,.366
1.056.788
669,748
677,710

Employer
Contribution

,

Z^'':Si
21.84%
20.02
21.17
22..30
23.42
24.56
25.73
26.96
28.28
29.74
31.35
33.14
.35.13
37.36
.39.83
42.54
45.49
48.65
52.06
.55.71
59.65
63.87
68.40
73.25
78.47
84.04
90.00
90.00

$109,532
113,915
255.005
262,352
270,459
278,982
287.895
296.875
306,529
317.645
329.021
340.809
351,914
362.004
371,235
379.748
387,404
393.386
399.100
404.588
409.351
413,540
417,415
421.670
426,181
430.865
435.877
27,164

Source:

(i.-ibnci Roeder Smith & Company. Gabriel Roeder Siniih i t Company is the consulting actuary lor the Relireinent Funds. Projection
derived from actuarial data a.s of December . I l . 2012

(I)

In Ihousaiiils of dollars.

E-27

 TABLE 14 - PROJECTION OF FUTURE FUNDING STATUS - PABF'
Market

Fiscal
Year

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
(a)

Market
Assets

Unfunded Accrued
Actuarial Liabilities
(UAAL)
(a-b)

• ••••i---".. ,. 1 ,2 ,>,.^w ,vsY, Jr^:
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
20.30
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
20.39
2040
2041
2042
2043
Source:

$10,679,810
11.034,979
11.395,9.36
11.761.717
12,130.320
12,499,767
12,867,620
13,231,797
13,591,726
13.946.178
14,293.787
14.633.563
14,964.374
15,285,111
15,594.800
15,888,196
16.153.064
I6..393.7I2
16.614.6.59
16,817,565
17,005,616
17,182,873
17,353,593
17,521,586
17.690,275
17.861.422
18.036.440
18.216.283
18.401.525
18,592,418

•
.$2,971,019
2.800.866
3,053.949
3.323,004
3,606.440
3,903.754
4.21.5.416
4.-541,104
4.882.757
5.242.297
5.620.728
6.020,954
6.445.257
6.896.318
7,380.260
7.898.871
8.450,706
9,033,687
9,648.140
10,294.939
10.978.965
11,707,115
12.485,517
13,320,879
14.219.878
15.188.465
16.2.32.796
16.394.654
16,561.373
16,7.33.176

.$7,708,791
8.2,34,113
8.341.987
8.-138,713
8.523,880
8,596,013
8,652.204
8,690,693
8.708.969
8.703.881
8.673.0.59
8.612.609
8.519,117
8,388,793
8.214,540
7,989.325
7.702.358
7.360,025
6.966,519
6,522.626
6,026.651
5.475.758
4.868,076
4.200.707
3.470.397
2.672.957
1.803.644
1,821.629
1.840.1-52
1.859,242

Employer
Contribution

—^-^
27.82%
25.38
26.80
28.25
29.73
31.23
.32.76
' 34.32
35.92
37..59
39.32
41.14
43.07
45.12
47.33
49.72
52.32
55.10
58.07
61.22
64.56
68.13
71.95
76.03
80.38
85.(W
90.00
90.00
90.00
90.00

•

$191,784
187,071
630.587
651.583
671.892
692.290
71.3.8.32
735,563
758.198
781.920
805.966
831.501
857.847
885,110
914,849
. 942,743
966.719
986,247
1,003,249
1,017,798
1.031,828
1,045,281
1,057.977
1,070.245
1.082,-388
l,(m.lfi5
1.106.278
189.858
193,3-39
197.089

(Kihricl Roctier Snnlh & Coinpany. G.ibnd Koctlcr Siniih & Conipaiiy LS ihc consulting jctudry for ilic Rcriiciiicni l-'unds Projeclrnii
dcriveit fri>in aciuanaJ dam js of December ? 1. 2012

(I)

Market
Funded Ratio

In lhousaii<l.<: of ilollarv

C-28

 T A B L E 15 - PROJECTION OF FUTURE FUNDING STATUS - AGGREGATE"

Fiscal
Year

2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021 '
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
20.39
2040
2041

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
(li)
I'SiV/^^^'^jE'jr.f
1^1**
.>ts * >v ^

'

•

$31,988,373
33.0.54.881
34,124.127
35.205,770
36.280,610
37,342.043
38.383.-356
39.399.783
40,388.314
41.359.448
42,296.575
43.196,766
44.054,693
44.867,328
45,634,262
46.350.822
47.001.846
47,590.955
48,124.400
48.606.072
49,044,569
49,447,789
49.823.925
50.182,511
50.531,591
50.878.816
51.228.861
51,587.901

Market
Assets
(b)

Market
Unfunded Accrued
Actuarial Liabilities
(UAAL)

Kmploycr
Contribution

.(a-bi,_
...

... '•iSHi'J:
$10,121,826
9,651,361
9.679,142
9.677,192
9.624,473
9,513.017
9,362.503
9.085.238
8.757,885
8,363.523
7.883,663
8,253,813
8,65.3,892
9,077,113
9,737.167
10,448,849
11.210.521
12,018.980
12.875.615
13.782.722
14.747.637
15,779,025
16,884,924
18,076.021
19,362.604
20,7-'54.7l7
22.260.531
22,494.040

Market
Funded Ratio

$21,866.-547
23.403.520
24,444,985
25,528,578
26,656,1-37
27.829,026
29.020,853
30.314.545
31.6-30,429
32.995,925
34,412,912
34,942.953
35.400,801
35.790,215
35.897,095
35.901.973
35.791,325
35,571,975
35,248.785
34,823,350
34.296.932
33.668,764
32.939,001
32.106.490
31,168.987
30.124,099
28,968.330
29.093,861

^_;:::i:oi;;:,-:^.
31.64%
29.20
28.36
27.49
26.53
25.48
24.39
23.06
21.68
20.22
18.64
19.11
19.64,
20.23
21.34
22.54
23.85
25.25
26.75
28.36
30.07
31.91
33.89
36.02
38.32
40.79
43.45
43.60

$ 471.879
479.245
1.069,568
1.103,992
1.1.38,710
1.174.084
1.211,153
1.248.600
1,287.752
1.329.490
1.-372,041
1.417.540
1.462.583
1.507.809
1.554,453
1,598.887
1.6.38.690
1,672.529
1.703,737
1,7.32.251
1.7-59.681
1.786.213
1.811,924
1.837,771
1.863,951
1.890.195
1.917.355
602.517

Source:

The aggregaietl information presented in this table is denved from ihe projections piesenied in T.ibles 11-14. Please leler to Tables
I l - l ' l for source inlonnaiion.

(1)

111 Ihous.ind.s of dollars.

(2l

Acgregaic data presented in this t.ible includes dala for all four Rciiremeni I-unds.

The projections in Tables 11 and 12 show lhat Ihe assets of MEABF and LABF will be depleted
hy 2025 ami 2028, respectively, under current law. This means that, under the Pension Code as currently
enacted, MEABF and LABF will not have assels on band Lo make payments to bcnericiaries beginning in
2025 and 2028, respectively. The employer conlribulions in Tables 11 and 12 relied the formula for such
contributions under current law, namely. Multiplier Funding.
See " — Determination of Cily's
Contributions" herein. These employer contributions, when combined with employee contributions and

E-29

 other sources o f revenue, such as investment returns, are  )rojecled to be insufficient to provide for full
payments lo benellciaries by M E A B F and L A B F upon in.solvency.
The City cannot predict the impact thai the insolvency of M E A B F or L A B F would have on ils
conlribulions to these Retirement Funds. One possibility upon insolvency of M E A B F or L A B F would be
changes in the Pension Code to provide for pay-as-you-go funding. Uniier pay-as-you-go funding, the
employer contribution equals ihe amounl necessary, when added lo other income, specifically employee
contributions, lo fund the current year benelits lo be paid by the retirement fund. Gabriel Roeder Smith &
Company ( " G R S " ) projeels lhat, should the City be required to adopt pay-as-you-go funding to ensure
that payments to beneficiaries arc made to M E A B F and L A B F beneficiaries following the insolvency o f
such Retirement Funds, the City's contributions to such Retirement Funds would increa.se substantially.
W i l h respecl lo M E A B F , GRS projects thai pay-as-you-go funding would increase the City's contribution
from approximately .$217 million in 2024 lo $1,129 billion in 2025, $1,686 billion in 2042 and $1,684
billion in 2060. W i t h respecl lo L A B F , GRS projects lhal pay-as-you-go funding would increase the
C i l y ' s conlribulion from approximalely $22.7 million in 2027 to .$222 million in 2028, $251 million in
2036 and $229 million in 2060. Such large increa.ses in the Cily's contributions, i f required, could have a
material adverse impact on the City's financial condition.
Additionally, the City cannot predict if or when changes lo the Pension CcxJe or judicial decisions
relevant to ils contributions w i l l be enacted or decided, respectively, and the impact any such legislation
or judicial decisions would have on ihe manner in which i l contributes to the Rcliremcnt Funds.
Contributing pursuant lo M u l l i p l i e r Funding or pay-as-you-go funding, as discussed in this sub.section,
represent two possible outcomes, however Ihe Cily can make no representation thai some olher method of
determining contributions, including payments that are possibly even larger than pay-as-you-go funding,
would not be required.
The projections in Tables 13 and 14 show lhat the assets o f both F A B F and P A B F w i l l , under
current law, begin to increa.sc in 2016. This increa.sc assumes the implementation o f t h e P.A. 96-1495
Funding Plan, beginning with levy year 201-5. This projection dix;s not consider Ihe impact of any
pending legislation. The Cily projects lhal, should the 96-1495 Delay B i l l be enacted in ils current form,
the Funded Ralio of such Rcliremcnt Funds would continue to dccrea.sc during Ihc period by which P.A.
96-1495 is delayed.
The slatemenls made in this subsection are based on projections, arc forward-looking in nature
and are developed using assumptions and informaiion currently available. Such slatemenls are subjecl lo
certain risks and uncertainties. The projections set forth in this Appendix rely on infonnation produced
by the Retirement Funds' independent actuaries (except where specifically noted olherwi.se) and were not
prepared with a view toward complying with the guidelines established by the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants with respecl lo prospective financial infi^rmation. This informaiion is not
fael and should nol be relied upon as being necessarily indicative o f future results. Readers of this
Appendix are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the prospective financial information. Neither the
City, Ihe City's independent auditors, nor any other independent accountants have compiled, examined, or
[Terformed any procedures w i l h respecl lo the prospective financial infonnation contained herein, nor have
they expressed any opinion or any other fonn of assurance on such information or its achievabilily, and
assume no responsibility for, and disclaim any associaiion w i l h , the prospective financial information.

E-30

 Report and Recommendations of the Commission to Strengthen Chicago's Pension Funds
The infonnation contained in this sub.section describing the CSCP and the Final Report (each as
defmed herein) relies on information produced by the CSCP, including the Final Report. The Final
Report is available al hltp://www.chipabf org/ChicagoPoliccPcnsion/PDF/Financia]s/pension_commi
ssion/CSCP_FinaLRepon_Vol.J_4.30.20l().pdf; however, the ciinlenl of the Final Report and such
website is not incorporated herein by such reference. The City makes no representation nor cxpres.ses any
opinion as lo the accuracy of the Final Report, the statements made or the information therein, some of
which may be confiicting. Furthemiore, infonnation about the Final Report is being provided for
historical purposes only.
On January 1 1, 2008, then Mayor Richard M. Daley announced the formation of the Commrssion
to Strengthen Chicago's Pension Funds (the "CSCP"), which was compo.sed of a broad cro.ss-.section of
Cily officials, union leaders, pension fund executives, and business and civic professionals. The CSCP
was charged with examining the Reliremenl Funds and reciimmending ways to improve the Funded Ralio
of each Retirement Fund. The CSCP met several times in 2(308 Ihrough 2010, and at the CSCP's final
meeting on March 24, 2010, the CSCP endorsed its final report, with three commissioners dis-scniing.
The CSCP's final report, which included letters from the dissenting commissioners, was submitted lo
Mayor FJaley on April 30, 2010 (the "l-'inal Report").
The CSCP's approval of the Final Report occurred before the enactment of Ihe Pension Refonn
Act and P.A. 96-1495 and, therefore, does not consider the impact of these acts on the Retirement Funds.
See "— Delennination of Cily's Conlribulions" and "— Legislative Changes" above for adilitional
information on these acls. As described below, certain of the CSCP's findings and recommendations as
contained in the Final Report are addres.sed by either act.
The CSCP found thai ihe financial health of the Retirement Funds had deteriorated due to a
combination of factors, including the following: increasing liabilities due to enhanced benefits (e.g., nonrecurring early retiremenl programs that were nol properly funded); inadequate contributions, which were
based upon a fixed percentage of payroll and nol actuarial need (i.e., the Multiplier Funding); and adverse
market conditions leading lo lluctuating returns on investments (in 2000-2002 and 2007-2009) which
could not keep pace wilh growlh in liabilities. Wilh regard to the CSCP's finding of inadequate
contributions, P.A. 96-1495 addresses ihis finding wilh regard to PABF and FABF. As de.scribed in "—
Determination of City's Conlribulions" and "— Legislafive Changes — P.A. 96-1495" above, the City's
Pension Levy applicable lo PABF and I'ABF will be calculated as Ihe level percentage of payroll
neces.sary lo reach the 90% Funded Ralio target by 2040 pursuant to the P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan,
which will significantly increase the Cily's conlribulions to PABF and FABF beginning with the levy
made in 2015 (and collectible in 2016).
The CSCP found lhat due to the inadequate contributions, the Retirement Funds have had to use
assets to pay current benefits, which in turn put pressure on the as.sei bases and Funded Ratios of the
Retirement Funds.
The CSCP modeled a set of scenarios for the Retirement Funds and found lhal, ba.sed on the
actuarial assumptions in u.se by the Rcliremcnt Funds and the condition of the Retiremenl Funds al the
end of 2009, the Retirement Funds would, in the absence of substantial changes to the Retirement Funds'
funding policy and/or benefit structure, deplete all assets in each of Ihc Retirement Funds at different
dates but all wilhin twenty years of the dale of ihe Final Report. However, the CSCP's approval of the

E-31

 Final Report occurred before ihc enaclmeni of the Pension Refonn Act and P.A. 96-1495 and ihc
depletion dates as estimated in the Final Report would not have laken into account Ihe impact of such
legislation. See "— I'rojcction of Funded Status" above for ibc projections based upon the current
legislative structure applicable lo the Retirement Funds.
The CSCP suggested that the issues related lo the Retirement Funds need to be addressed as soon
as possible and offered the following specific recommendations: (i) the defined benefii structure u.sed by
the Retirement Funds should remain (as opposed lo a defined contribution structure); (ii) new employees
should continue to become members of the Reliremenl Funds; (iii) the Retirement Funds should be
funded on an actuarial basis; (iv) changes in the Reliremenl Funds for new members, while recognized hy
the CSCP as undesirable, will probably be necessary; (v) contributions to the Retiremenl Funds should be
increased and revenue sources identified; (vi) employee conlribulions should not exceed the value of
benefits on a career basis; (vii) review any provisions in current law for refunds or for alternative benefit
calculations lo ensure lhat the anticipated financial results of a reform program are actually obtained;
(viii) in general, no changes in the Retirement Funds should be made unless financially neutral or
advantageous lo the Retirement Funds, now or in the future; (ix) a variety of other refonns should be
considered, including reforming potential abuses, establishing sound reciprocity wilh other Illinois public
pensions, implementing new structures to manage investments of the Retirement Funds, and improving
administration of disabilily claims and beneflls; and (x) any refonn legislation must comprehensively and
simultaneously address all aspects of the pension funding program.
CSCP's recommendations were made prior to ihe enactment of the Pension Reform Act and P.A.
96-1495. Certain of the CSCP's recommendations, including changes in the Rcliremcnt Funds for new
members, were part of the Pension Refomi Act (with regard to MEABF and LABF) and,P A. 96-1495
(wilh regard to PABF and FABF).
Diversion of Grant Money to Police and Fire Funds Under P.A. 96-1495
P.A. 96-1495 allows the State Comptroller to divert Stale grant money intended for the City to
either of PABF and FABF lo satisfy contribution shortfalls by Ihe City (the "Recapture Provision"). I f
the City fails to coniribule lo PABF and FABF as required by the Pension Code, the Cily will be subject
to a reallocation of grants of State funds to the City if (i) the Cily fails lo make the required payment for
90 days past the due date, (ii) the subject Retirement Fund gives notice of the failure lo the Cily, and (iii)
such Retirement Fund certifies to the .Stale Comptroller that such payment has not been made. Upon the
(x;eurrence of these events, the State Comptroller will withhold grants of Stale funds from the City in an
amount not in excess of the delinquent payment amount in the following proportions: (i) in fiscal year
2016, one-third of Ibe Cily's Stale grant money, (ii) in fiscal year 2017, two-thirds of Ihe Cily's Slate
grant money, and (iii) in fiscal year 201 8 and in each fiscal year thereafier, 100% of the Cily's Slate grant
money. Should the Recapture Provision in [-".A. 96-1495 be invoked as a result of the City's failure lo
contribute all or a porlion of its required conlribution, a reduction in State grant money may have a
significant adverse impact on the City's finances.
A delay bill such as the P.A. 96-1495 Delay Bill may, if enacted, delay the implcmcnlation ofthe
Recapture Provision of P.A. 96-1495. No assurance can be given lhat a bill such as the P.A. 96-1495
Delay Bill will be enacted.
See "— Determination of City's Conlribuiion.s— Cily's Required
Contributions to PABF and FABF Beginning with the Levy made in 2015"

E-32

 GASB Statements 67 and 68
On June 25, 2012, GASB announced i l was adopting new Statements 67 and 68 (collectively, the
"Stalemenls") covering the manner in which pension plans and governments, respeclively, account for
and report informaiion regarding those pension plans. The Statements take effect in fiscal years 2014 and
2015, respeclively. The Cily expects they will significantly alter the financial Matements produced by the
City and the Retirement Funds; however, because the City contributes to the Retirement Funds pursuant
lo the methods established in the Pension Code, fhe Statements would nol impact the contributions made
by the City without legislative action.
Legislative Changes
P.A.

96-0889

On April 14, 2010, Governor Quinn .signed Public Act 96-0889 (the "Pension Reform Act") into
law. The Pension Refonn Act establishes a "two-tier" benefit .system with less generous benefits for
employees who become members of MEABF and LABF on or after January 1, 2011 as compared to those
provided to employees prior lo such date. The Pension Reform Act does not impact persons who first
became members or participants prior lo ils effective date of January 1, 201 1.
Among olher changes, Ihc Pension Reform Act: (i) increases the minimum age at which an
active employee may retire with unreduced benefits to age 67 from age 60 or younger based on a fomiula
combining the age of the employee and the number of years of service; (ii) increases the mininiuin age at
which an active employee may retire wilh reduced benefits to age 62 from age 50; (iii) provides lhat final
average salary is based on 96 consecutive months wilhin the lasl 120 months of employment (instead of
48 months of the lasl 120 months); (iv) reduces Ihc annual cost of living adjustment to the lower of 3% or
50% of Ihc change in Ihe consumer price index for all urban consumers, whichever is lower, and
eliminates compounding for employees hired after January I , 2011, compared with a cost of living
adjustment of 3%, compounded, under prior law; and (v) caps the salary on which a pension may he
calculated at $ 106,800 (subject lo certain adjuslinents for inflation).
The Pension Reform Act does not change Cily or employee conlribulions to MEABF or LABF.
The Pension Code continues to require that the City contribute to MEABF and LABF pursuant to the
respective Multiplier.
The Pension Reform Act as described in this sub.seetion, taken independently of any olher
legislafive or market effects, is expeclcd to reduce benefits afforiled new hires and therefore reduce over
time the growlh in the Acluarial Accrued Liability, the UAAL and the Actuarially Required Contribution.
In calculating the Acluarial Accrued Liability, ihe actuaries make a.ssumptions about future benefit levels.
As the value of future benefits decreases over time, and as a greater percenlage of the City's workforce is
covered by the Pension Reform Act, the Acluarial Accmed Liability is expected lo decrea.se compared to
what i l would have been under previous law. Consequently, the UAAL is expected to gniw more slowly
and the Funded Ralio lo improve. As the growth in the UAAL slows, the Actuarially Required
Conlribution is expected lo be reduced as the amount of UAAL to be amortized decreases. However, no
assurance can be given lhat these expectations will be the actual experience going forward.

E-33

 P.A.

96-1495

P.A. 96-1495 has a significant impact on PABF and FABF. Certain provisions of P.A. 96-1495
are di.scus.sed above in "— Detcnninalion of City's Contributions — City's Required Conlribulions to
PABF and FABF Beginning with the Levy made in 2015." The P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan will have the
effect of significantly increasing Ihe portion of the Pension Levy applicable to PABF and FABF becau.se,
among other things, the Multiplier Funding will no longer serve lo cap the Pension Levy (applicable lo
PABF and FABF) and because the P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan is designed lo require larger contributions
by the Cily. The greater contributions projected to be required under the P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan are
expected to pose a substantial burden for the City's financial condition beginning in 2016. See "—
Projection ol Funded Slalus and Insolvency" above.
In addition, P.A. 96-1495 makes changes lo benefits for police officers and firefighters first
participating in PABF and FABF on or after January 1, 2011. Among other changes, P.A. 96-1495: (i)
increases the minimum eligibility age for unreduced retiremenl benefits from 50 (with ten years of
service) to 55 (with ten years of .service); (ii) provides for retirement at age 50 (with ten years of service)
wilh the annuity reduced by .5% per month; (iii) provides that final average salary is based on 96
consecutive months within the last 120 months of employment (instead of 48 months of the lasl 120
months); (iv) reduces the cost of living adjustment to the lower of 3% or 50% of the change in the
consumer price index for all urban consumers, whichever is lower, commencing at age 60; (v) provides
lhal widow benefits are 66 2/3%' of the employee's annuity al the dale of dealh; and (vi) caps the salary
on which a pension may be calculated at $106,800 (subject lo certain adjustments for inllation).
While the reforms discussed in this seciion arc expected to contribute lo a reduction in the
Retirement Funds' respective UAALs over lime, such reforms are nol expected to materially reduce such
UAALs in the near future.
Pension Reform
The Cily believes lhat significant legislative changes are required to properly fund the Retirement
Funds and is considering the options available to address those unfunded liabilities. Based on its work in
developing the Mayor's 2012 pension reform proposal (.see below) and olher analysis, the City believes
lhat the Retiremenl Funds' unfunded liabilities cannot be adequately and practically addres.sed ihrough
increases in the Cily's contributions alone and without a modification lo the current level of benefits. If
the City aitempted to fund such increased contributions ihrough an increa.sc in taxes, the increase would
be larger than any increase in recent history, politically difficult lo enact, and harmful lo the Cily's
financial condition and, likely, its economy. If the Cily altempled to fund such increased contributions
through expenditure cuts, essential Cily services, including, bul nol limiled to, public health and safely,
would be jeopardized. And the amount lhat could be derived from the sale of City assets would be
inconsequential when compared to the Reliremenl Funds' unfunded liabilities. Finally, a combination of
revenue increases and expenditure cuts likely would not be practical to address the unfunded liabilities,
given their magnitude. This is true both when considering the Retiremenl Funds on their own, and when
viewed collectively with the unfunded liabilities of ibe Olher Reliremenl Funds, whose sponsoring
Ciovernmental Units' have lax ba.ses lhat overlap wilh the City's tax ba.se. See —Overlapping Tax
Bodies." Therefore, the Cily believes that reductions in the benefits provided by each of the Reliremenl
Funds are neces.sary, in combinaiion wilh any increases in employer and employiie contributions, to
adequately address the unfuniicd liabilities of the Retirement Funds.

E-34

 On May 8, 2012, Mayor Rahm Emanuel testified before the Committee on Personnel and
Pensions of the Illinois House of Representatives and presented the following proposal lo amend
provisions of Ihc Pension Code in order to help address the unfunded liabilities of the Retirement Funds:
(a) suspending for a period of time automatic increases in pension amounis payable to annuitants; (b)
increasing the required employee contribution to the applicable Retiremenl Fund by an additional five
percent of pensionable compensation (phased in over time); (c) increasing the retirement age for active
members hired before January I , 2011; and (d) offering new members and certain existing members
oiilions lo make their retirement plans more competitive and consistent with tho.se offered in the private
sector.
No assurance can be given that a bill embodying the propo.sed plan will be introduced in the
Illinois General As.sembly or that any such bill would be enacted, or that i f enacted, any such bill would
contain any of ihe proposed changes described above. Furthermore, any reduction in benefits (whether
pursuant to the propo.sed plan or otherwise) would require action by the Illinois General Assembly to
mtxlify the Pension Code, and no assurance can be given lhal any proposal to modify benefits will be
enacted. Given the Illinois Pension Clause in the Illinois Constitution, any legislafion which reduces
benefits may be challenged under this constitutional provision, and no assurance can be given that such
legislation will be upheld upon a legal challenge.
The Cily continues to make its statutory contributions to each Retirement Fund.

OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS
General
The City and the Reliremenl Funds share the cost of post-employment healthcare benefits
available to City employees parficipaling in the Retirement Funds through a single-employer, defined
benefit healthcare plan (the "Health Plan"), which is administered by the City. Prior lo June 30, 2013, the
costs of the Health Plan were shared pursuant lo a seillemenl agreement (as amended, the "Settlement")
entered into between the City and the Retirement Funds regarding the responsibility for payment of these
health benefits as described below under"— The Settlement."
MEABF and LABF participants older lhan 55 wilh at least 20 years of service and PABF and
FABF participants older lhan 50 with at least 10 years of service may become eligible for the Health Plan
if they eventually become an annuitant. The Health Plan provides basic health benefits to non-Medicare
eligible annuitants and provides supplemental health benefits lo Medicare-eligible annuitants.
The Cily contributes a percentage toward the cost of Ihe Health Plan for each eligible annuitant.
Annuitants who retired prior to July I , 2005 receive a 55% subsidy from the City, whereas annuitants
retiring on or after such date receive a subsidy equal to 50%, 45%', 40% or zero percent ba.sed on the
annuitant's length of actual employment with the Cily. The Retirement Funds contribute a fixed dollar
amounl monthly ($65 for each Medicare-eligible annuitant and $95 tor each non-Medicare eligible
annuitant) for each of their annuitants. The annuitants are responsible for conlnbuting the difference
between the cost of their licallb benefits and the sum of Ihc subsidies provided by the City and the related
Retirement Fund.
The Retirement f-'unds" subsidies are paid from the Pension Levy, as provided in the Pension
Code. These payments therefore reduce the amounis available in the Retirement I'-unds to make payments

E-35

 on pension liabilities. Sec Tables 5-9 in "Retirement Fund.s—Funded Status of Retirement Funds"' above
for Retirement Funds' statement of net assets, which incorporates the expense related to the Health Plan
as part of the "Administration" line ilcm. The Pension l ^ v y is described in "Reliremenl Funds —
Determination of City's Contributions" above.
The Settlement
In 1987, the Cily sued the Retirement Funds as.scrting, among other things, lhal ihe Cily was nol
obligated to provide healthcare benefits to certain retired City employees. Certain retired employees
intervened as a class in the litigation, and the Retiremenl Funds countersued the Cily. To avoid the risk
and expen.se of protracted litigation, Ihe Cily and Ihe other parties entered into Ihc Settlement, the terms of
which have been renegotiated over time. The City contributed lo the Health Plan as a result of the
obligation established by the Settlement during Ihe term of the Seillemenl (the "Seillemenl Period"). The
Settlement expired on June 30, 2013. See "— Status of Healthcare Benefits After the Seillemenl Period"
below.
City Financing of the Health Plan
The Health Plan is funded on a pay-as-you-go basis. Pay-as-you-go funding refers to the fact that
as.scls are not accumulated or dedicated to funding the Health Plan. Instead, the City contributes the
amounl necessary to fund ils share of the curreni year costs of the Health Plan. The City's contributions
are made from funds derived from the Pension Levy, which is described above in "'Retirement Funds —
Determination of City's Contribution.s" as required by the Pension Code. See Table 17 below for a
schedule of historical contributions made by the City lo the Health Plan.
Actuarial Considerations
Cir\' Obligation
The City has an Actuarial Valuation completed for its contributions to the Health Plan annually.
The purpose and process behind an Actuarial Valuation is described above in "Retirement Funds — The
Acluarial Valuation — Actuaries and the Actuarial Process." In addition, the Retirement Funds produce
an Acluarial Valuation for.the liabilily of such Rcliremcnt Fund to its retirees for the benefits provided
under the Health Plan.
Although these Actuarial Valuations all refer to the liability owed for the same benefits, ihc
results of the Retirement Funds' Acluarial Valuations differ significantly from the City's Actuarial
Valuation for two reasons. First, the City's Acluarial Valuation only refiects ihe portion of liabilities the
Cily owes under the Seillemenl. Second, the Actuarial Valuations of Ihe Cily and the Retirement Funds
differ becau.se the actuarial methods and a.ssumptions used for each purpose vary.
This Appendix addresses the funded slalus of Ihe City's obligation lo make payments for the
Health Plan. For additional informaiion on ihe amounts owed to members of Ihe Retiremenl Funds for
retiree healthcare benefits, see the Acluarial Valuations of ihe Reliremenl Funds, which are available as
described in "Reliremenl Funds — Source Information" above, and Note 11(b) lo the Cily's Basic
Audited
Financial
Stalemcnts,
which
are
available
on
the
Cily's
website
al
hltp://www.ciiyofchicago.org/city/en/dcpi.s/fin/supp_info/comprehensi vc_annualfinancialslatemenLs.html;
provided, however, that the conlenls ofthe City's website are not incorporated herein by such reference.

E-36

 Acluarial Melhods and Assumptions
The Acluarial Valuation for the Cily's obligation to the Health Plan utilizes variiius acluarial
methods and assumptions similar to ihose described in "Retiremenl Funds" above with respecl to the
Retirement Funds. The Cily does not use an Actuarial Method to calculate the Actuarial Value of Assels
of Ihc Heallh Plan because no assets are accumulated therein for payment of future benefits. As such, the
Actuarial Value of Assels for the Health Plan is always zero.
The City's Actuarial Valuation employs Ihe PUC Method lo allocale the Cily's obligations under
the Settlement. For more information on the PUC Method, see "Retirement Funds — Actuarial Methods"
above.
The Cily's 2012 Acluarial Valuation amortizes the Heallh Plan's UAAL over a clo.sed l-year
period, in order to reflect Ihc remainder of the Sclllemcnt Period. The use of a ck).sed, 1-year period has
the effect of increasing the Actuarially Required Contribution as compared to the typical 30-year open
amorfization period because (i) the pericxJ of time over which the UAAL will be amortized is shorter, and
(ii) the amortizaUon period is one year as opposed lo remaining al 30 years for each period going forward.
Funded Status
The following tables provide infomiation on the financial health of the Health Plan. The Health
Plan is funded on a pay-as-you-go basis, which means no assets are accumulated lo pay for Ihe liabilities
ofthe Health Plan. As such, the Funded Ratio with respect to the Health Plan is perpetually zero.
Table 16 summarizes the currentfinancialcondition and the funding progress ofthe Heallh Plan.
T A B L E 16 - S C H E D U L E OF FUNDING PROGRESS'"

2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Soiia'es:
(1)
(2)

Actuarial
Value of
As.sels
$0
0
0
0
0

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
$1,062,864
787,395
5.33,387
-390.611
470.952

Unfunded
Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
$1,062,864
787,395
533.387
390.611
470,952

Funded
Ratio
0%
0
0
0
0

Covered
Payroll
$2,562,007
2,475,107
2,546.961
2.475,000
2.518,7.35

UAAL as a
Percentage of
Payroll
41.5%
31.8
20.9
15.8
18.7

Comprehensive Aniiu.il Financial Report of the Cily for the fiscal years endnig December 31, 2010-2012.
In thoui-anils ot dollars
The Ciiy. as rec iiired. adopted (lASH Statenieni No 4.S in fise.il year 2007. The informaiion provided in this table was [irotluced m
2007 or lalcr

E-37-

 Table 17 shows the amounis actually contributed to the Health Plan by the Cily.
T A B L E 17 - HISTORY OF C I T Y ' S CONTRIBUTIONS'"
Actual City
Contribution
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Sources:
(1)
(2)

.$98,065
98,000
107.431
99.091
97.531

Comprehensive Annual Financial Report ol ihe Cily for Ihe fiscal years ending 20(18-2012
111 ihou.saiuls of ilollars.
The Cily. as required, .idopicd GASB Stalemenl No. 45 in fi.scal ye.ir 2007.

Retiree Health Benefits Commi.ssion
The Seitlemeni provided for the creation of the Retiree Heallh Benefits Commission (the
"RHBC"), which was tasked with, among other things, making recommendations conceming retiree
heallh benefits after June 30, 2013. The RHBC's members were appointed by the Mayor of Lhe City for
tenns that do not expire. The Settlement required that the RHBC be compo.scd of experts who will be
objective and fair-minded as lo the interest of both retirees and taxpayers, and include a representaiivc of
the Cily and a representative of the Retirement Funds.
On January 11, 2013, Ihe RHBC relea.sed its "Report lo ihc Mayor's Office on the State of
Retiree Healthcare" (the "RHBC Report"). The RHBC Report can be found on the Cily's website al
htlp://www.cilyofchicago.org/city/en/depl.s/fin/provdrs/ben/alcrts/2()l3/jan/rel'iree_heakhcarebenefils
commissionreporttotbemayorhtml; provided, however, that the contents of the RHBC Report and of the
Cily's websile arc not incorporated herein by such reference.
The RHBC Report concluded lhal maintaining lhe funding arrangement ihen in place for lhe
Health Plan was untenable, would prevent Ihe City from continuing lo provide the current level of
benefits to retirees in the future, and could result in other financial consequences, such as changes to Ihe
City's bond rating and its creditworthiness. The RHBC Report pre.senied .several options for the Mayor to
consider which would reduce the level of .spending wilh respect to the Heallh Plan from approximately
$108 million annually lo between $90 million and $12.5 million annually depending on the option.
Status of Healthcare Benelits After the Settlement Period
On May 15, 2013, the Cily announced plans to, among olher things: (i) provide a lifetime
healthcare plan lo employees who retired before August 23, 1989 with a contribution from the Cily of up
to 55% of lhe cost of lhal plan; and (ii) beginning January I , 2014, provide employees who retired on or
after August 23, 1989 wilh healthcare benefits bul with significant changes to the terms provided by the
Health Plan, including increases in premiums and deduclibles, reduced benefits and the phase-out ofthe
entire Health Plan for such employees by the beginning of 2017.

E-38

 On May 30, 2013, the General Assembly pas.sed Senate Bill 1584, which was signed inlo law by
the Governor on June 28, 2013. .Senate Bill 1584 extends the Retirement Funds' subsidies for retiree
healthcare costs unlil such lime as the City no longer provides a health care plan for annuitants or
December 31, 2016, whichever comes first.
After the June 30, 2013 expirafion of the Seillemenl, on July 5, 2013, certain participants in the
Heallh Plan filed a motion to "re-activate" the 1987 liligalion covered by lhe Sculcment. On July 17,
2013, the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois denied that motion. On July 23, 2013, certain of the
participants filed a new lawsuit (the "Lawsuit") in the Circuit Court against the City and the Trustees of
each of Ihe four Retiremenl Fund Board.s, seeking to bring a class action on behalfof fonner and current
City employees who previously contributed or now contribute lo one of the four Retirement Funds. The
plaintiffs a.ssert, among other things, that pursuant to the Illinois Pension Clause, each such Cily
employee is entitled lo a permanent and unreduced level of healthcare coverage by the City, which vesis
as of the dale Ihcy began participafing in any of Ihc four Retirement Funds and is subsidized by their
respeclive Retirement Fund. The City sub.sequently moved the Lawsuit to federal court, and filed a
motion to dismiss Ihe Lawsuit wilh prejudice. The court granted the City's motion to dismiss, and
plaintiffs appealed and motioned for an injuncfion pending the appeal. The court denied plaintiffs'
motion for an injunclion and subsequcnlly dclermined lhat the plaintiffs' appeal should be held in
abeyance pending the resolution of Kanerva (defined below). The City intends lo vigorously defend the
appeal.
On August 16, 2013, the Cily filed a brief as amicus curiae wilh the Supreme Court of Illinois in
the ca.sc of Kanen'a v. Weems ("Kanerva"). Although the City is nol a party in the Kanerva litigation,
the City believes that the outcome of the Kanerva case may impact the law at issue in the Law.suit,
particularly with respect lo the question of whether retiree heallh benefits are protected by the Pension
Clause.
The City expects lo save approximalely $100 million annually beginning in 2017 as a result of
the phase-out ot the Health Plan.

E-39

 [17-113 PAGE 

 

APPENDIX 

FORMS OF OPINIONS OF CO-BOND COUNSEL

 

 HS LEFT 

PROI'OSKI) F O R M OF O P I N I O N OK C O - B O N D C O U N S K L

  L E T I KKIIKAI) OK CO-BONI) COUNSKI,]
I r o UK i)A I Ko C L O S I N G D A r i ;  

Wc have examined a certified copy of the record of the proceedings (the "Prcjceedings") ofthe
Cily Council ofthe City of Chicago (the "City"), including an ordinance adopted by the City Council of
the City on the 5th day of February, 2014 (the "Ordinance"), as supplemented by a Notification of Sale
(the "Notification o j Sale"), relating to the issue of its fully registered General Obligation Bonds, Project
and Refunding Series 2 0 H A (the "Bonds"), in the aggregate principal amount of $432,630,000, dated
March 24, 2014, due on January I ofthe years and in the amounts and bearing interest as follows:
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036

•

$ 2,735,000
2,850,000
3,700,000
4,950,000
5,075,000
4,920,000
625.000
4,500,000
5.000,000
4,000,000
10,675,000
23,055,000
30,270,000
3,710,000
36,950,000
15.425.000
42,615,000
44,875,000
49,700,000
69,000,000
68,000,000

4.00%
4.00%
4.00%
5.00%
5.00%'
5.00%
4.00%
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%
5.25%
5.25%,
5.00%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%

The Bonds due on or after January 1, 2025, are subject to redeinption prior to maturity at the
option ofthe City as a whole or in part, on January 1, 2024, or on any date thereafier, at the redemption
price of par plus accrued interest to the redemption date, as provided by the Ordinance and the
Notification of Sale.
The Bonds are authorized and issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 6 of Article Vll ofthe
Illinois Constitution of 1970 and by virtue of the Ordinance, and we are of the opinion lhat the
Proceedings show la<^ul authority for said issue under the laws ofthe State of Illinois now in force.

 We have examined the form of bond prescribed for said issue and find the same in due form of
law, and in our opinion said issue, in the amount named herein, is valid and legally binding upon the City
and is payable from any funds ofthe City legally available for such purpose, and all taxable property in
the Cily is subject to the levy of taxes to pay the same without limitation as to rate or amount, except that
the rights ofthe owners of the Bonds and the enforceability ofthe Bonds may be limited by bankruptcy,
insolvency, moratorium, reorganization and olher similar laws affecting creditors' rights and by equitable
principles, whether considered at law or in equity, including the c.Kercise of judicial discretion.
It is our opinion that, subject to the City's compliance with certain covenants, under present law,
interest on the Bonds is excludable from gross income of lhe owners thereof for federal income lax
purposes and is nol included as an item of tax preference in computing the alternative minimum ta.\ for
individuals and corporations under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, but is taken into account in
computing an adjustment used in determining the federal alternative minimum lax for certain
corporations. Failure to comply with certain of such City covenants could cause interest on the Bonds to
be includible in gross income for federal income tax purposes retroactively to the date of issuance ofthe
Bonds. Ownership ofthe Bonds may result in other federal tax consequences lo certain taxpayers, and we
express no opinion regarding any such collateral consequences arising with respect to the Bonds.
Interest on the Bonds is not e.vcmpl from present Stiite of Illinois income ta.xes. Ownership ofthe
Bonds may result in other state and local tax consequences to certain taxpayers, and we express no
opinion regarding any such collateral consequences arising with respect to the Bonds.
We express no opinion herein as to the accuracy, adequacy or completeness of any information
furnished to any person in connection with any offer or sale ofthe Bonds.
In rendering this opinion, we have relied upon certifications of the City with respect to certain
material facts within the City's knowledge. Our opinion represents our legal judgment based upon our
review of the law and the facts that we deem relevant to render such opinion and is not a guarantee of a
result. This opinion is given as ofthe date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or supplement
this opinion to reflect any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to our attention or any changes
in law lhat may hereafter occur.

F-2

 PUOI'OSKI) FOR-M OK OPINION OK CO-BONl) COl.NSKL
ILK ITERIIKAD OK CO-BOND COUNSI-:i, 
11 O BK DA I'KI) CJ.O-SING D A I KI

We have examined a certified copy ofthe record ofthe proceedings (the "Proceedings") ofthe City
Council ofthe City of Chicago (the "City"), including an ordinance adopted by the City Council ofthe City
on the 5th day of February, 2014 (the "Ordinance"), as supplemented by a Notification of Sale (the
"Notification o f Sale"'), relating to the issue of its fully registered 6.314% General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2014B (the "Bonds"), in the aggregate principal amount of
$450,790,000, dated March 24, 2014, due on January I , 2044, and subject to mandatory redemption, in
integral multiples of $5,000 at a redemption price of par plus accrued interest to the redemption date, selected
as provided in the Ordinance and the Notification of Sale, on January I o f t h e years and in the principal
amounts as follows:
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044

$ 37,770,000
50,625,000
57,670.000
28,255,000
32,255,000
34,300,000
101,745,000
108,170.000 (maturity)

The Bonds are further subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option ofthe City as a whole or
in part, on any business day, upon the tenns as provided by the Ordinance and the Notification of Sale.
The Bonds are authorized and issued pursuant lo the provisions of Section 6 of Article Vll o f t h e
Illinois Constitution o f 1970 and by virtue of the Ordinance, and we are of the opinion that the Proceedings
show lawful authority for said issue under the laws of the State of Illinois now in force.
We have examined the form of bond prescribed for said issue and find the same in due fonn of law,
and in our opinion said issue, in the amount named herein, is valid and legally binding upon the Cily and is
payable from any funds ofthe City legally available for such purpose, and all taxable property in the City is
subject to the levy of taxes to pay the same without limitation as to rale or amount, except that the rights of
the owners of the Bonds and the enforceability of the Bonds may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency,
moratorium, reorganization and olher similar laws affecting creditors' rights and by equitable principles,
whether considered al law or in equity, including the exercise of judicial discrefion.
It is our opinion that under present law, interest on the Bonds is includible in gross income of the
owners thereof for federal income tax purposes. Ownership of the Bonds may result in other federal income
tax consequences to certain taxpayers. Bondholders should consult their own tax advisors concerning tax
consequences of ownership of the Bonds.

F-3

 Interest on the Bonds is not exempt from present State of Illinois income taves. Ownership ofthe
Bonds may result in other stale and local tax consequences to certain taxpayers, and we express no opinion
regarding any such collateral consequences arising with respect to the Bonds.
We express no opinion herein as to the accuracy, adequacy or completeness of any information
furnished to any person in connection with any offer or sale of the Bonds.
In rendering this opinion, wc have relied upon certifications of lhe City wilh respect to certain
material facts within the City's knowledge. Our opinion represents our legal judgment based upon our
review of the law and the facts that we deem relevant lo render such opinion and is not a guarantee of a
result. This opinion is given as ofthe date hereof and we assume no obligation lo revise or supplement this
opinion to reflect any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to our attention or any changes in law
that may hereafter occur.

F-4

  

APPENDIX 

BOND INSURANCE

 

 PAGE LEF 1? Bl. 

BOND INSURANCE
Bond Insurance Policy
Concurrently with the issuance o f t h e Bonds, Assured Guaranty Municipal Corp. ("AGM")
will issue its Municipal Bond Insurance Policy (the "Policy'') for the Series 2014A Bonds maturing on
January 1. 2031 (the '"Insured Bonds"). The Policy guarantees the scheduled payment of principal of
and interest on the Insured Bonds when due as set forth in the fonn ofthe Policy included at the end of
this APPENDIX G — " B O N D INSURANCE."
The Policy is not covered by any insurance security or guaranty fund established under New
York, California, Connecticut or Florida insurance law.
Assured Guaranty Municipal Corp.
AGM is a New York domiciled financial guaranty insurance company and an indirect
subsidiary of Assured Guaranty Ltd. ("AGL"'), a Bermuda-based holding company whose shares are
publicly traded and arc listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol "AGO". AGL.
through its operating subsidiaries, provides credit enhancement products to the U.S. and global public
finance, infrastructure and structured finance markets. Neither AGL nor any of its shareholders or
affiliates, other than AGM, is obligated to pay any debts of AGM or any claims under any insurance
policy issued by AGM.
AGM's financial strength is rated "AA-" (stable outlook) by Standard and Poor's Ratings
Services, a Standard & Poor's Financial Services LLC business ("S&P") and "A2" (stable outlook) by
Moody's Investors Service, Inc. ("Moody's"). Each rating of A G M should be evaluated
independently. An explanation of the significance of the above ratings may be obtained from the
applicable rating agency. The above ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell or hold any security,
and such ratings are subject to revision or withdrawal at any lime by the rating agencies, including
withdrawal initiated at the request of AGM in its sole discretion. In addition, the rating agencies may
at any time change AGM's long-term rating outlooks or place such ratings on a watch list for possible
downgrade in the near term. Any downward revision or withdrawal of any ofthe above ratings, the
assignment of a negalive outlook to such ratings or the placement o f such ratings on a negative watch
list may have an adverse effect on the market price of any security guaranteed by AGM. AGM only
guarantees scheduled principal and scheduled interest payments payable by the issuer of bonds insured
by AGM on the date(s) when such amounis were inifially scheduled to become due and payable
(subject to and in accordance with the terms ofthe relevant insurance policy), and does not guarantee
the market price'or liquidity ofthe securities it insures, nor does it.guaranlee that the ratings on such
securities will not be revised or withdrawn.
Current Financial Strength Ratings
On February 10, 2014, Moody's issued a press release stating that it had affirmed AGM's
insurance financial strength rating of "A2" (stable outlook). AGM can give no assurance as lo any
further ratings action that Moody's may take.
On June 12, 2013, S&P published a report in which it affirmed AGM's "AA-" (stable outlook)
financial strength rating. AGM can give no assurance as to any further ratings action that S&P may
take.
For more information regarding AGM's financial strength ratings and the risks relating
thereto, see AGL's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2013.

 Capitalization of AGM
Al December 31. 2013, AGM's policyholders' surplus and contingency reserves were
approximately $3,529 million and its net unearned premium reserve was approximately SI,891
million. Such amounts represent the combined surplus, contingency reserves and net unearned
premium reserve of AGM and its wholly owned subsidiary Assured Guaranty (Europe) Ltd., plus
60.7% o f t h e contingency reserve and net unearned premium reserve of AGM's indirect subsidiary.
Municipal Assurance Corp.
Incorporation of Certain Documents by Reference
Portions of the following document filed by AGL with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (the "SEC"') lhal relate to AGM are incorporated by reference into this Official Statement
and shall be deemed lo be a part hereof; the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2013 (filed by AGL with the SEC on February 28, 2014).
All consolidated financial statements of AGM and all other information relating to AGM
included in, or as exhibits to, documents filed by AGL with the SEC pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, excluding Current Reports or portions thereof
"furnished" under Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 of Fonn 8-K, after the filing ofthe last document referred to
above and before the termination ofthe olfering ofthe Insured Bonds shall be deemed incorporated by
reference into this Official Statement and to be a part hereof from the respective dales of filing such
documents. Copies of materials incorporated by reference are available over the internet at the SEC's
website at htlp://www.sec.gov, at AGL's website at http://www.assuredguaranty.com, or will be
provided upon request to Assured Guaranty Municipal Corp.: 31 West 52nd Street, New York, New
York 10019, Attenfion: Communications Department (telephone (212) 974-0100). Except for the
information referred to above, no information available on or through AGL's website shall be deemed
to be part of or incorporated in this Official Statement.
Any information regarding AGM included herein under the caption "INSURED BONDS" or
included in a document incorporated by reference herein (collectively, the " A G M Information") shall
be modified or superseded to the extent that any subsequently included AGM Information (either
directly or through incorporation by reference) modifies or supersedes such previously included AGM
Information. Any AGM Information so modified or superseded shall not constitute a part of this
Official Statement, except as so modified or superseded.
»
Miscellaneous Matters
AGM or one of its affiliates may purchase a portion o f t h e Insured Bonds or any uninsured
bonds offered under this Official Statement and such purchases may constitute a significant proportion
ofthe bonds offered. AGM or such aftHiate may hold such Insured Bonds or uninsured bonds for
investment or may sell or otherwise dispose of such Insured Bonds or uninsured bonds at any time or
from lime to time.
AGM makes no representation regarding the Bonds or the advisability of investing in the
Bonds. In addition, AGM has not independently verified, makes no representation regarding, and does
not accept any responsibility for the accuracy or completeness of Ihis Official Statement or any
information or disclosure contained herein, or omitted herefrom, other than with respect to the
accuracy ofthe information regarding AGM supplied by AGM and presented under this APPENDIX
G — "BOND INSURANCE."

G-2

 r4?ARAN1^'

MUNICIPAL BOND

^

INSURANCE POLICY

MUNICIPAL

ISSUER:
BONDS:

./^P-o'jcy No:
$ in aggregate principal amount of

-N

Effective Date:
^i$iii=<:„.. Premium: $

ASSURED GUARANTY MUNICIPAL CORP. ("AGM"), ,,fpf consideration ^fepeived, hereby
UNCONDITIONALLY AND IRREVOCABLY agrees to pay to the trusted;(the "Trustee") or paying agent (the
"Paying Agent") (as set forth in the documentation providing for the issu'aii^_.of _and securing the Bonds) for
the Bonds, for the benefit of Ihe Owners or, at the election of AGM, directly!:tQ:'each Own&i, subject only to
the terms of this Policy (which Includes each endorsement hfe^ejp), that "pb'rtlpn of theVprincipal of and
interest on the Bonds that shall become Due for Payment but sh'alt'ySainpaid E}i'.''reasonj6t Nonpayment by
the Issuer.
'"t. ' ^ h - .
'c^^"
On the later of the day on which such prin'^p'alcand inte'rf,st becprpieS' Due for Payment or the
Business Day next following the Business Day;pn whFckAGMVshall '^ave receWed Notice of Nonpayment,
AGM will disburse to or for the benefit of each,';^wner of ^*Bond''ttie5faCe amotjnt of principal of and interest
on the Bond that is then Due for Payment But i&Jto?n unpaidiby reas'ofij.of Nonpayment by the Issuer, but
only upon receipt by AGM, in a form reasonably satisfactory'tp.J^ of (a) evidence of the Owner's right to
receive payment of the principal pii^interesl. then "Dbe for P&^irienl and (b) evidence, including any
appropriate instruments of assignrfient, that all of the'^Owner's .rights with respect to payment of such
pnncipal or interest that is Due for Payment shall thereupofjiyest in AGM. A Notice of Nonpayment will be
deemed received on a given Business Day if it is receiveiS.'p'nor to 1:00 p.m. (New York time) on such
Business Day; otherwise,.;.itJ:will bdjijdeemed received on the next Business Day. If any Notice of
Nonpayment received bxiAGM~is incQi)lp!ele, it shall jbe deemed nof to have been received by AGM for
purposes of the preceding sentence afi'(i?AGM shalf'promptly so advise the Trustee, Paying Agent or
Owner, as appropriafe^^^who ma^:-:Submit''~'aKamended Notice of Nonpayment. Upon disbursement in
respect of a Bond, AGM 's ip l beciOme the^owner of the Bond, any appurtenant coupon to the Bond or right
to receipt of payrn'ent,pf prlhcipal of or interi^st on the Bond and shall be fully subrogated lo the rights of the
Owner, includirig the^'Owner's'-'jight to receive payments under the Bond, fo the extent of any payment by
AGM hereunSer. Payririenf by A^t;^ to the Trustee or Paying Agent for the benefit of Ihe Owners shall, to
the extent theredt, discharge the obligatl'on of AGM under this Policy.
Ejfcept to'inp extent expressly modified by an endorsement hereto, the following terms shall have
thfe meanings specifi^iJ;for all purposes of this Policy. "Business Day" means any day other than (a) a
Saturday, pr,.Sunday or'(b')',a'day on which banking institutions in the Stale of New York or the Insurer's
Fisdeil'Ageflil^reJ^thorizM or required by law or executive order to remain closed. "Due for Payment"
means"(a^ when referring to the principal of a Bond, payable on the stated maturity date thereof or the date
on which the same shall have been duly called for mandatory sinking fund redemption and does not refer to
any earlier date oniwhich payment is due by reason of call for redemption (other than by mandatory sinking
fund redemptiigh)'," acceleration or other advancement of maturity unless AGM shall elect, in its sole
discretion, to pdy such pnncipal due upon such acceleration together with any accrued interest to fhe date
of acceleration and (b) when referring to interest on a Bond, payable on the staled date for payment of
inlerest. "Nonpayment" means, in respect of a Bond, the failure of the Issuer to have provided sufficient
funds to the Trustee or, if there is no Trustee, to the Paying Agent for payment in full of all principal and
interest that is Due for Payment on such Bond. "Nonpayment" shall also include, in respect of a Bond, any
payment of pnncipal or interest that is Due for Payment made to an Owner by or on behalf of the Issuer
which
has
been
recovered
from
such
Owner
pursuant
to
the

G-3

 Page 2 of 2
Policy No. -N
United States Bankruptcy Code by a trustee in bankruptcy in accordance with a final, nonappealable order
of a court having competent jurisdiction. "Notice" means telephonic or telecopied notice, subsequently
confirmed in a signed writing, or written notice by registered or certified mail, from an Owner, the Trustee or
the Paying Agent to AGM which notice shall specify (a) the person or entity making the claim, (b) the Policy
Number, (c) the claimed amount and (d) the date such claimed amount became Due for Payment. "Owner"
means, in respect of a Bond, the person or entity who, at the lime of Nonpayment, is entitled under the
terms of such Bond to payment thereof, except lhat "Owner" shall not include the Issuer or any person or
entity whose direct or indirect obligation constitutes the underlying security for the Bonds..;'''
AGM may appoint a fiscal agent (the "Insurer's Fiscal Agent") for purposes of'ttijs Policy by
giving written notice to the Trustee and the Paying Agent specifying the name,and notice addrfsss of the
Insurer's Fiscal Agent. From and after the date of receipt of such notice by.thej^fUstee.pnd tii^^. Paying
Agent, (a) copies of all notices required to be delivered to AGM pujjsijant 't6Vt"isHPpijcy?-.s i^ll be
simultaneously delivered to the Insurer's Fiscal Agent and to AGM and shSil'npt be deemed receK/M-'until
received by both and (b) all payments required to be made by AGM under this Policy may;,be made directly
by AGM or by the Insurer's Fiscal Agent on behalf of AGM. The InsurePs Fiscal Agent is the,agent of AGM
only and the Insurer's Fiscal Agent shall m no event be liable to any'6'v^'er^for any;ac;t of the Insurer's Fiscal
Agent or any failure of AGM to deposit or cause to be deposited suffibeij.t, funds to make payhients due
under this Policy.
''JiiSj-i.
'"8*^.
-ff
'"C'X,
..p
To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, AGM:;^g'riBes not to-a,ssprt,;and hereby waives,
only for the benefit of each Owner, all rights (whether by counterG[ai'rn;-;setoff or'b.therwise) and defenses
(including, without limitation, the defense of fraud)'i''5whether acguire'd':by subrogation, assignment or
otherwise, to the extent that such rights and defe'nses-^^ay.jbe^ available'tofAGM to avoid payment of its
obligalions under this Policy in accordance with'the express p*rbVfsions'tif lhis "g!6licy.
.:.A'f.::.^
"*''?^^;;:i
This Policy sets forth in full the undertaking of'AGM, aridJshall not be modified, altered or
affected by any other agreement or instroment, inclijdi)>g any modification or amendment thereto. Except to
the extent expressly modified by ansehdorsement heVet6,j,(a) any'premium paid in respect of Ihis Policy is
nonrefundable for any reason whatsoever, including payrrient, or provision being made for payment, of the
Bonds prior lo maturity and (b) this Policy may not be 'cianceled or revoked. THIS POLICY IS NOT
COVERED BY THE PROPERTY/CAS.UALTY INSURANCE SECURITY FUND SPECIFIED IN ARTICLE 76
OF THE NEW YORK INSURANCE LAW.
ii
In witness;.wl).ereof, ASSUREDjiGUARANjTY MUNICIPAL CORP. has caused this Policy to be
executed on its behalf by its Authdnzed Officefi*, --"'""

L* > : I.

ASSURED GUARANTY MUNICIPAL CORP.

,. ,4;

By
Authorized Officer

A subsidiary of Assured Guaranty Municipal Holdings Inc.
31 West 52nd StreeL New York, N.Y. 10019
Form 500NY (5/90)

G-4

(212)826-0100

  

APPENDIX 

REFUNDED BONDS

 

 us PAGE 

o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o

-r

^
-3-

T

T

o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o

^

Tj- '^r - T

^

f^I rv  CN (^1 c^i

r.1

•a
c

o
CO
<

5

O
o
o
o'

~

O O O CD O O
o o o o o o
o o o o o o
'r-'t ir-',' o" '/S O C"'

-

Ox OS <

Q

z
o
oa
Q
u
a

z
u

. o o t~— —; O l

o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o
o o O^ O O O C3
O

'r-j tr\ o

O ' 'n" o ' >/^* '/^r o ' o "

"~'

o^oo^— o o i o o * " i o i — i u - i o - o s O ^ o * ^
o o o s r ^ o o o — o\ — r^—<t^.— 'ooo

" —•' —'•' —
*ri'—

o i " —'" r i ' —" Ol" —" o i " — o f —" r i " o j "

o o o o o o o
U-) u-> vrj
'o 'o o
o ) r-t OJ OJ O l 04 o
•o
l o 'iS
' n «^

o o o o o o o o o
' O ' r > v - i 0 ' o o « o o o

oo Os o

oo 0 \ o

o
o

o
o

o
o

o
o

o
o

o
o

O I O J O I O O I O O J O O O O O O O

>/"i t/-)

i/S l o '/"» »ri  /^ t o »/S

o

i/S

</S

T3
o
o
^

OJ m

O l O l O l OJ O l

—

—

— — r i

OJ o l

OJ

f i rn

"

—

O l O l OJ OJ O l OJ O l O l r i

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

O l OJ

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

r-^ CM r . j t^t r^r r^l CM (N r.1 <N (N rvj f N (^1 {N
^

o

-rt

T

o

-rt

o

-t

o

Q
LU

Q
Z

>•>•>->•>•,-<
c>
i/n
'/-I \o
3

>'>>a><U>-!<0<U\:i^X.^

V/

LU
Qi
-J

oo oo oo oo oo oo oo
-rt-

O CJ
\0

^

r-.
^ O

-It

<<<<<<<
r^, m

rn

<
b

^

rO

m

r n r'l

rn

Ol

O l O J O J O l CM O J

o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o

Ll.

< < < < < < < < < < < < < < <

o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

o
o

0 1 O l O J O J O J O J O ) O J O J O l O l O J O J OvJ f N

 o
p

O
o
o
o
o

O
o
o
o
o

O
o
o
o
o

O
o
o
o
o

O
o
o
o
o

o
o
o
o
c

o
o
o
o
o

o
o
o
o
o

o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o

0

T
3

=

=:

«

-+

*3-*^T-4--i--cr'*Tr-T-r-i--*-T-=r-r-^-ri--r

-r •

"

S

Oj

Ol Ol

r r - r -st0 0 0

T3
B
O

n

f N r s i O J O J f v j fst r*J 0 1 O l r j O J O J O J o i r N r i 0 1

ctj

0

c3 as rt ra

2 22S 2

5

0 0 0 0 0
H E - ; - : — f-

o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o

rN

00
m

oi

»x

0
m
00

0 "
T

NO

oi

0

\o

0 "

0

0
00

o«

0
0 -

0
r n
c n

w-i'
r n

0
T
vO

0
r n

0
01

0
OJ

v-i
01

0
0 w-j

0
0

o»

0

^0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0
0 '

»0
01
0 .

>X
m or- r-

0
0
0
OJ
00

0
0
0
«o'
0
ao

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
OJ

• 0

0
r n

0
0
0
0
cn

0
r n

00

,000

0
0

o_^

,000

0
0
0

,000

0
0
0

,000

0
0
0

,000

0
0
0
0 "
00

,000

o__

,000

0
0

,000

0
0
0

,000

0
0
0

,000

o_^

,000

0
0

,000

,000

Tf

,000

Q

CQ
CO

0
ov 0
l/~> O J
r n

-f

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0

d

r-

rN

' O
r n
0 -

S
CQ

y

Ol

i>
t/i

USI

CL

u
«n
oJ
—
•ri

H

O
'/^
OJ
vo

O O
o
O
'(-I i n
' n

'r>
1^
m
•/-(

</-i
rrn
 /^

o o o
<r> •/-!

V-) O O
o- o
c
i-n o
c
>r)
"/-,

o o o
«0 'O

o o o o
o w-> O

o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o

r - J r > J O I o j O J O J O o t O o J
o
o
i/S
' O '/n
' n
v i »/S ' n

o

o
o
o
o
"/"j vri </S <Oi

o

0
O
o
•n

0 0 0
OC O 'O
oe o rn
T v-i v i

u

~

'1-

0

<=y

u

-G

>

0

ez

C
ni

'/•i •/-! i n

vo

• / - i s o o - o o O s O — > — • r j « * j r n m i : t - i j - » r j * o » 0 0 *

0 0 Os

0

0

0

0

0

0

^

^

^

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0 0 0

u
u

>o »/n •/"! •y'* w-i

O ^ O C D O O O O O O O g O ^ O O O O

0

0

5

0

0

o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o

0

0

0

0

0

irac;

X

•H
E

•0
0

-c
0

E
o

0 .

rn

rn

rn rn m rn

p
r n
0

r n
0
r n
0
0

-r
p

0

0

OJ

r-j

C!

01

0

00
0

00
0

0 0
0

0 0
0

r n
0

-?
0

-30

•30

XT

0

c*
OC
0

T
0

0

0

01

QC
0

00
0

0

OJ

-r
QJ

06
0

CC
0

•30

T
0

T

•a0

rJ

O l

OJ

OJ

OJ

00
0

CO
0

0

0 0
0

CO
0

T

•3-

T
0

•n-

-drsi

0

0

O l

r S

OJ

00
0

CO
0

0

^

^

?

CJ

•S
a.
Q
UJ

5^

00 o   r J rN

—

a z: Z3 o
C O
UJ

CQ CJ Q
O cp O

rt

V , "fx
DO OC
-T
rv O vO

T

T

O

0» m —

rp
i:^

o

u

> . N ^ > ^ 5 m X o > - - s : D < i J j £ ? S ; S
. -1 I. ^ ^

^

^

f""*

r^i

r^j r~v

^

r'!r:
J 0
rN
~ 1 "TT

vi'ooso^vcososO'OsososOsosow-iinwn
OOCOOOOOOOOOCCOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOO

T3-"^-d--*Ti--r'^-:r-rT-:r"«r-r-:T-3-"*'^-3r-o-o~r^r— t~-o-o-r^r^o-i— r^o-j— o-r^o*
s O O s O s O O s o s O s o k O s o v O v o s O s o s O s O s O s O

^ ZZ "Z.
0\
CQ :=;
c: a.
W-i sO >/-, " O
a o 0 0 OG 3 a 0 0
-a- T T f - T

o-

Q

CS
0

u.

(-^ o- 0-

<

v o vO v o VO sC

<

<

< <<< <

ri
0
0
OJ

01 o l r J r J
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
r t r-\ r J r^J

M

J::
3

H

a

5

rJ

O

m
' n 00 —
CJs Os o ^ O
O CT> Os O
^
— ^ r-J

%i

5

oo r -

O D L -t
Li; U J > -

>/- 
00 00 00
T -T
r~
p~
vO s O s o

0 .

rt

c

—
<
0

<<<

0 0 0
0 0 0
rN n

o^

<<<<<<<<<<<<<<!;<<<<
-r

TT

T*- T f T T

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 <
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O C J

r - j 0 1 O J 0 1 O J r i r - j rM O J o l O J r N O J 0 1 O J r J O J o J

<
0
0

O C2 Q O
Vi V I vo O0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0

T

OJ O J O J 0 1 r j

0

5

0

 CITY OF CHICAGO - GENERAL Bosns, PROJECT MD REFUNDING SERIES 2014A AND TAXABLE PROJECT AND REFUNDING SERIES 2014B

 

SCHEDULE I

TERMS AND AUTHORIZATION

SCHEDULEIA

$432,630,000 G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS, P R O J E C T AND REFUNDING S E R I E S 2014A
1.

Aggregate Principal Ainount: $432,630,000

2.

Dated: March 24,2014

3.

]\'laturities, Principal Amounts, Interest Rates, Prices and CUSIP Numbers:

MATURITY

PRJNQPAL

JANUARY 1

AMOUNT

INTEREST RATE (%)

2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036

$ 2,735,000
2,850,000
3,700,000
4,950,000
5,075,000
4,920,000
625,000
4,500,000
5,000,000
4,000,000
10,675,000
23,055,000
30,270,000
3,710,000
36,950,000
15,425,000
42,615,000
44,875,000
49,700,000
69,000,000
68,000,000

4.00
4.00
4.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
4.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.25
5.25
5.00
5.25
5.25
5.25
5.25
5.00
5.00
5.00

4. Interest Payment Dates:
January 1 and July 1.

PRICE

108.935
109.338
• 108.289
112.361
110.911
109.262
100.397
108.436
106.598
104.716
103.351
104.580
103.706
100.000
102.918
103.864
101.673
101.134
98.511
98.217
97.658

CUSIP
167486 SEO
167486 SF7
167486 SG5
167486 SH3
167486 SJ9
167486 SK6
167486 SL4
167486 TA7
167486 SM2
167486 SNO
167486 SP5
167486 SWO
167486 SQ3
167486 SRI
167486 SZ3
167486 SY6
167486 SS9
167486 ST7
167486 SU4
167486 SV2
167486 SX8

July 1, 2014, and semiannually thereafter on each

5. Redemption: The Series 2014A Bonds are subject to optional redemption prior to
maturity, as described belo'w.. The Series 2014A Bonds shall be redeemed only in principal
amounts of $5,000 and integral multiples thereof.
Optional Redemption ofthe Series 2014A Bonds. The Series 2014A Bonds maturing on
and after January 1, 2025, are subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the City, in
whole or in part, on any date on or after January 1, 2024, and if less than all of the outstanding
Series 2014A Bonds of a single maturity and interest rate are to be redeemed, the Series 2014A

 Bonds to be called shall be called by lot and in accordance with the procedures
Trust Com any at a redemption price equal to principal amount of the
Series 014A Bonds being redeemed plus accrued interest to the date ?xed for redemption
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City in hav 0 call any of the
nes 2014 Bonds for optional redemption, in whole or in part; provrd d, hat such sale or
waiver Wil ot adverse affect the excludability of interest on Series A Bonds from
cross inco for federal income tax purposes

-2-

SCHEDULE IB

$450,790,000 G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS,
T A X A B L E P R O J E C T AND REFUNDING S E R I E S 2014B
1.

Aggregate Principal Amount: $450,790,000

2.

Dated: March 24,2014

3.

IMaturity, Principal Ainount, Interest Rate, Price and CUSIP Number:

MATURITY
JANUARY

1

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT

2044
$450,790,000
4. Interest Payment Dates.
January 1 and July 1.

INTEREST RATE

(%)

PRICE

CUSIP

6.314
100.00
167486 802
July 1, 2014, and semiannually thereafter on each

5. Redemption. The Taxable Series 2014B Bonds are subject to both optional and
mandatory redemption prior to maturity, as described below. The Taxable Series 2014B Bonds
shall be redeemed only in principal amounts of $5,000 and integral multiples thereof.
Optional Redemption of the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds with fAake Whole Payment.
The Taxable Series 2014B Bonds are subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the
City, in whole or in part, on any Business Day (as defined below) at a redemption price equal to
the greater of: (A) the principal amount of the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds to be redeemed, or
(B) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest
on the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds to be redeemed, not including any portion of those payments
of interest accrued and unpaid as of the date such bonds are to be redeemed, discounted to the
date of redemption of the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds to be redeemed on a semiannual basis
(assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury Rate (defined
below) plus 40 basis points, plus accrued interest on the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds being
redeemed to the date fixed for redemption.
The make whole optional redemption price of the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds to be
redeemed will be calculated by an independent accounting firm, investment banking firm or
financial advisor (the "Calculation Agent") retained by the City at the City's expense. The Bond
Registrar and the City may rely on the Calculation Agent's determination of the make whole
optional redemption price and will not be liable for such reliance. An authorized officer of the
City shall confirm and transmit the redemption price as so calculated on such dates and to such
parties as shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.
The "Treasury Rate" is, as of any redemption date, the yield to maturity as of such
redemption date of U.S. Treasury securities with a constant maturity (as compiled and published
in the most recent Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.15 (519) that has become publicly

 available four Business Days (as defined below) prior to the redemption date (excluding inflation
indexed securities) (or, i f such Statistical Release is no longer published, any publicly available
source of similar market data)) most nearly equal to the period from the redemption date to the
maturity date of the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds to be redeemed; provided, however, that i f the
period from the redemption date to such maturity date is less than one year, the weekly average
yield on actually traded U.S. Treasury securities adjusted to a constant maturity of one year will
be used. "Business Day" means any day other than a day on which banks in New York, New
York, Chicago, Illinois, or the city in which the Bond Registrar maintains its designated office
are required or authorized to close. The Treasury Rate will be determined by an independent
accounting firm, investment banking firm or financial advisor retained by the City at the City's
expense.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call the Taxable
Series 2014B Bonds for optional redemption.
Mandatory Redemption of tlie Taxable Series 2014B Bonds. The Taxable Series 2014B
Bonds are subject to mandatory redemption at a redemption price equal to the principal amount
thereof, plus accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption, on January 1 of the following
years and in the following principal amounts:
YEAR

PRINCIPAL AMOUNT

2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044

$ 37,770,000
50,625,000
57,670,000
28,255,000
32255,000
34,300,000
101,745,000
108,170,000 (maturity)

Selection of Taxable Series 2014B Bonds for Redemption. If less than all of the Taxable
Series 2014B Bonds are to be redeemed prior to maturity, the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds being
redeemed, or portions thereof to be redeemed, will be selected on a pro-rata pass-through
distribution of principal basis to the extent permitted by and in accordance with procedures of
The Depository Trust Company ("DTC"). If the DTC operational arrangements do not allow for
the redemption of the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds on a pro-rata pass-throiigh distribution of
principal basis, then the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds will be selected for redemption in
accordance with DTC procedures, by lot.

-2-

 SCHEDULE IC

REFUNDED OUTSTANDING INDEBTEDNESS

GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS, REFUNDING SERIES

1993B

Original Principal Amount:

$153,280,000

Dated:

September 15,1993

Originally Issued:

October 14,1993

Escrow Agent, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent:

The Bank of New York Mellon
Trust Company, N.A.

Principal Amount Refunded by
the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds:

$12,425,000

YEAR
(JANUARY 1)

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT
REFUNDED ($)

ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT ($)

INTEREST
RATE(%)

CUSIP

2015

12,425,000

12,425,000

5.125

167486 QB8

(the "Refunded 1993B Bonds")
Call Feature:

The Refunded 1993B Bonds are
not subject to optional redemption
prior to maturity.

 G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS, P R O J E C T AND REFUNDING S E R I E S

1995A-2

Original Principal Amount:

$220,390,000

Dated:

April 1,1996

Originally Issued:

April 3,1996

Escrow Agent, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent:

Amalgamated Bank of Chicago

Principal Amount Refunded by
the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds:

$15 385,000

PRINCIPAL

ORIGINAL

YEAR

AMOUNT

PRINCIPAL

INTEREST

(JANUARY 1)

REFUNDED ($)

AMOUNT ($)

RATE(%)

CUSIP

2015

15,385,000

15,385,00

6.25

167484 CN2

(the "Refunded 1995A-2 Bonds")
Call Feature:

The Refunded 1995A-2 Bonds are
not subject to optional redemption
prior to maturity.

 G E N E R A L O B L I G A T I O N BONDS, P R O J E C T AND REFUNDING S E R I E S

1998

Original Principal Amount:

$426,600,000

Dated:

March 1, 1998

Originally Issued:

April 1,1998

Escrow Agent, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent:

The Bank of New York Mellon
Trust Company, N.A.

Principal Amount Refunded by
the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds:

$6,830,000

PRINCIPAL

ORIGINAL

YEAR

AMOUNT

PRINCIPAL

INTEREST

(JANUARY 1)

R E F U N D E D ($)

AMOUNT ($)

RATE(%)

CUSIP

2015

6,830,000

11,070,000

5.50

167486 KU2

(the "Refunded 1998 Bonds")
The Refunded 1998 Bonds are not
subject to optional redemption
prior to maturity.

Call Feature:

-3-

 GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS, PROJECT AND REFUNDING SERIES 2001A

Original Principal Amount:

$491,760,262.50

Dated:

March 28, 2001

Originally Issued:

March 28,2001

Escrow Agent, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent:
Amalgamated Bank of Chicago
Principal Amount Refunded by~~
the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds:
$2,440,000

(JANUARY 1)

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT
REFUNDED ($)

ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT ($)

RATE(%)

CUSIP

2015

2,440,000

9,345,000

5.50

167485 EG2

YEAR

INTEREST

(the "Refunded 2001A Bonds")
Call Feature:

The Refunded 2001A Bonds are
called for redemption and payment
prior to maturity on April 24,2014,
at the redemption price of par plus
accrued interest to the redemption
date.

-4-

 GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS, PROJECT AND REFUNDING SERIES

Original Principal Amount:

$169,765,000

Dated:

June 13,2002

Originally Issued:

June 13,2002

2002A

Escrow Agent, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent:
AmalgaiTiated Bank of Chicago
Principal Amount Refunded by
the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds:
$780,000
PRINCIPAL
YEAR

AMOUNT

ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL

(JANUARY I)

REFUNDED ($)

AMOUNT ($)

RATE(%)

CUSIP

2015
2016
2017
2018
2019

160,000
170,000
180,000
190,000
80,000

5,510,000
5,810,000
6,120,000
6,450,000
2,720,000

5.375
5.375
5.375
5.000
5.000

167485 GBl
167485 GC9
167485 GD7
167485 W23
167485 W31

INTEREST

(the "Refunded 2002A Bonds")
Call Feature:

The Refunded 2002A Bonds are
called for redemption and payment
prior to maturity on April 24,2014,
at the redemption price of par plus
accrued interest to the redemption
date.

 GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS, PROJECT AND REFUNDING SERIES

Original Principal Amouiit:

$157,990,000

Dated:

April 3,2003

Originally Issued:

April 3,2003

Escrow Agent, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent:

Seaway Bank and Trust
Company

Principal Amount Refunded by
the Series 2014A Bonds:
YEAR
(JANUARY 1)

2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027

2003A

$11,425,000

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT
REFUNDED ($)

ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT ($)

900,000
945,000
995,000
1,050,000
1,105,000
1,160,000
1,225,000*
1,285,000*
1,345,000*
1,415,000

2,515,000
2,645,000
2,785,000
2,930,000
3,085,000
3250,000
3,420,000*
3,590,000*
3,770,000*
3,960,000

Mandatory sinking fund installment of 2027 term txDnd.

INTEREST
RATE(%)

5.25
5.25
5.25
5.25
5.25
5.25
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

CUSIP
167485 Y54
167485 Y62
167485 Y70
167485 Y88
167485 Y96
167485 Z20
167486 QJl,
167486 QJl
167486 QJl
167486 QJl

 Principal Amount Refunded by
the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds:
YEAR
(JANUARY 1)

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT
REFUNDED ($)

2015
2016
2017

770,000
330,000
345,000

$1,445,000
ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT ($)

2,155,000
2270,000
2,390,000

INTEREST
RATE(%)

5.25
5.25
5.25

CUSIP
167485 EQO
167485 ER8
167485 Y47

(collectively, the "Refunded 2003A Bonds")
Call Feature:

The Refunded 2003A Bonds are
called for redemption and payment
prior to maturity on April 24,
2014, at the redemption price of
par plus accrued interest to the
redemption date.

 GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS, PROJECT AND REFUNDING SERIES 2004A

Original Principal Amount:

$408,110,000

Dated:

August 24, 2004

Originally Issued:

August 24, 2004

Escrow Agent, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent;

Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.

Principal Amount Refunded by
the Series 2014A Bonds:

$32,055,000

PRINCIPAL
YEAR

AMOUNT

ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL

INTEREST

(JANUARY 1)

REFUNDED ($)

AMOUNT ($)

RATE (%)

2018
2019
2020
2021
2021
2022
2022
2023 .
2023
2024
2024
2025
2025
2026
2027

1,890,000
1,985,000
2,775,000
1,085,000
2,850,000
1,105,000
2,930,000
1,125,000
2,710,000
1,155,000
2,775,000
2,690,000
1,190,000
2,825,000
2,965,000

11,000,000
11,580,000
12,190,000
5385,000
12,830,000
5,650,000
13,500,000
5,935,000
14210,000
6230,000
14,920,000
6,545,000
15,665,000
16,450,000 .
17270,000

5.25
525
5.25
5.00
525
5.00
5.25
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

CUSIP
167486 HV4
167486 HW2
167486 QW2
167486 RB7
167486 QXO
167486 RC5
167486 QY8
167486 QZ5
167486 RD3
167486 RA9
167486 REI
167485 2H3
167486 RF8
167485 2J9
167485 2K6

 Principal Amount Refunded by
the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds:

$14365,000

PRINCIPAL

ORIGINAL

YEAR

AMOUNT

(JANUARY 1)

REFUNDED ($)

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT ($)

2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2021
2022
2022
2023
2023
2024
2024
2025
2025
2026
2027

1,640,000
30,000
20,000
20,000
25,000
1,570,000
695,000
1,650,000
725,000
1,735,000
770,000 •
1,825,000
805,000
1,920,000
30,000
845,000
30,000
30,000

INTEREST
'

9,435,000
9,930,000
10,455,000
11,000,000
11380,000
12,190,000
5385,000
12,830,000
5,650,000
13300,000
5,935,000
14210,000
6230,000
14,920,000 _
6345,000
15,665,000
16,450,000
17270,000

RATE (%)

5.25
5.25
5.25
525
5.25
5.25
5.00
5.25
5.00
5.25
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

CUSIP
167486 EY3
167486 EZO
167486 HU6
167486 HV4
167486 HW2
167486 QW2
167486 RB7
167486 QXO
167486 RC5
167486 QY8
167486 QZ5
167486 RD3
167486 RA9
167486 REI
167486 2H3
167486 RF8
167486 2J9
167486 2K6

(collectively, the "Refunded 2004A Bonds")
Call Feature:

The Refunded 2004A Bonds are
called for redemption and payment
prior to maturity on April 24,2014,
at the redemption price of par plus
accrued interest to the redemption
date.

 G E N E R A L OBLIGATION REFUNDING BONDS, S E R I E S

2005A

Original Principal Amount:

$441,090,000

Dated:

March 16, 2005

Originally Issued:

March 16,2005

Escrow Agent, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent:

Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.

Principal Amount Refunded by
the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds:

$63 390,000

(JANUARY 1)

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT
REFUNDED ($)

2015

63390,000

YEAR

ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL

INTEREST

AMOUNT ($)

RATE(%)

CUSIP

5.00

167485 BT7

63390,000

(the "Refunded2005A Bonds")
Call Feature:

The Refunded 2005A Bonds are
not subject to optional redemption
prior to maturity.

-10-

 GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS, PROJECT AND REFUNDING SERIES 2005B

Original Principal Amount:

$300350,000

Dated:

August 17,2005

Originally Issued:

August 17,2005

Escrow Agent, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent:

The Bank of New York Mellon
Trust Company, N.A.

Principal Amount Refunded by
the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds:

$2,710,000

YEAR
(JANUARY 1)

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT
REFUNDED ($)

ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT ($)

RATE(%)

CUSIP

2015

2,710,000

3230,000

5.00

167486 JNO

INTEREST

(the "Refiinded 2005B Bonds")
Call Feature:

The Refunded 2005B Bonds are
not subject to optional redemption
prior to maturity.

-11

 GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS, T A X A B L E SERIES

2005C

Original Principal Amount:

$38,925,000

Dated:

August 17,2005

Originally Issued:

August 17,2005

Escrow Agent, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent:

The Bank of New York Mellon
Trust Company, N.A.

Principal Amount Refunded by
the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds:
PRINCIPAL

$4205,000
ORIGINAL

YEAR

AMOUNT

PRINCIPAL

INTEREST

(JANUARY 1)

REFUNDED ($)

AMOUNT ($)

RATE(%)

2015

4 205,000

4205,000

4.88

CUSIP
167485 JJl

(the "Refunded 2005C Bonds")
The Refunded 2005C Bonds are
not subject to optional redemption
prior to maturity.

Call Feature:

•12-

 GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS, T A X A B L E SERIFS

2006B

.Original Principal Amount:

$67 360,000

Dated:

March 29,2006

Originally Issued:

March 29,2006

Escrow Agent, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent:
U.S. Bank National Association
Principal Amount Refunded by
the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds:
$4,920,000
ORIGINAL

YEAR

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT

PRINCIPAL

INTEREST

(JANUARY 1)

REFUNDED ($)

AMOUNT ($)

RATE(%)

2015

4,920,000

8,685,000

535

CUSIP
167485 RU7

(the "Refunded 2006B Bonds")
Call Feature:

The Refunded 2006B Bonds are
not subject to optional redemption
prior to maturity.

-13-

 GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS,PROJECT AND REFUNDING SERIES

2007C

Original Principal Amount:

$312340,000

Dated:

November 8,2007

Originally Issued:

November 8,2007

Escrow Agent, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent:

U.S. Bank National Association

Principal Amount Refunded by
the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds:

$5,735,000

YEAR
(JANUARY 1)

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT
REFUNDED ($)

ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT ($)

RATE(%)

CUSIP

2015

5,735,000

5,735,000

4.00

167485 P96

INI^EREST

(the "Refunded2007C Bonds")
The Refunded 2007C Bonds are
not subject to optional redemption
prior to maturity.

Call Feature:

-14-

 GENERAL OBLIGATION COMMERCIAL PAPER NOTES
AND LINES OF CREDIT

Proceeds from the Series 2014A Bonds and the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds in the
amount of $151,691,054 will be paid to The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N A .
{"BNY"), and used to retire a portion of the City's Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program.
Proceeds from the Series 2014A Bonds and the Taxable Series 2014B Bonds in the
amount of $145,109,175 will be paid to Bank of America, NA. {"BOA"), pursuant to theRevolving Credit Agreement, dated March 1, 2013. Proceeds from the Taxable Series 2014B
Bonds in the amount of $276,771.18 will be paid to the City for interest expenses under said
Agreement.
FUND

ACCOUNT

2014A Project Fund

Equipment Fund

2013A Capital Project Account
2012/2013 Lewis Capita] Projects
Account
2013 Equipment Account

Taxable 2014B Project Fund

2013B Capita] Projects Account

TOTAL

PAYMENT
TOBNY

PAYMENT
TO BOA

$ 19,085,922.19
66,000,104.00

$ 15,429,893.41
34,570,106.59

13380,973.81
53224.054.00
$151,691,054.00

-15-

PAYMENT
TO CITY

95.109.175.00
$145,109,175.00

$276,771.18

 SCHEDULE II

NOTIFICATION OF TAX ABATEMENT

STATE OF ILLINOIS

)

)SS
COUNTY OF COOK

)
NOTIFICATION OF T A X ABATEMENT

$432,630,000
G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS, P R O J E C T AND REFUNDING S E R I E S

2014A

$450,790,000
G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS, T A X A B L E P R O J E C T AND REFUNDING S E R I E S

2014B

OF THE CITY OF CHICAGO

To:

The City Council of the City of Chicago and the County Clerks of The Counties of Cook
and DuPage, Illinois

Please be advised that responsive to authority contained in an Ordinance (the
"Ordinance") adopted by the City Council (the "City Council") of the City of Chicago (the
"City") on February 5, 2014, authorizing the issuance of up to $900,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of general obligation bonds of the City plus original issue discount, on March 24, 2014
the City issued its $432,630,000 General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding
Series 2014A, and $450,790,000 General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding
Series 2014B (collectively, the "Bonds"), having the terms described in that certain Bond
Purchase Agreement dated March 13, 2014 (the "Bond Purchase Agreement") between the City
and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, acting on behalf of itself and as representative of
certain underwriters named therein.
Capitalized terms used herein without definition have the meanings assigned to such
terms in the Ordinance.
Notification of the sale of the Bonds to the City Council and of the determinations made
by the Chief Financial Officer of the City with respect to the sale of the Bonds, the filing of the
Bond Purchase Agreement, and the Official Statement for the Bonds, all as provided for or
required by the Ordinance was made by the filing with the City Clerk of a Notification of Sale
executed and delivered by the Chief Financial Officer on the date of issuance ofthe Bonds.
Please be further advised that Section 7 of the Ordinance provides for a direct annual tax
in and for each of the years 2013 to 2054, inclusive, to pay the interest on the Bonds promptly
when and as the same falls due and to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity.
Pursuant to Section 12 of the Ordinance, please be further advised that the amount of the annual
tax levy requirements for the payment of the principal of and interest on the Bonds resulting
from the sale of the Bonds is less than the levy of taxes authorized in Section 7 of the Ordinance.
I have determined that a reduction in the amount of the tax levy in the years 2013 to 2054,
inclusive, is deemed desirable in connection with the sale of the Bonds. The amount of the taxes

i
3543589.01.09.8 .doc
2205201

I
i

 levied in the Ordinance to pay debt service on the Bonds, the amount of the taxes to be abated
resulting from the sale of ±e Bonds, and the remainder of the taxes levied which is to be
extended for collection are as follows:

LEVY YEAR

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
2051
2052
2053
2054

A M O U N r LEVIED
IN BOND
ORDINANCE

$150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150.000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150.000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00

TAX TO BE
EXI'ENDED
EXCESS LEVY
TO B E A B A T E D

$150,000,000.00
129,019222.00
99321,744.40
96.786,744.40
96,781,144.40
96,045,144.40
94,943,144.40
95,065,644.40
95,474394.40
95315394.40
95,890394.40
97,140394.40
90,665394.40
78,819,144.40
72,814331.90
64,013,706.90
91374,081.90
64,993,894.40
64,971,181.90
62 302,119.40
45,687.119.40
50,137,119.40
83,767,119.40
73296.917.20
69,448379.70
102304,663.50
100288,684.20
100280264.90
35,000,966.90
35,000.146.20
150.000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000.000.00
150,000,000.00
150.000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00
150,000,000.00

FOR PAYMENT OF
THE BONDS

$

0.00
20,980,778.00
50,478255.60
53213255.60
53218,855.60
53,954,855.60
55,056,855.60
54,934355.60
54325,605.60
54,484,605.60
54,109,605.60
52,859,605.60
59334,605.60
71,180,855.60
77,185,468.10
85,986293.10
58,625,918.10
85,006,105.60
85,028,818.10
87,497,880.60
104312,880.60
99,862,880.60
66232,880.60
76,703,082.80
80351,620.30
47,495 336.50
49,711315.80
49,719,735.10
114,999.033.10
114,999.853.80
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

 1n
Respectfully submitted as of this 9H4 day of 2014.

    

. 
Chief Financial Of?cer

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF FILING
NOTIFICATION OF TAX ABATEMENT

The foregoing Notification of Tax Abatement relating to $432,630,000 General
Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2014A, and $450,790,000 General Obligation
Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2014B, of the City of Chicago (the "City") has
been filed in my office as City Clerk of the City and is part of the officialfilesand records of my
office.
I N WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto affixed my signature and caused to be affixed
hereto the corporate seal of the City this
day of i A l ^ M
. 2014.

Susana A. Mendozav
City Clerk
[SEAL]

 SCHEDULE 

REF UNDED BONDS TAX ABATEMENT



STATE OF ILLINOIS

)

) SS
COUNTY OF COOK

)

CERTIFICATE OF REDUCTION OF CERTAIN TAXES L E V I E D TO
PAY PRINCIPAL OF AND INTEREST ON CERTAIN OUTSTANDING
GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS OF THE C I T Y OF CHICAGO
To:

T H E COUNTY CLERKS OF T H E COUNTIES OF COOK AND DUPAGE, ILLINOIS

Please be advised that on February 5, 2014, the City Council of the City of Chicago (the
"City Council") adopted an ordinance (the "Bond Ordinance") authorizing, among other things,
the issuance of (i) $432,630,000 aggregate principal amount of General Obligation Bonds,
Project and Refunding Series 2014A (the "Series 2014A Bonds") and (ii) $450,790,000
aggregate principal amount of General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding
Series 2014B (the "Taxable Series 2014B Bonds," and together with the Series 2014A Bonds,
the "Refunding Bonds") for the purpose of refunding the outstanding General Obligation Bonds
of the City described herein (collectively, the "Refunded Bonds").
Please be further advised that on the 13th day of March, 2014, the Chief Financial Officer
of the City (the "Chief Financial Officer"), with the concurrence of the Chairman of the
Committee on Finance of the City Council, entered into a Bond Purchase Agreement on behalf
of the City with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Representative of certain
underwriters named therein, for the sale of the Refunding Bonds.
Please be further advised that pursuant to the authority provided in Section 15 of the
Bond Ordinance, the Chief Financial Officer is now filing in the offices of (i) the County Clerk
of The County of Cook, Illinois (the "Cook County Clerk") and (ii) the County Clerk of The
County of DuPage, Illinois (the "DuPage County Clerk"), a certificate of reduction of taxes
levied for the years from and after 2013 for the payment of the Refunded Bonds.
You are Therefore Ordered and Directed to abate the taxes levied in each of the
ordinances authorizing the issuance of the Refunded Bonds, as follows.

3543593.01.08.B.doc
2205201

 1. Series 1993B Bonds. For each of the following levy years specified below are
(a) the taxes levied by Section 7 of the Ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council on
September 15, 1993 (the "Series 1993B Bond Ordinance") and filed in each of your offices on
October 14, 1993, authorizing, among other things, the issuance of general obligation bonds of
the City, including the City's General Obligation Bonds, Refunding Series 1993B (the
"Series 1993B Bonds'.'), as adjusted to reflect any prior abatement of taxes by the City; (b) the
amount of taxes that are being abated pursuant to this Certificate of Reduction as a result of the
refunding of certain of the Series 1993B Bonds with a portion of the proceeds of the Refunding
Bonds; and (c) the remainder of those taxes required to be extended to pay when due the
principal of and interest on all outstanding general obligation bonds issued pursuant to the
Scries 1993B Bond Ordinance that have not been so refunded (such amount being equal, for each
levy year, to the difference between the amount specified in column (a) and the amount specified
in column (b)).
(b)

(a)

TAXES LEVIED
BY SERIES

AMOUNT OF

EXACT AMOUNT OF

TAXES ABATED AS A

TAXES REQUIRED TO BE

RESULT OF THE

EXTENDED PURSUANT TO

-

1993B BOND

LEVY YEAR

ORDINANCE*

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020

$15393,019.00
15,801238.00
17,691,150.00
5,184350.00
5,186,919.00
5,188,469.00
5,188,488.00
2,491,463.00

(c)

REFUNDING OF
SERIES

1993B BONDS

$13,061,781.25
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

"As adjusted for any prior abatements.

-2-

THE SERIES

1993B

BOND ORDINANCE

$ 2331237.75
15,801238.00
17,691,150.00
5,184350.00
5,186,919.00
5,188,469.00
5,188,488.00
2,491,463.00

 2. Series 1995A-2 Bonds. For each of the following levy years specified below are
(a) the taxes levied by Section 7 of the Ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council on
November 8, 1995 (the "Series 1995A-2 Bond Ordinance") and filed in each of your offices on
December 13,1995, authorizing, among other things, the issuance of general obligation bonds of
the City, including the City's General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 1995A-2
(the "Series 1995A-2 Bonds"), as adjusted to reflect any prior abatement of taxes by the City;
(b) the amount of taxes that are being abated pursuant to this Certificate of Reduction as a result
of the refunding of certain of the Series 1995A-2 Bonds with a portion of the proceeds of the
Refunding Bonds; and (c) the remainder of those taxes required to be extended to pay when due
the principal of and interest on all outstanding general obligation bonds issued pursuant to the
Series 1995A-2 Bond Ordinance that have not been so refunded (such amount being equal, for
each levy year, to the difference between the amount specified in column (a) and the amount
specified in column (b)).
(a)

(b)

(c)

AMOUNT OF
TAXES ABATED AS A
TAXES LEVIED
BY SERIES

1995A-2 BOND

EXACT AMOUNT OF

RESULT OF THE

TAXES REQUIRED TO BE

REFUNDING OF

EXTENDED PURSUANT TO

SERIES 1995A-2

THE SERIES

1995A-2

LEVY YEAR

ORDINANCE*

BONDS

BOND ORDINANCE

2013
2014
2015
2016

$19,194,462.50
19,192,900.00
19,193,925.00
19,190,450.00

$16,34636230
0.00
0.00
0.00

$ 2,847,900.00
19,192,900.00
19,193,925.00
19,190,450.00

*As adjusted for any prior abatements.

 3. Series 1998 Bonds. For each of the following levy years specified below are (a) the
taxes levied by Section 7 of the Ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council on
December 10, 1997 (the "Series 1998 Bond Ordinance") and filed in the office of (i) the Cook
County Clerk on March 10, 1998 and (ii) the DuPage County Clerk on March 11, 1998,
authorizing, among other things, the issuance of general obligation bonds of the City, including
the City's General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 1998,(the "Series 1998
Bonds"), as adjusted to reflect any prior abatement of taxes by the City; (b) the amount of taxes
that are being abated pursuant to this Certificate of Reduction as a result of the refunding of
certain of the Series 1998 Bonds with a portion of the proceeds of the Refunding Bonds; and
(c) the remainder of those taxes required to be extended to pay when due the principal of and
interest on all outstanding general obligation bonds issued pursuant to the Series 1998 Bond
Ordinance that have not been so refunded (such amount being equal, for each levy year, to the
difference between the amount specified in column (a) and the amount specified in column (b)).
(a)

(b)

(c)

AMOUNT OF
TAXES LEVIED

RESULT OFTHE

BY SERIES 1998 BOND

REFUNDING OF

EXACT AMOUNT OF
TAXES REQUIRED TO BE
EXTENDED PURSUANT TO
THE SERIES 1998

LEVY YEAR

ORDINANCE*

SERIES 1998 BONDS

BOND ORDINANCE

2013
2014
2015

$ 8,877,925.00
13,147275.00
19,971,150.00

$7 205,650.00
0.00
0.00

$ 1,672275.00
13,147 275.00
19,971,150.00

TAXES ABATED AS A

"As adjusted for any prior abatements.

-4-

 4, Series 2001A Bonds. For each of the following le"vy years specified below are
(a) the taxes levied by Section 7 of the Ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council on
November 15,2000 (the "Initial Series 2001A and B Bond Ordinance") and filed in the office of
(i) the Cook County Clerk on January 2, 2001 and (ii) the DuPage County Clerk on
December 28, 2000, as amended by the Ordinance adopted by the City Council on February 7,
2001 and filed in the office of (i) the Cook County Clerk on March 23, 2001 and (ii) the DuPage
County Clerk on March 22, 2001 (the "Amendatory Series 2001A and B Bond Ordinance" and,
collectively with the Initial Series 2001 and B Bond Ordinance, the "Series 2001A and B Bond
Ordinance"), authorizing, among other things, the issuance of general obligation bonds of the
City, including the City's General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2001, issued
as (x) General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2001A (the "Series 2001A
Bonds") and (y) Taxable General Obhgation Bonds, Series 2001B (the "Series 2001B Bonds"
and, collectively with the Series 2001A Bonds, the "Series 2001A and B Boruis"), as adjusted to
reflect any prior abatement of taxes by the City; (b) the amount of taxes that are being abated
pursuant to this Certificate of Reduction as a result of the refunding of certain of the
Series 2001A Bonds with a portion of the proceeds of the Refunding Bonds; and (c) the
remainder of those taxes required to be extended to pay when due the principal of and interest on
all outstanding general obligation bonds issued pursuant to the Series 2001A and B Bond
Ordinance that have not been so refunded (such amount being equal, for each le'vy year, to the
difference between the amount specified in column (a) and the amount specified in column (b)).

[REMAINDER OF PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY B L A N K ; CHART FOLLOWS ON NEXT PAGE]

 LEVY YEAR

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028

(a)

(b)

(c)

TAXES LEVIED

AMOUNT OF
TAXES ABATED AS A
RESULT OF THE
REFUNDING OF
SERIES 2001A BONDS

EXACT AMOUNT OF
TAXES REQUIRED TO BE
EXTENDED PURSUANT TO
THE SERIES 2001A AND B
BOND ORDINANCE

BY SERIES 2001A AND B
BoNTD ORDINANCE*
$ 6,845 352.69
10397,709.19
10399,904.69
10 399397.69
10,605,941.19
10,602,466.19
10399,974.19
10,601,838.19
3,961,980.19
3,965,895.19
3,962,015.19
3,965313.19
3,964,920.19
3,959,940.69
3,960,920.19
3,962,012.69

$

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

*AS adjusted for any prior abatements.

-6-

$

10397,709.19
10399,904.69
10399397.69
10,605,941.19
10,602,466.19
10399,974.19
10,601,838.19
3,961,980.19
3^)65,895.19
3,962,015.19
3,965313.19
3,964,920.19
3,959,940.69
3,960,920.19
3,962,012.69

 5. Series 2002A Bonds. For each of the following levy years specified below are
(a) the taxes levied by Section 7 of the Ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council on
December 5, 2001 (the "Series 2002A Bond Ordinance") and filed in each of your offices on
June 7, 2002, and June 4, 2002, authorizing, among other things, the issuance of general
obligation bonds of the City, including the City's General Obligation Bonds, Project and
Refunding Series 2002A (the "Series 2002A Bonds"), as adjusted to reflect any prior abatement
of taxes by the City; (b) the amount of taxes that are being abated pursuant to this Certificate of
Reduction as a result of the refunding of certain of the Series 2002A Bonds with a portion of the
proceeds of the Refunding Bonds; and (c) the remainder of those taxes required to be extended to
pay when due the principal of and interest on all outstanding general obligation bonds issued
pursuant to the Series 2002A Bond Qrdinance that have not been so refunded (such amount
being equal, for each levy year, to the difference between the amount specified in column (a) and
the amount specified in column (b)).
(a)

(b)

(c)

AMOUNT OF
TAXES ABATED AS A

EXACT A M O U W OF

RESULT OF THE

TAXES REQUIRED TO BE

REFUNDING OF

EXTENDED PURSUANT TO

TAXES LEVIED
BY SERIES
LEVY YEAR

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019

2002A BOND

SERIES

ORDINANCE*

2002A

BONDS

$

$

*As adjusted for any prior abatements.

-7-

THE SERIES

2002A

BOND ORDINANCE

$

 6. Series 2003A Bonds. For each of the following levy years specified below are
(a) the taxes levied by Section 7 of the Ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council on
May 1, 2002 (the "Series 2003A Bond Ordinance") and filed in each of your offices on April 1,
2003, authorizing, among other things, the issuance of general obligation bonds of the City,
including the City's General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2002C, which were
ultimately issued as General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2003A (the
"Series 2003A Bonds"), as adjusted to reflect any prior abatement of taxes by the City; (b) the
amount of taxes that are being abated pursuant to this Certificate of Reduction as a result of the
refunding of certain of the Series 2003A Bonds with a portion of the proceeds of the Refunding
Bonds; and (c) the remainder of those taxes required to be extended to pay when due the
principal of and interest on all outstanding general obhgation bonds issued pursuant to the
Series 2003A Bond Ordinance that have not been so refunded (such amount being equal, for
each levy year, to the difference between the amount specified in column (a)' and the amount
specified in column (b)).

[REMAINDER OF PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK; CHART FOLLOWS ON NEXT' PAGE]

 (b)

(a)

TAXES LEVIED

BY SERIES 2003A
LEVY YEAR

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040

ORDINANCE*

$3226,475.00
3226,050.00
3228325.00
3 228,637 30
322638730
3226,775.00
3229337.50
3 229,41230
3 226,400.00
3230300.00
3229250.00
3,805,000.00
3,198,750.00
3,198,000.00
3,198,750.00
3,900,750.00
3,898,750.00
3,901,000.00
3,087,000.00
3,087250.00
3,087,750.00
3,088250.00
3,088300.00
3,088250.00
3,087250.00
3,085250.00
3,087,000.00
3,087,000.00

*As adjusted for any prior abatements.

BOND

(c)

AMOUNT OF

EXACT AMOUNT OF

TAXES ABATED AS A

TAXES REQUIRED TO BE

RESULT OFTHE

EXTENDED PURSUANT TO

REFUNDING OF

THE SERIES

2003A

SERIES 2003A BONDS

BOND ORDINANCE

$1,432300.00
952,075.00
949,750.00
1,486,637.50
1,484387.50
1,484,775.00
1,48733730
1,487,412.50
1,484,400.00
1,488 300.00
1,487250.00
1,483,000.00
1,485,750.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

$1,793,975.00
2273,975.00
2278,775.00
1,742,000.00
1,742,000.00
1,742,000.00
1,742,000.00
1,742,000.00
1,742,000.00
1,742,000.00
1,742,000.00
2322,000.00
1,713,000.00
3,198,000.00
3,198,750.00
3,900,750.00
3,898,750.00
3,901,000.00
3,087,000.00
3,087250.00
3,087,750.00
3,088250.00
3,088300.00
3,088250.00
3,087 250.00
3,085 250.00
3,087,000.00
3,087,000.00

,

 7. Series 2004A Bonds. For each of the following levy years specified below are
(a) the taxes levied by Seciion 7 of the Ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council on
May 26, 2004 and filed in each of your offices on August 24, 2004 (the "Series 2004A and B
Bond Ordinance"), authorizing, among other things, the issuance of general obligation bonds of
the City, including the City's (x) General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2004A
(the "Series 2004A Bonds") and (y) General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 2004B (the
"Series 2004B Bonds" and, collectively with the Series 2004A Bonds, the "Series 2004A and B
Bonds"), as adjusted to reflect any prior abatement of taxes by the City; (b) the amount of taxes
that are being abated pursuant to this Certificate of Reduction as a result of the refunding of
certain of the Series 2004A Bonds with a portion of the proceeds of the Refunding Bonds; and
(c) the remainder of those taxes required to be extended to pay when due the principal of and
interest on all outstanding general obligation bonds issued pursuant to the Series 2004A and B
Bond Ordinance that have not been so refunded (such amount being equal, for each levy year, to
the difference between the amount specified in column (a) and the' amount specified in
column (b)).
(a)

(b)

(c)

TAXES LEVIED

AMOUNT OF
TAXES ABATED AS A
RESULT OF THE
REFUNDING OF
SERIES 2004A BONDS

EXACT AMOUNT OF
TAXES REQUIRED TO BE
EXTENDED PURSUANT TO
THE SERIES 2004A AND B
BOND ORDINANCE

BY SERIES 2004A AND B
LEVY YEAR

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032

BOND ORDINANCE*

$ 9,058,900.00
9,062,100.00
12,646,950.00
12,647,687 30
12,645 237 30
14,873,787.50
11200,175.00
11,089,925.00
10,688312.50
10392,01230
835926230
6221312.50
6218,762.50
6219,012.50
6221,762.50
6218250.00
23,614300.00
23,612250.00
4,437300.00
4,436250.00

$4,008,800.00
2312,700.00
2,301,125.00
4,190,075.00
4,189,800.00
6,419275.00
8,126,16230
8,015,912.50
7,614300.00
7318,000.00
5 285 250.00
3,147300.00
3,144,750.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

*As adjusted for any prior abatements.

-10-

$ 5,050,100.00
6,749,400.00
10345,825.00
8,457,61230
8,455,43730
8,45431230
3,074,01230
3,074,01230
3,074,01230
3,074;012.50
3,074,01230
3,074,01230
3,074,01230
6219,01230
6221,762.50
6218250.00
23,614300.00
23,612250.00
4,437300.00
4,436250.00

 8. Series 2005A Bonds. For each of the following levy years specified below are
(a) the taxes levied by Section 7 of the Ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council on
February 9, 2005 and filed in each of your offices on March 3, 2005 and March 7, 2005 (the
"Series 2005A Bond Ordinance"), authorizing, among other things, the issuance of general
obligation bonds of the City, including the City's General Obligation Refunding Bonds,
Series 2005A (the "Series 2005A Bonds"), as adjusted to reflect any prior abatement of taxes by
the Cily; (b) the amount of taxes that are being abated pursuant to this Certificate of Reduction as
a result of the refunding of certain of the Series 2005A Bonds with a portion of the proceeds of
the Refunding Bonds; and (c) the remainder of those taxes required to be extended to pay when
due the principal of and interest on all outstanding general obligation bonds issued pursuant to
the Series 2005A Bond Ordinance that have not been so refunded (such amount being equal, for
each levy year, to the difference between the amount specified in column (a) and the amount
specified in column (b)).
(a)

(b)

(c)

LEVY YEAR

TAXES LEVIED
BY SERIES 2005A BOND
ORDINANCE*

AMOUNT OF
TAXES ABATED AS A
RESULT OF THE
REFUNDING OF
SERIES 2005A BONDS

EXACT AMOUNT OF
TAXES REQUIRED TO BE
EXTENDED PURSUANT TO
THE SERIES 2005A
BOND ORDINANCE

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026

$79315,025.00
70,052,96230
57,164387.50
32388,837.50
30,858,737.50
30,734,487.50
• 15310237.50
15,49123730
7,828,48730
8,645,487 30
5,880,737.50
5207,06230
338636230
3,096,81230

'

$66,769300.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00 .
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

*As adjusted for any prior abatements.

-11-

$12345 325.00
70,052,96230
57,16438730
32388,83730
30,858,73730
30,734,487 30
1531023730
15,491,237.50
7,828,487.50
8,645,487 30
5,880,737.50
5207,062.50
3386362.50
3,096,81230

 9. Series 2005B Bonds. For each of the following levy years specified below are
(a) the taxes levied by Section 7 of the Ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council on
July 27, 2005 and filed in each of your offices on August 17, 2005 (the "Series 2005B and
Direct Access Bond Ordinance") authorizing, among other things, the issuance of general
obligation bonds of the City, including the City's (x) General Obligation Bonds, Project and
Refunding Series 2005B (the "Series 2005B Bonds"), (y) General Obligation Direct Access
Bonds, Series 2005-1, Series 2005-2 and Series 2005-3 (collectively, the "Series 2005 Direct
Access Bonds") and (z) General Obligation Direct Access Bonds, Series 2006-1 (the
"Series 2006 Direct Access Bonds" and, collectively with the Series 2005B Bonds and the
Series 2005 Direct Access Bonds, the "Series 2005B and Direct Access Bonds"), as adjusted to
reflect any prior abatement of taxes by the City; (b) the amount of taxes that are being abated
pursuant to this Certificate of Reduction as a result of the refunding of certain of the
Series 2005B and Direct Access Bonds with a portion of the proceeds of the Refunding Bonds;
and (c) the remainder of those taxes required to be extended to pay when due the principal of and
interest on all outstanding general obligation bonds issued pursuant to the Series 2005B and
Direct Access Bonds that have not been so refunded (such amount being equal, for each levy
year, to the difference between the amount specified in column (a) and the amount specified in
column (b)).

[REMAINDER OF PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK; CHART FOLLOWS ON NEXT PAGE]

-12-

 (a)

LEVY YEAR

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038

(b)

(c)

AMOUNT OF
TAXES ABATED AS A

EXACT AMOUNT OF
TAXES REQUIRED TO BE

TAXES LEVIED

RESULT OF THE

EXTENDED PURSUANT TO

BY SERIES 2005B ANTD

REFUNDING OF

DIRECT ACCESS BOND

SERIES 2005B AND

THE SERIES 2005B AND
DIRECT ACCESS

ORDINANCE* ,

DIRECT ACCESS BONDS

BOND ORDINANCE

$38,128,146.45
35,496,159.16
40356,185.28
55,145 303.82
45308,41632
41,135,716.32
48243,137.78
42,093,968.82
49371,965 32
48258,822.82
44,673,011.78
44,849,17032
52346,405 32
52336,85532
44,648226.78
48,910,01532
38,637 20932
38,635357.26
28,606294.64
28228,740.46
22,865,480.45
32,838,82733
21,953,67432
35,864,808.46
35,871,45638
20353388 39

$

.

*AS adjusted for any prior abatements.

-13-

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

$

35,496,159.16
40,356,18528
55,145303.82
45 308.41632
41,135,716.32
48243,137.78
42,093,968.82
49371,965 32
48258,822.82
44,673,011.78
44,849,17032
52346,40532
52336,85532
44,648226.78
48,910,01532
38,637209.32
38,635357.26
28,606294.64
28228,740.46
22,865,480.45
32,838,82733
21,953,67432
35,864,808.46
35,871,45638
20,35338839

 10. Series 2005C Bonds. For each of the following levy years specified below are
(a) the taxes levied by Section 7 of the Ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council on
July 27 , 2005 (the "Series 2005C Bond Ordinance") and filed in each of your offices on
August 17, 2005, authorizing, among other things, the issuance of general obligation bonds of
the City, including the City's General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 2005C (the
"Series 2005C Bonds"), as adjusted to reflect any prior abatement of taxes by the City; (b) the
amount of taxes that are being abated pursuant to this Certificate of Reduction as a result of the
refunding of certain of the Series 2005C Bonds with a portion of the proceeds of the Refunding
Bonds; and (c) the remainder of those taxes required to be extended to pay when due. the
principal of and interest on all outstanding general obligation bonds issued pursuant to the
Series 2005C Bond Ordinance that have not been so refunded (such amount being equal, for each
levy year, to the difference between the amount specified in column (a) and the amount specified
in column (b)).

(a)

(b)

(c)

AMOUNT OF
TAXES ABATED AS A
TAXES LEVIED
BY SERIES 2005C BOND
LEVY YEAR

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017

RESULT OF THE

TAXES REQUIRED TO BE

REFUNDING OF

EXTENDED PURSUANT TO

SERIES

ORDINANCE*

2005C

BONDS

$

$

*AS adjusted for any prior abatements.

-14-

EXACT AMOUNT OF

THE SERIES 2005C
BOND ORDINANCE

 11. Series 2006B Bonds. For each of the following \ t \ y years specified below are
(a) the taxes levied by Section 7 of the Ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council on
March 1, 2006 (the "Series 2006B Bond Ordinance") and filed in each of your offices on
March 28, 2006, and March 27, 2006, authorizing, among other things, the issuance of general
obligation bonds of the City, including the City's General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series
2006B (the "Series 2006B Bonds"), as adjusted to reflect any prior abatement of taxes by the
City; (b) the amount of taxes that are being abated pursuant to this Certificate of Reduction as a
result of the refunding of certain of the Series 2006B Bonds with a portion of the proceeds of the
Refunding Bonds; and (c) the remainder of those taxes required to be extended to pay when due
the principal of and interest on all outstanding general obligation bonds issued pursuant to the
Series 2006B Bond Ordinance that have not been so refunded (such amount being equal, for each
levy year, to the difference between the amount specified in column (a) and the amount specified
in column (b)).
(a)

(b)

(c)

AMOUNT OF
TAXES ABATED AS A
RESULT OF THE

EXACT AMOUNT OF
TAXES REQUIRED TO BE

REFUNDING OF

E X I ENDED PURSUANT TO

TAXES LEVIED
BY SERIES
LEVY YEAR

2013
2014

2006B BOND

SERIES

ORDINANCE*

$

*AS adjusted for any prior abatements.

-15-

2006B

THE SERIES

2006B

BONDS

BOND ORDINANCE

$

$

 12. Series 2007C Bonds. For each of the following levy years specified below are
(a) the taxes levied by Section 7 of the Ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council on
September 27, 2007 and filed in each of your offices on November 7, 2007 (the "Series 2007C
Bond Ordinance"), authorizing, among other things, the issuance of general obligation bonds of
the City, including the City's General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2007C
(the "Series 2007C Bonds"), as adjusted to reflect any prior abatement of taxes by the City;
(b) the amount of taxes that are being abated pursuant to this Certificate of Reduction as a result
of the refunding of certain of the Series 2007C Bonds with a portion of the proceeds of the
Refunding Bonds; and (c) the remainder of those taxes required to be extended to pay when due
the principal of and interest on all outstanding general obligation bonds issued pursuant to the
Series 2007C Bond Ordinance that have not been so refunded (such amount being equal, for each
levy year, to the difference between the amount specified in column (a) and the amount specified
in column (b)).

[REMAINDER OF PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK; CHART FOLLOWS ON NEXT PAGE]

-16-

 LEVY YEAR

2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036^
2037 ^
2038
2039
2040

(a)

(b)

(c)

TAXES LEVIED
BY SERIES 2007C BOND
ORDINANCE*

AMOUNT OF
TAXES ABATED AS A
RESULT OF THE
REFUNDING OF
SERIES 2007C BONDS

EXACT AMOUNT OF
TAXES REQUIRED TO BE
EXTENDED PURSUANT TO
THE SERIES 2007C
BOND ORDINANCE

$30,173326.50
30323,610.00
35,664,960.00
40,960,721.00
35,424,059.00
31,814,429.00
27,468,947.00
28,751391.00
28,930361.00
27,706213.00
43,942,650.00
42,863,150.00
35,042,900.00
35,968,400.00
40,713,650.00
39,637,900.00
39202,650.00
21,800,150.00
47,436,400.00
47311,979.00
26,491,151.06
14,085,63430
14,058,981.00
14,040349.75
7,748,666.00
23262,782,20
23211221.00
23,148,98530

$

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

*As adjusted for any prior abatements.

-17-

•$

30323,610.00
35,664,960.00
40,960,721.00
35,424,059.00
31,814,429.00
27,468,947.00
28,751391.00
28,930361.00
27,706213.00
43,942,650.00
42,863,150.00
•35,042,900.00
35,968,400.00
40,713,650.00
39,637,900.00
39 202,650.00
21,800,150.00
47,436,400.00
47311,979.00
26,491,151.06
14,085,63430
14,058,981.00
14,040349.75
7,748,666.00
23262,782.20
2321U21.00
23,148,98530

 IN

WITNESS WHEREOF,

I have executed this Certificate on this

,2014.

Is A. Scott<Chief rmancia

CERTIHCATE OF REDUCTION FOR REFUNDED BONDS

day of

 STATE OF ILLINOIS

)

) SS
COUNTY OF COOK

)
FILING CERTIFICATE

I , David D . Orr, County Clerk of The County of Cook, Illinois (the "County"), do hereby
certify that on the
day of
, 2014, there has been filed in my office as tax
extension officer of the County and remains on file in my office a certificate of the Chief
Financial Officer of the City of Chicago, dated
, 2014, entitled:
CERTIHCATE OF REDUCTION OF CERTAIN TAXES LEVIED TO PAY PRINCIPAL
OF AND INTEREST ON CERTAIN OUTSTANDING GENERAL OBLIGATION
BONDS OF THE CITY OF CHICAGO
I N WITNESS WHEREOF,

Illinois, this

day of

I have set my hand and affixed the seal of The County of Cook,
, 2014.

County Clerk of The County of Cook, Illinois
[SEAL]

 STATE OF ILLINOIS

)

) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE

)
FILING CERTIFICATE

I , Gary A. King, County Clerk of The County of DuPage, Illinois (the "County"), do
hereby certify that on the
day of
, 2014, there has been filed in my office as
tax extension officer of the County and remains on file in my office a certificate of the Chief
Financial Officer of the City of Chicago, dated
, 2014, entided:
CERTIFICATE OF REDUCTION OF CERTAIN TAXES LEVIED TO PAY PRINCIPAL
OF AND INTEREST ON CERTAIN OUTSTANDING GENERAL OBLIGATION
BONDS OF THE CITY OF CHICAGO
IN WITNESS WHEREOF,

Illinois, this

day of

I have set my hand and affixed the seal of The County of DuPage,
, 2014.

County Clerk of The County of DuPage,
Illinois
[SEAL]

 ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF F I L I N G NOTIFICATION OF SALE

The foregoing Notification of Sale of $432,630,000 aggregate principal amount of
General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2014A, and $450,790,000 aggregate
principal amount of General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2014B, of
the City of Chicago (the "City") has been filed in rny office as City Clerk of the City and is part
of the official files and records of my office.

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto affixed my signature and caused to be affixed
hereto the corporate seal of the City this i^^-t^ day of l\A<tt^yl
2014.

Susana A. Mendoza
City Clerk
[SEAL]

\

 