City of Chicago
Office of the City Clerk

F2015-100

Document Tracking Sheet

Meeting Date:

7/29/2015

Sponsor(s):

Dept./Agency

Type:

Communication

Title:

Notification of sale of City of Chicago General Obligation
Bonds Series 2015A (the Series 2015A Bonds) and
General Obligation Bonds Taxable Series 20158 (the
Taxable Series 20158 Bonds)

Committee(s) Assignment:

 DEPARTMENT

OF

FINANCE

CITY OF CHICAGO
'?•

r:

July 21, 2015

tX>~ :
'^ Z'C

CO

cn
.via

Susana Mendoza
City Clerk
121 North LaSalle Street, Room 107
Chicago, Illinois 60602

RE: City of Chicago, Illinois, $345,530,000 General Obligation Bonds Series 2015A (the "Series 2015A
Bonds") and $742,860,000 General Obligation Bonds Taxable Series 2015B (the "Taxable Series 2015B
Bonds")
Dear Ms. Mendoza,
Attached is the Notification of Sale which is required to be filed with your office pursuant to
Section 12 o f t h e ordinance authorizing the issuance o f t h e Series 2015A Bonds and the Taxable Series
2015B Bonds, which was passed by the City Council on June 17, 2015.
Very Truly Yours,

Carole L
Chief Financial Officer

121 N O K T H L A S . A L L l i STREIJT. S U I T E 700. C H I C A G O .

I L L I N O I S 6()«02

 S'TATEOF ILLINOLS

)
)SS

COUNTY OF COOK

)
NOTIFICATION OF SALE

$345330,000
G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS, S E R I E S

2015A

$742,860,000
G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS, T A X A B L E S E R I E S

2015B

BEING ISSUED BY THE C I T Y OF CHICAGO

To: The City Council ofthe City of Chicago
Please be advised that responsive to authority contained in an Ordinance (the
"Ordinance") adopted by the City Council (the "City Council") of the City of Chicago (the
"City") on June 17, 2015, authorizing the issuance of up to $1,100,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of general obligation bonds of the City, plus original issue discount, a Bond Purchase
Agreement dated July 16, 2015 (the "Series 2015A Bond Purchase Agreement"), providing for
the sale of $345,530,000 aggregate principal amount of General Obligation Bonds, Series 201SA
(the "Series 2015A Bonds"), and a Bond Purchase Agreement dated July 15,20IS (the "Taxable
Series 2015B Bond Purchase Agreement" and, together with the Series 20ISA Bond Purchase
Agreement, the "Bond Purcha.se Agreements") providing for the sale of $742,860,000 aggregate
principal amount of General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 20I5B (the "Tccxable
Series 2015B Bonds" and together with the Series 20ISA Bonds, the "Bonds"), each were
entered into by me as the Chief Financial Officer of the City, with the concurrence of the
Chairman of the Committee on Finance of the City Council of the City, and the purchasers
thereof named below (the "Underwriters"). The Bonds of each series are being issued pursuant
to the terms of a separate trust indenture, each dated as of July 1,201S (each an "Indenture" and
collectively the "Indentures"), by and between the City and Zions First National Bank, Chicago,
Illinois, as Trustee, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent for the Bonds (the "Trustee").
The Series 201SA Bonds were sold at a purchase price of $338,783,430.15 (representing
the aggregate principal amount of the Series 201SA Bonds less net original issue discount of
$4,570,044.25, and less an underwriters' discount of $2,176,525.60); and the Taxable
Series 201SB Bonds were sold al the purchase price of $726,784,205.13 (representing the
aggregate principal amount of the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds less an original issue discount of
$11,396,932.85 and less an underwriters' discount of $4,678,862.02). The aggregate purchase
price for the Bonds is equal to $1,065,567,635.28 (vvhich represents the aggregate principal
amount of the Bonds less net original issue discount of $15,966,977.10. and less an aggregate
underwriters' discount of $6,855,387.62). The Underwriters for ihe Bonds are Morgan Stanley
& Co. LLC, Siebert Brandford Shank & Co., L.L.C, William Blair & Company, Academy
Securities. Inc.. BMO Capital Markets GKST, Inc., Citigroup Global Markets. Inc.. Estrada
381291601 (I.S due

 Hinojosa & Company, Inc., George K. Baum & Company, J.J.B. Hilliard, W.L. Lyons, LLC,
Melvin & Company, and North South Capital LLC. The compensation (including all fees) of
$6,855,387.62 being paid to the Underwriters in connection with the sale of the Bonds represents
less than 5% of the aggregate principal amount ofthe Bonds.
Capitalized terms used herein without definition shall have the meanings assigned to such
terms in the Ordinance.
The proceeds of the Series 201 SA Bonds will be used to provide funds for the purpose of
paying (i) costs of the Series 20ISA Debt Management Project (as defined below), (ii) certain
interest to become due on the Series 2015A Bonds, and (iii) expenses of issuance of the Series
201 SA Bonds (including the Underwriters' discount). "Series 2015A Debt Management
Project" means (i) the payment of costs of the Debt Management Purposes described in
Schedule IC attached hereto and (ii) any other expenditure of proceeds of the Series 20ISA
Bonds authorized by the City Council after the date of execution and delivery of the Indenture
related to the issuance of the Series 2015A Bonds.
The proceeds of the Taxable Series 201SB Bonds will be used to provide funds for the
purpose of paying (i) costs of the Series 201SB Debt Management Project (as defmed below), (ii)
certain interest to become due on the Taxable Scries 201SB Bonds and (iii) expenses of issuance
of the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds (including the Underwriters' discount). "Series 2015B Debt
Management Project" means (i) the payment of costs of the Debt Management Purposes
described in Schedule ID attached hereto and (ii) any other expenditure of proceeds of the
Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds authorized by the City Council after the date of execution and
delivery ofthe Indenture related to the issuance of the Series Taxable 2015B Bonds.
Attached hereto as Exhibits I through 5, respectively, are executed copies of the Series
20ISA Bond Purchase Agreement, the Taxable Series 201 SB Bond Purchase Agreement, the
Official Statement dated July 16, 201S, the Indenture pursuant to which the Series 20I5A Bonds
are being issued, and the Indenture pursuant to which the Taxable Series 20ISB Bonds are being
issued.
Pursuant to Section 12 of the Ordinance, the undersigned hereby makes the following
determinations: (a) the principal amount of the Bonds is $1,088,390,000 and the designation of
the Bonds and principal amount of the Series 201SA Bonds and the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds
are set forth in the first paragraph hereof, (b) the Series 201SA Bonds are issued as Current
Interest Bonds in denominations of $5,000 or any integral multiple thereof, the Taxable Series
20ISB Bonds are issued as Current Interest Bonds in denominations of $1,000 and integral
multiples thereof, and none of the Bonds are sold as Direct Purchase Bonds, Capital
Appreciation Bonds or Convertible Bonds, (c) the Bonds mature and are subject to redemption as
set forth in Schedules lA and IB attached hereto, (d) the principal amounts and interest rates on
the Current Interest Bonds are set forth in Schedules lA and IB attached hereto, (e) a description
ofthe Series 2015A Debt Management Project, including (i) an identification ofthe Outstanding
Line and CP Indebtedness lo be paid or refunded vvith proceeds of the Series 20ISA Bonds and
the date on and price at wliich such Outstanding Line and CP Indebtedness shall be paid or
refunded, (ii) a description of the Financing Transaction Undertakings lo be financed with the

 proceeds of the Series 20ISA Bonds, and (iii) an identification of any funds of the City to which
reimbursement is made with proceeds of the Series 20ISA Bonds and the amounts of such
reimbursements, is set forth in Schedule IC attached hereto, (f) a description of the Series 201 SB
Debt Management Project, including (i) an identification of the Outstanding Line and CP
Indebtedness to be paid or refunded with proceeds of the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds and the
date on and price at which such Outstanding Line and CP Indebtedness shall be paid or refunded,
(ii) a description of the Financing Transaction Undertakings to be financed with the proceeds of
the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds, and (iii) an identification of any funds of the City to which
reimbursement is made with proceeds of the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds and the amounts of
such reimbursements, is set forth in Schedule ID attached hereto, (g) the Underwriters of the
Bonds and the compensation paid thereto are as set forth above, and such compensation does not
exceed five percent of the principal amount of the Bonds, (h) the Bonds are issued in book-entry
form; the book entry depository is The Depository Trust Company, (i) the sale price of the Bonds
is as set forth in the second paragraph of this Notification of Sale, and such price with respect to
each series of the Bonds is not less than 85 percent of the principal amount of such series of the
Bonds, and (j) the Trustee shall serve as Bond Registrar for each series of the Bonds pursuant to
the Indentures.
Pursuant to Section 7 of the Bond Ordinance, the amount of taxes to be levied for the
Bonds in each year will be less than the levy of taxes specified in Section 7 of the Bond
Ordinance and I have determined, pursuant to the Ordinance, to abate the excess levy of taxes
not necessary for the purpose of payment of the principal of and interest on the Bonds, as
specified, together with the annual tax levy requirements for the payment of the principal and
interest on the Bonds, in the Notification of Tax Abatement filed concurrently with the City
Clerk, a copy of which is attached hereto as Schedule II.

 Respectfully submitted as of this j L j ^ d a y of J ^ ^ - A ,

201S

Carole L. Brown
Chief Financial Officer

jSiGNA TU'RE

PAGE

TO No'TiFic'A HON

OT S A L E !

 EXHIBIT 1

SERIES 2015A BOND PURCHASE AGREEMENT

BOND PURCHASE A G R E E M E N T

$345,530,000
C I T Y OF CHICAGO
G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS,
SERIES 2015A

July 16,2015
City of Chicago
Office ofthe City Comptroller

Ladies and Gentlemen:
The undersigned, Morgan Stanley &. Co. LLC (the "Representative"), on behalf of
itself and the other underwriters listed below (collectively, the "Underwriters"), hereby offers
to enter into this Bond Purchase Agreement (the "Agreement") with the City of Chicago (the
"City"), for the purchase by the Underwriters, and sale by the City, of all but not less than all
ofthe City's General Obligation Bonds, Series 2015A (the "Series 2015A Bonds"). This offer
is made subject to the acceptance by the City, evidenced by the signature of a duly authorized
officer of the City in the space provided below, on or before 5:00 P.M., Chicago time on the
date hereof, and upon such acceptance this Agreement shall be in full force and effect in
accordance with its terms and shall be binding on the City and the Underwriters.
The Representative is authorized, and hereby represents and warrants that it is
authorized, to act as Representative of the Underwriters and to execute this Agreement and
has full authority to take such action as it may deem advisable with respect to all matters
pertaining to this Agreement. Each Underwriter hereby severally represents to the City that it
is registered and in good standing under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(the "1934 Act"), as a municipal securities dealer.
The primary role of the Underwriters is to purchase the Series 20ISA Bonds, for
resale to investors, in an arm's-length commercial transaction between the City and the
Underwriters. The Underwriters have financial and other interests that differ from those of
the City.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed
thereto in the Preliminary Official Statement, as defined herein.
1.

Agreement to Sell and Purchase.

(a)
Upon the terms and conditions and based upon the representations, warranties
and covenants herein set forth, the Underwriters, jointly and severally, hereby agree to
purchase from the City and the City hereby agrees to sell to the Underwriters the Series 2015 A

  

Bonds at a price equal to $338,783,430.15 (which represents the aggregate principal amount
of the Series 20ISA Bonds less an Underwriters' discount of $2,176,525.60 and less a net
original issue discount of $4,570,044.25).
(b)
It shall be a condition to the City's obligation to sell and deliver the Series
20ISA Bonds that all the Series 2015A Bonds be purchased and paid for by the Underwriters
at the Closing (as defined in Section 7 hereof) and a condition to the Underwriters' obligation
to purchase and pay for the Series 2015A Bonds that all Series 20ISA Bonds be issued, sold
and delivered by the City at the Closing.
(c)
The City and the Underwriters did execute on July 15, 2015, an agreement
(the "Series 20I5B Bond Purchase Agreement") with respect to the sale and delivery by the
City and the purchase by the Underwriters ofthe General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series
2015B ofthe City (the "Series 2015B Bonds" and, together with the Series 2015A Bonds, the
"Bonds").
2.
Bond Authorization. The Series 2015A Bonds are authorized by an ordinance
ofthe City adopted by the City Council of the City (the "City Council") on June 17,2015 (the
"Ordinance"), and the Series 201 SA Bonds will be issued pursuant to and secured by a Trust
Indenture dated as of July 1, 2015 (the "Trust Indenture"), between the City and Zions First
National Bank, as Trustee, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent for the Series 2015A Bonds (the
"Trustee"). The Series 2015A Bonds will mature, bear interest and have such other terms and
conditions as are set forth on Schedule I hereto.
3.
The Preliminarv Official Statement. Attached hereto as Exhibit A is a copy
of the Preliminary Official Statement of the City, dated July 8, 2015, relating to the Series
201 SA Bonds (the "Preliminary Official Statement"). For purposes of Rule 15c2-12 ("Rule
I5c2-12") adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") under the 1934
Act, the Preliminary Official Statement is "deemed final" by the City with respect to the Series
2015A Bonds as of its date except for the omission of such infonnation as is permitted by
Rule 15c2-12(b)(1).
4.
Public Offering Price. The Underwriters have agreed to make a bona fide
public offering of the Series 20 ISA Bonds at the initial offering prices set forth on Schedule
I . The Representative will provide the City and Co-Bond Counsel (as defined herein) with a
closing certificate confirming the reoffering yields and prices of the Series 2015A Bonds and
the UndenATiters acknowledge that the City and Co-Bond Counsel will rely on such certificate
and that such reliance is material to the City in entering into this Agreement and in connection
with the delivery of the Series 201 SA Bonds.
5.

The Official Statement.

(a)
The City shall provide, or cause to be provided, at its expense, to the
Underwriters no later than the earlier of (i) seven (7) business days after the date of this
Agreement or (ii) one (1) day prior to the Closing, three copies of the Official Statement of
the City relating to the Bonds (the "Official Statement"), signed on behalf ofthe City by the
Chief Financial Officer and the Official Statement so delivered shall be "final" for purpo.ses

 of Rule I5c2-12. Such delivery ofthe Official Statement shall occur in sufficient time to
accompany any confirmation that requests payment from any customer and in sufficient
quantity to comply with the rules of the SEC and the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board
(the "MSRB").
(b)
If on or prior to the Closing or within twenty-five (25) days afler the "end of
the underwriting period" (as hereinafter defined) any event known to the City relating to or
affecting the City, the Ordinance or the Series 2015 A Bonds, shall occur which would cause
any statement of a material fact contained in the Official Statement to be materially incorrect
or materially incomplete, the City will promptly notify the Representative in writing ofthe
circumstances and details of such event. If, as a result of such event, it is necessary, in the
joint opinion of the City and the Representative to amend or supplement the Official Statement
by stating or restating any material fact necessary in order to make the statements made
therein, in light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading, the City
will forthwith prepare and fiirnish to the Underwriters a reasonable number of copies of an
amendment of or a supplement to such Official Statement in form and substance satisfactory
to the City and the Representative, at the City's sole cost and expense, which will so amend
or supplement such Official Statement so that, as amended or supplemented, the Official
Statement will not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any material
fact necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in light of the circumstances
under which they were made, not misleading. For purposes of this Agreement, the term "end
of the underwriting period" shall mean the later of the date of Closing or the date on which an
Underwriter no longer retains an unsold balance of the Series 20ISA Bonds for sale to the
public. Tlie Underwriters agree that the date on which the end ofthe underwriting period shall
occur shall be the date of the Closing, unless the Underwriters otherwise notify the City in
writing prior to twenty-five (25) days after the date of the Closing that, to tlie best of their
knowledge, the Underwriters retain for sale to the public an unsold balance of the Series
2015A Bonds, in which case the end of the underwriting period shall be extended for
additional periods of thirty (30) days each upon receipt of additional written notification from
the Underwriters that, to the best of their knowledge, there exists an unsold balance of the
Series 20 ISA Bonds, but in no event shall the end ofthe underwriting period be extended
longer than sixty (60) days after the date of Closing.
The Official Statement shall be provided for distribution, at the expense of the City,
in such quantity as may be requested by the Underwriters as set forth above in order to
permit the Underwriters to comply with Rule 15c2-12, and the applicable rules of the
MSRB, with respect to distribution of the Official Statement. The City shall prepare the
Official Statement, including any amendments thereto, in word-searchable PDF format as
described in the MSRB Rule G-32 and shall provide the electronic copy of the wordsearchable PDF format of the Official Statement to the Underwriters no later than one (1)
business day prior to July 21, 2015, to enable the Underwriters to comply wilh MSRB Rule
G-32.
(c)
At or prior to the Closing, the Representative shall file, or cause to be filed,
the Official Statement with the MSRB in compliance with the rules of the SEC and the MSRB.
Promptly after the date after which the Underwriters are no longer obligated under Rule 15c212(b)(4) to deliver to potential customers the Official Statement, the Representative shall

 notify the City of such date.
6.
Representations, Warranties and Covenants of the City. The City represents
and warrants to the Underwriters as of the date hereof that:
(a)
The City is a mimicipal corporation and home rule unit of local govemment,
existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois (the "State").
(b)
The City Council has: (i) duly adopted the Ordinance, which remains in ftill
force and effect; (ii) duly approved the execution and delivery of the Trust Indenture; (iii) duly
authorized the use of the Preliminary Official Statement prior to the date hereof in connection
with the public offering and sale of the Bonds and duly authorized the execution, delivery and
distribution of the Official Statement in connecfion with the public offering and sale of the
Bonds; and (iv) duly authorized and approved the execution and delivery of the Series 2015A
Bonds, this Agreement and a continuing disclosure undertaking pursuant to the provisions of
Secfion (b)(5) of Rule 15c2-12 (the "Undertaking").
(c)
With the exception of the disclosure described in the Preliminary Official
Statement in the section titled "SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE - Corrective
Action Related to Certain Bond Disclosure Requirements", the City has not failed during
the previous five years to comply in all material respects with any previous undertakings
in a written continuing disclosure contract or agreement under Rule 15c2-l 2.
(d)
The City has full legal right, power and authority to: (i) adopt the Ordinance;
(ii) execute and deliver this Agreement, the Trust Indenture, the Undertaking and the Official
Statement; (iii) issue, sell and deliver the Series 2015A Bonds to the Underwriters pursuant
to the Ordinance and the Trust Indenture and as provided in this Agreement; and (iv) pay for
the Series 2015A Bonds from the sources pledged under the Ordinance and the Trust
Indenture for their payment.
(e)
The adoption of the Ordinance and compliance with the provisions thereof do
not, and the execution and delivery of this Agreement, the Trust Indenture, the Undertaking
and the Official Statement will not, in any material manner, violate any applicable law or
administrative regulation of the State or any department, division, agency or instrumentality
thereof or of the United States of America (the "United States") or of any department, division,
agency or instrumentality thereof, or any applicable judgment or decree to which the City is
subject, or confiict with, in a material manner, or constitute a material breach of, or a material
default under, any ordinance, agreement or other instrument to which the City is a party or is
otherwise bound.
(f)
All approvals, consents and orders of, and filings (except, i f any, under
applicable state "blue sky" laws) with, any govemmental authority, board, agency or
commission having jurisdiction which would constitute a condition precedent to the
performance by the City of its obligations under this Agreement, the Undertaking, the
Ordinance, the Trust Indenture, and the Series 2015A Bonds have been obtained or made.
(g)
The financial statements of the City contained in the Official Statement fairly
present the financial position and results of operations of the City as of the date and for the

 periods therein set forth and the City has no reason to believe that such financial statements
have not been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as
applied to governmental units, consistently applied except as otherwise noted therein.
(h)
The Official Statement (excluding any description of The Depository Trust
Company ("DTC"), informafion under the captions "THE BONDS - Book-Entry System,"
"RATINGS," "UNDERWRITING," "TAX MATTERS," APPENDIX A — "SUMMARY
OF THE INDENTURES", APPENDIX B — "ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC
INFORMATION (with respect to the information under the headings "— Economy," "—
Percentage of Total Non-Farm Employment by Major Industry Sector" and "and "—
Housing Market," and information relating to population, per capita personal income and
employment, and unemployment rate with respect to the United States, the State of Illinois,
Cook County and the Chicago MSA), Tables 1-10 included in APPENDIX E —
"RETIREMENT FUNDS," APPENDIX F — "OPINIONS OF CO-BOND COUNSEL,"
and information furnished by the Underwriters for use in the Official Statement) as of its
date does not, and at the Closing will not, contain any untrue statement of a material fact
or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements therein, in light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading in any material respect.
(i)
Information in the Third Party Sourced Retirement Fund Tables is sourced
from documents published by the Retirement Funds and the City takes no responsibility
for the accuracy and completeness of such information; however, nothing has come to the
attention of the City which would lead the City to believe that the Third Party Sourced
Retirement Fund Tables are not true and correct in all material respects;
(j)
The Ordinance, the Trust Indenture, this Agreement, and the Undertaking,
when duly executed and delivered by the parties thereto, as appropriate, "will constitute legal,
valid and binding obligations ofthe City enforceable in accordance with their terms (except
to the extent that enforceability may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency and other laws
affecting creditors' rights or remedies and the availability of equitable remedies generally).
(k)
When delivered to the Representative, and paid for by the Underwriters at the
Closing in accordance with the provisions of this Agreenient, the Series 2015 A Bonds will be
duly authorized, executed and delivered and will constitute legal, valid and binding
obligations of the City enforceable in accordance with their terms (except to the extent that
enforceability may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency and other laws affecting creditors'
rights or remedies and the availability of equitable remedies generally).
(I)
Except as disclosed in the Official Statement, there is no action, suit or
proceeding, at law or in equity, or before or by a court, public board or body, pending or, to
the City's knowledge, threatened, against the City wherein an unfavorable decision, ruling or
finding would materially adversely affect (i) the validity or enforceability of the Series 2015A
Bonds, the Ordinance, the Trust Indenture, this Agreement, or the Undertaking or (ii) the
excludability from federal income taxation of the interest on the Series 201 SA Bonds under
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code").
(m)

The City has not taken, or omitted taking, and will not take or omit to take.

 any action, which action or omission would adversely affect the excludability from federal
income taxation of the interest on the Series 2015 A Bonds under the Code.
(n)
Any certificate signed by any Authorized Officer of the City and delivered to
the Representative at the Closing in connection with the issuance or sale ofthe Series 2015 A
Bonds shall be deemed to be a representation and warranty by the City to the Underwriters as
to the statements made therein as of the date so delivered.
(o)
The City will make available such information, execute such instruments and
take such other action in cooperation with the Underwriters as the Representative may
reasonably request to qualify the Series 2015A Bonds for offering and sale under the "blue
sky" or other securities laws and regulations of such states and other jurisdictions ofthe United
States as the Underwriters may designate in writing; provided, however, that nothing in this
Section 6(o) shall require the City to consent to general service of process in any state or
jurisdiction other than the State.
(p)
The City will apply the proceeds of the Series 20ISA Bonds in accordance
with the Ordinance and the Trust Indenture.
(q)
The City acknowledges and agrees that: (i) the transaction contemplated by
this Agreement is an ami's length, commercial transaction between the City and the
Underwriters in which the Underwriters are acting solely as a principal and not acting as a
municipal advisor, financial advisor or fiduciary to the City; (ii) the Underwriters have not
assumed any advisory or fiduciary responsibility to the City with respect to the transaction
contemplated hereby and the discussions, undertakings and procedures leading thereto
(irrespective of whether any Underwriter has provided other services or is currently providing
other services to the City on other matters); (iii) the Underwriters have financial and other
interests that differ from those of the City; and (iv) the City has consulted its own legal,
account, tax, financial and other advisors, as applicable, to the extent it has deemed
appropriate.
7.
Closing. Subject to the conditions set forth in this Agreement, the closing (the
"Closing") ofthe sale of the Series 2015A Bonds by the City and the purchase of the Series
201 SA Bonds by the Underwriters, shall take place at approximately 9:00 a.m., Chicago time,
on July 21,2015, at the offices of Chapman and Cutler LLP, 111 W. Monroe Street, Chicago,
Illinois (or at such other time, date and place as the City and the Representative mutually
agree).
(a)
At the Closing, the City shall deliver or cause to be delivered to DTC, as
securities depository, for the account of the Underwriters one fully registered certificate for
each, interest rate and maturity of the Series 201 SA Bonds in the aggregate principal amount
thereof, registered in the name of Cede & Co., as nominee for DTC.
(b)
Upon delivery of the Series 2015 A Bonds to the Representative at the Closing,
the City will deliver to tlie Representative the closing documents as set forth in Section 10
hereof
(c)

The Representative will accept delivery of the Series 2015A Bonds and pay

 the purchase price therefor at the Closing by delivering federal funds checks or making federal
funds wire transfers or otherwise confirming deposits of same day funds, as the City shall
direct, to the City's account at a bank specified by the City, in an aggregate amount equal to
the purchase price of the Series 2015 A Bonds pursuant to Section I hereof
8.
Reliance and Further Conditions ofthe Underwriters. The Underwriters have
entered into this Agreement in reliance upon the representations, warranties and agreements
ofthe City herein and the perfonnance by the City of its obligations hereunder, both as of the
date hereof and as of the date of the Closing. The Underwriters' obligations under this
Agreement are and shall be subject to the following further condifion that at the time of the
Closing, the Ordinance, the Tmst Indenture, the Undertaking, and this Agreement shall be in
full force and effect and the Ordinance and the Official Statement shall not have been
amended, modified or supplemented except as may have been agreed to with respect to the
Official Statement pursuant to Section 5 hereof, and the City shall have duly adopted and there
shall be in full force and effect such ordinances as, in the opinion of Chapman and Cutler
LLP, Chicago, Illinois, and Hardwick Law Fimi, Chicago, Illinois, as co-bond counsel ("CoBond Counsel") shall be necessary in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby
and thereby.
9.

Termination of Agreement.

(a)
The Underwriters shall have the right to cancel their obligations to purchase
the Series 2015A Bonds and have the further right to terminate this Agreement, without
liability therefor, by written notice to the City from the Representative, if, between the date
hereof and the Closing:
(i)
legislation shall be introduced in or enacted by the Congress of the
United States or adopted by either House thereof or shall have been introduced and
favorably reported for passage to either House by any committee of such House lo
which such legislation had been referred for consideration, or a decision shall have
been rendered by or adopted by either House or a decision by a court of the United
States or the United States Tax Court or an order, ruling or regulation shall have
been issued or proposed by or on behalf of the Treasury Department of the United
States or the Internal Revenue Service, with respect to federal income taxation upon
interest received on obligations of the general character ofthe Series 2015A Bonds
which, in the Representative's reasonable opinion, does materially adversely affect
the market price or marketability of the Series 2015 A Bonds, or
(ii)
legislation shall have been enacted by the Congress of the United
States to become effective on or prior to the Closing, or a decision of a court of the
United States shall be rendered, or a stop order, ruling, regulation or proposed
regulation by or on behalf of the SEC or other agency having jurisdiction over the
subject matter shall be issued or made, to the effect that the issuance, sale and
delivery ofthe Series 201 SA Bonds, or any similar obligations of any similar public
body of the general character of the City, is in violation of, or has the effect of
requiring the contemplated offering, sale and distribution of the Series 20ISA
Bonds to be registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the

 enactment of the Ordinance or any ordinance of similar character is in violafion of
the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended, or with the purpose or effect of
otherwise prohibifing the issuance, sale or delivery of the Series 201 SA Bonds as
contemplated hereby or by the Official Statement or of obligations of the general
character of the Series 2015A Bonds which, in the Representative's reasonable
opinion, does materially adversely affect the market price or marketability of the
Series 2015 A Bonds, or
(iii)
there shall have occurred any event which in the Representative's
reasonable opinion, after consultation with its legal counsel, makes the Official
Statement ehher (A) contain an untrue statement of a material fact or (B) omit to
state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the statements
contained therein not misleading in any material respect, and the City fails to
prepare or furnish or fails to cause to be prepared or furnished to the Underwriters
an amendment or supplement to the Official Statement, pursuant to Section 5
hereof, which will amend or supplement the Official Statement so that, as amended
or supplemented, the Official Statement will not contain any untrue statement of a
material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary
to make the statements contained therein not misleading in a material respect, or
(iv)
there shall be in force a general suspension of trading on The New
York Stock Exchange, Inc., or minimum or maximum prices for trading shall have
been fixed and be in force, or maximum ranges for prices for securities shall have
been required and be in force on The New York Stock Exchange, Inc., whether by
virtue of a determinafion by that Exchange or by order of the SEC or any other
govemmental authority having jurisdiction, or
(v)
a general banking moratorium shall have been declared by either
federal. State or New York authorities having jurisdiction and be in force, or
(vi)
any legislation, ordinance, mle or regulation shall be enacted by the
City or State, or any department or agency thereof, or a decision by any court of
competent jurisdiction within the State shall be rendered which, in the reasonable
opinion of the Representative, would have a material adverse effect on the market
price or marketability of the Series 2015A Bonds, or
(vii)
a war involving the United States, an outbreak or escalation of or
adverse development in hostilities or terrorist activities or other national or
international calamity or crisis shall have occurred which, in the reasonable opinion
of the Representafive, materially adversely affects the market price or marketability
of the Series 2015 A Bonds, or
(viii)
there shall be any proceeding or threatened proceeding by the SEC
against the City and such proceeding or threatened proceeding, in the reasonable
opinion of the Representative, materially adversely affects the markel price or
marketability of the Series 201 SA Bonds, or

 (ix)
an event idenfified in the 201 SB Bond Purchase Agreement shall
occur giving the Underwriters the right to cancel their obligation to purchase the
Series 2015B Bonds pursuant to the Series 201 SB Bond Purchase Agreement.
(b)
If the City shall be unable to safisfy the conditions contained in this Agreement
or if the Underwriters' obligations shall be terminated for any reason permitted by this
Agreement, this Agreenient shall terminate and neither the City nor the Underwriters shall
have any further obligations hereunder.
10.

Closing Conditions.

(a)
The Underwriters' obligations to purchase, to accept delivery of and to pay for
the Series 201 SA Bonds at the Closing shall be conditioned upon the City's performance of
its obligations imder Sections 6, 7 and 8 hereof and the Underwriters' receipt ofthe following
documents:
(i)
three copies of the Official Statement manually executed by the Chief
Financial Officer;
(ii)
the approving opinions, dated the date of the Closing, of Co-Bond
Coimsel to the City, substantially in the form attached to the Official Statement as
Appendix F;
(iii)
the opinions, dated the date of the Closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters and to the City, of Co-Bond Counsel,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit B-1;
(iv)
the letters dated the date of the closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters and to the City, of Co-Bond Counsel,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit B-2;
(v)
a letter dated the date of the closing and addressed to the City of
Chapman and Cutler LLP, Special Pension Disclosure Counsel to the City in
connection with certain pension matters described in the Official Statement,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit B-3, which letter shall also
either be addressed to or accompanied by a reliance letter to the Representative on
behalf ofthe Underwriters;
(vi)
an opinion, dated the date of the Closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, ofthe Corporation Counsel ofthe City,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit C;
(vii)
an opinion or opinions, dated the date ofthe Closing and addressed to
the Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, of Mayer Brown LLP, Chicago,
Illinois, as counsel for the Underwriters ("Underwriters' Counsel"), in form and
substance satisfactory to the Representative;
(viii)

an opinion or opinions, dated the date ofthe Closing and addressed to

 the Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, of Duane Morris LLP, Chicago,
Illinois, and Shanahan & Shanahan LLP, Chicago, Illinois, Co-Disclosure Counsel
to the City, substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit D;
(ix)
a certificate, dated the date of the Closing, signed by the Chief
Financial Officer, to the effect that (A) the representations and warranties of the
City herein are correct in all material respects as ofthe date of the Closing; and (B)
there has been no material adverse change in the financial condition of the City
since December 31, 2014, as reflected in Appendix C to the Official Statement,
except as set forth in the Official Statement;
(x)
a certificate of the Trustee to the effect that the Tmstee has full legal
right, power and authority to act as the Trustee, Bond Registrar, and Paying Agent
under the Ordinance and the Trust Indenture;
(xi)
a certificate, dated the date of the Closing, signed by the
Representative, in form and substance satisfactory to the City and Co-Bond
Counsel;
(xii)
an executed copy of the Undertaking substantially in the form
summarized in the Official Statement under the heading "SECONDARY
MARKET DISCLOSURE";
(xiii)

an executed copy of the Trust Indenture;

(xiv)
a copy of an agreement between the City and DTC relating to the
safekeeping and book-entry form of the Series 201 SA Bonds;
(xv)
a copy, duly certified by the City Clerk of the City, of the Ordinance,
as passed by the City Council and approved by the Mayor;
(xvi)
evidence satisfactory to the Representative that the Series 201 SA
Bonds have ratings of "BBB+" (negative outlook) by Standard & Poor's, a division
of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., "BBB+" (negative outlook) by Fitch, and
"A-" (stable outlook) by Kroll Bond Rating Agency;
(xvii)
such additional closing certificates and agreements related to the
Series 2015 A Bonds, including such tax certifications and agreements relating to
the Series 2015A Bonds, as Co-Bond Counsel shall reasonably determine to be
necessary to deliver their opinions as provided hereinabove.
(b)
All of the opinions, letters, certificates, instruments and other dociunents
mentioned above or elsewhere in this Agreement will be deemed to be in compliance with the
provisions hereof if, but only if, they are in form and substance satisfactory to the
Representative, in its reasonable judgment. Payment for the Series 201 SA Bonds and
acceptance of the Series 20 ISA Bonds by the Underwriters shall constitute acknowledgment
by the Underwriters of the City's full perfomiance hereunder.

10

 11.
Expenses. The Underwriters shall be under no obligation to pay, and the City
shall pay, any and all expenses incident to the performance of the City's obligations
hereunder, including but not limited to: (a) the cost of the preparation and printing or other
reproduction of the Ordinance, the Trust Indenture, the Preliminary Official Statement and
the Official Statement, as well as the cost of shipping the Official Statement; (b) the cost of
the preparation and printing of the Series 2015A Bonds; (c) the fees and disbursements of CoBond Counsel and Co-Disclosure Counsel; (d) the fees and disbursements of any experts or
consultants retained by the City; (e) the fees of the Tmstee; and (f) the fees for the municipal
bond ratings on the Series 2015A Bonds. The City shall be responsible for any meal, travel
and lodging expenses of its own officials and employees. The Underwriters will pay the
expenses incurred by them or any of them in connecfion with their public offering and
distribution of the Series 2015A Bonds, including, but not limited to, the CUSIP Service
Bureau charges, the fees and expenses of Underwriters' Counsel and advertising expenses
directly incurred by the Underwriters.
The City shall pay for any expenses (included in the expense component of the
Underwriters' discount) incurred by the Underwriters on behalf of the City in connection
with the marketing, issuance and delivery of the Series 2015A Bonds, including, but not
limited to, meals, transportation, lodging, and entertainment of the City's employees and
representatives.
12.
Notices. Any notice or other communication to be given to the City under this
Agreement shall be given by delivering the same in writing at the address set forth above, and
any such notice or other communication to be given to the Underwriters shall be given by
delivering the same in writing to the Representative at the following address:
Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC

Attenfion: William Daley, Managing Director
13.
No Third Partv Beneficiaries, Survival, Etc. This Agreement is made solely
for the benefit ofthe City and the Underwriters (including the successors or assigns of any
Underwriter), and no other person, partnership, association or corporation including any
purchaser of the Series 2015A Bonds shall acquire or have any right hereunder or by virtue
hereof All ofthe representations and agreenients by the City in this Agreement shall remain
operative and in full force and effect regardless of any investigation made by or on behalf of
the Underwriters and shall survive the delivery of and payment for the Series 2015 A Bonds.
14.
Governing Law. The rights and obligations of the parties to this Agreement
shall be governed by, constmed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the State, without
giving effect to the conflict of laws provisions thereof
15.
Representations and Warranties of the Underwriters. The Underwriters
represent and warrant that:
(a)

They have heretofore authorized the Representative to execute any

  

document on behalf of or exercise any authority of and otherwise to act for, the
Underwriters in all matters under or pertaining to this Agreement. Each Underv^'iter has
warranted and confirmed to the Representative, and the Representative warrants and
confirms to the City that: (i) it is duly registered under the 1934 Act, as a broker/dealer or
municipal securities dealer and has duly paid the fee prescribed by MSRB Rule A-12 or is
exempt from such requirements, (ii) it is (a) a member in good standing of the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority ("FINRA") or (b) otherwise eligible under FINRA rules to
receive underwriting discounts and concessions available to such members with respect to
underwriters of municipal securities, and (iii) it has complied with the dealer registration
requirements, if any, of the various jurisdictions in which it offers Series 20 ISA Bonds for
sale. The Underwriters represent, warrant and covenant that they are and will be in
compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulafions in connection with the offering,
issuance and sale ofthe Series 20 ISA Bonds.
(b)
To the knowledge of the Underwriters, no person holding office ofthe City,
either by election or appointment, is in any manner financially interested, either directly in
the officer's own name or indirectly in the name of any other person, association, trust or
corporation, in any contract being entered into or the performance of any work to be carried
out in connection with the issuance and sale of the Series 20 ISA Bonds upon which said
officer may be called upon to act or vote.
(c)
Each Underwriter severally represents to the City that neither the
Underwriter, nor any Affiliate thereof is listed on any ofthe following lists maintained by
the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States Department of the Treasury, the
Bureau of Industry and Security of the United States Department of Commerce, the United
States Department of State or their successors, or on any other list of persons or entities
with which the City may not do business under any applicable law, rule, regulation, order
or judgment: the Specially Designated Nationals List, the Denied Persons List, the
Unverified List, the Entity List, the List of Statutorily Debarred Parties and the Excluded
Parties List. Such representation shall be provided to the City in the form attached hereto
as Exhibit E.
For purposes of this representation, "Affiliate," when used to indicate a
relationship •with a specified person or entity, means a person or entity that, directly or
indirectly, through one or more intermediaries, controls, is controlled by or is under
common control with such specified person or entity, and a person or entity shall be
deemed to be controlled by another person or entity, if controlled in any manner
whatsoever that results in control in fact by that other person or entity (or that other person
or entity and any persons or entities with whom that olher person or entity is actingjointly
or in concert), whether directly or indirectly and whether through share ownership, a trust,
a contract or otherwise.
(d)
The Underwriters may enter into distribution agreements with certain
financial institutions for the retail distribufion of municipal securifies, including the Series
2015A Bonds, at the initial public offering price. In accordance with such arrangements,
the Underwriters may share a portion of its underwriting compensation.

12

 16.
Approval. The approval of the Underwriters when required hereunder or
the determination of their satisfaction as to any document referred to herein shall be in
writing signed by the Representative and delivered to the City.
17.
Successors and Assigns. This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be
binding upon the parties and their successors and assigns, and will not confer any rights upon
any other person. The terms "successors" and "assigns" shall not include any purchaser of
any Bond or Series 2015 A Bonds from the Underwriters merely because of such purchase.
18.
Enforceability. If any provision of this Agreement shall be held or deemed to
be or shall, in fact, be invalid, inoperative or unenforceable as applied in any particular case
in any jurisdiction or jurisdictions, or in all jurisdictions, because it conflicts with any
provisions of any constitution, statute, mle or public policy, or for any other reason, such
circumstances shall not have the effect of rendering the provision in question invalid,
inoperative or unenforceable in any other case or circumstances, or of rendering any other
provision or provisions of this Agreement invalid, inoperative or unenforceable to any extent
whatsoever.
19.
Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in several coimterparts, each
of which shall be regarded as the original and all of which shall constitute one and the same
document.
20.
Cooperation with Citv Inspector General. As acknowledged by each
Underwriter's Representation Letter, each Underwriter understands and agrees that it is
required to and will comply with the provisions of Chapter 2-56 of the Municipal Code of
Chicago. Pursuant to Section 2-56-090 of the Municipal Code of Chicago, it shall be the
duty of each Underwriter to cooperate with the inspector general in any invesfigation or
hearing undertaken pursuant to Chapter 2-56. Every Underwriter shall report, directly and
without undue delay, to the City's inspector general any and all information concerning
conduct by any person which such Underwriter knows to involve corrupt activity, pursuant
to Section 2-156-018(b) of the Municipal Code of Chicago. As acknowledged by each
Underwriter's Representation Letter, any Underwriter's knowing failure to report corrupt
acfivity as required in subsection (b) of Section 2-156-018 of the Municipal Code of
Chicago, shall consfitute an event of default under this Agreeinent. For purposes of
subsection (b) of Section 2-156-018 of the Municipal Code of Chicago, "corrupt activity"
shall mean any conduct set forth in subparagraph (a)(1), (2) or (3) of Section 1-23-020 of
the Municipal Code of Chicago:
(a)
bribery or attempted bribery, or its equivalent under any local, state
or federal law, of any public officer or employee of the City or of any sister agency;
or
(b)
theft, fraud, forgery, perjury, dishonesty or deceit, or attempted
theft, fraud, forgery, perjury, dishonesty or deceit, or its equivalent under any local,
state or federal law, against the City or of any sister agency; or

13

 (c)

conspiring to engage in any of the acts set forth in items (a) or (b) of

above.
The Underwriter (individually and collectively) agrees and covenants that no
payment, gratuity or offer of employment shall be made in connection with this Agreement,
by or on behalf of a subcontractor to the Underwriter or any higher-tier subcontractor or
any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order
related to this Agreement.
21.
Entire Agreement. This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between
the parties hereto with respect to the matters covered hereby, and supersedes all prior
agreements and imderstandings between the parties. This Agreement shall only be amended,
supplemented or modified in a writing signed by both of the parties hereto.

14

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Bond Purchase
Agreement in connection with the City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Series
2015A, to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date first above
written.
Very truly yours,
THE UNDERWRITERS
Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
William Blair & Company
Seibert Brandford Shank & Co., LLC
Academy Securities, Inc.
BMO Capital Markets GKST Inc.
Citigroup Global Markets, Inc.
Estrada Hinojosa & Company, Inc.
George K. Baum & Company
J.J.B. Hilliard, W.L. Lyons, LLC
Melvin & Company
North South Capital LLC
By: MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC
As Representative

Fdward M. Burke
Chairman, Committee on
Finance of the City Council

 SCHEDULE I

TERMS OF CITY OF CHICAGO GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS,
SERIES 2015A
1.

Aggregate Principal Aniount: $345,530,000

2.
Dated: Date of Issuance (Expected to be July 21, 2015)
3.
Maturities, Principal Amounts, Interest Rates, Prices and CUSIP Numbers:

4.

Maturity
(.lanunrv 1)

Princinal Amount

2019
2020

$ 4.965,000
7,380.000

2021

Interest
Rate

Price

CUSIP

5.000%
5.000

103.511
103.579

I67486WC9
I67486WD7

7.870,000

5.000

102.874

167486WE5

2022

8,320,000

5.000

101.537

167486WF2

2023

8,845,000

5.000

100.366

167486Vk'GO

2024

5,415.000

5.000

99.385

167486WH8

2026

19,390,000

5.000

97.692

167486 WJ4

2027

24.925,000

5.250

98.980

167486 WKl

2028

33,585,000

5.250

98.206

167486 WL9

2029

35.275,000

5.375

98.539

167486WM7

2033

88,100,000

5.500

98.454

167486WN5

2034

36,430,000

5.500

98.179

I67486WP0

2035

16,420.000

5.500

98.008

167486WQ8

2039

48,610.000

5.500

97.553

167486 WR6

Redemption.

The Series 2015A Bonds are subject to both optional and mandatory redemption prior to
maturity, as described below, only in principal amounts of $5,000 and integral multiples thereof
Optional Redemption.
The Series 2015 A Bonds maturing on and after January 1, 2026, arc subject to redemption
prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole or in part, on any date on or after January 1,
2025, and if less than all of the outstanding Series 2015A Bonds of a single maturity and interest
rate are to be redeemed, the Series 2015A Bonds called shall be called by lot in such principal
amounts and from such maturities and interest rates as the City shall determine, at a redemption
price equal to the principal amount of the Series 2015A Bonds being redeemed plus accrued interest
to the date fixed for redemption.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call any of the Series
2015A Bonds for optional redemption, in whole or in part; provided, that such sale or waiver will

 not adversely affect the excludability of interest on the Series 2015A Bonds from gross income for
federal income tax purposes.
Mandatory Redemption of the Series 20 ISA Bonds.
The Series 2015A Bonds due January 1, 2033, are subject to mandatory redemption prior
to maturity, at par and accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption, on January 1 of the
following years and in the following principal amounts:
Year

2031
2032
2033*

Principal Aniount

$ 6,205,000
8,275,000
73,620,000

* Final Maturity
The Scries 2015 A Bonds due January 1, 2039, are subject to niandatoi-y redemption prior
to maturity, at par and accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption, on January 1 of the
following years and in the following principal amounts:
Vear

2036
2037
2038
2039*

Principal Aniount

$16,135,000
12,620,000
15,875,000
3,980,000

* Final Maturity

 EXHIBIT A

PRELIMINARY OFFICIAL STATEMENT

E X H I B I T B-1
SUPPLEMENTAL OPINION OF CO-BOND COUNSEL

J u l y _ , 2015

Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
Chicago, Illinois
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement
described below (the "Underwriters")
Re:

City of Chicago

City of Chicago
$345,530,000 General Obligation Bonds, Series 201 SA
(the "Series 2015A Bonds ")
$742,860,000 General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB
(the "Series 2015B Bonds")

Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have on this date delivered to you our approving opinions (the "Approving
Opinions") in connection with the issuance by the City of Chicago (the "City") ofthe
above-referenced obligations (collectively, the "Bonds"). The Series 20ISA Bonds have
been delivered this date to the Underwriters pursuant to the terms of the Bond Purchase
Agreement dated July 16, 2015, between the City and the Underwriters (the "Series 2015A
Bond Purchase Agreement") and the Series 201 SB Bonds have been delivered this date to
the Underwriters pursuant to the terms of the Bond Purchase Agreement dated July 15,
2015, between the City and the Underwriters (the "Series 2015B Bond Purchase
Agreement" and, together with the Series 2015A Bond Purchase Agreement, the "Bond
Purchase Agreements"). Capitalized terms used herein without definition shall have the
meanings ascribed to such terms in the Purchase Agreements.
Based upon our examination as Bond Counsel of the proceedings described in the
Approving Opinions, we are of the opinion that:
I.
Pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the City Council on the 17th
day of June, 2015, authorizing the issuance of the Bonds (as supplemented by a
Notification of Sale, the "Bond Ordinance"), the City has duly authorized,
executed and delivered the Bond Purchase Agreements, the Indentures and the
Undertaking (together with the Bond Purchase Agreements and the Indentures, the
"City Documents"), and, assuming the due authorizafion, execution, delivery and
the binding effect on the other parties thereto, each of the City Documents

  

constitutes a legal, valid and binding obligafion ofthe City, enforceable against the
City in accordance with its respective terms, except that the enforceability ofthe
City Documents may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, moratorium,
reorganization and other similar laws affecting creditors' rights and by equitable
principles, whether considered at law or in equity, including the exercise of judicial
discrefion.
2.
Based upon our examination of such documents and questions of
law as we have deemed relevant in connection with the offering and sale of the
Bonds under the circumstances described in the Official Statement dated July 16,
2015, we are of the opinion that, under existing law, the Bonds are not required to
be registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and the Bond Ordinance
and the Trust Indentures are not required to be qualified under the Trust Indenture
Act of 1939, as amended.
Our opinion represents our legal judgment based upon our review of the law and
the facts that we deem relevant to render such opinion, and is not a guarantee of a result.
This opinion is given as of the date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or
supplement this opinion to reflect any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to
our attention or any changes in law that may hereafter occur.
This opinion is furnished by us as Bond Counsel to the City. No attorney-client
relationship has existed or exists between our firm and the Underwriters in connection with
the Bonds or by virtue of this opinion. This opinion is solely for the benefit of the
Underwriters and the City and may not be used, quoted, relied upon or otherwise referred
to for any other purpose or by any other person (including any person purchasing any of
the Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written consent.
Very tmly yours,

 E X H I B I T B-2
LETTER OF CO-BOND COUNSEL

J u l y _ , 2015

Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
Chicago, Illinois
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement
described below (the "Underwriters")
Re:

.City of Chicago

City of Chicago
$345,530,000 General Obligation Bonds, Series 20ISA
(the "Series 2015A Bonds")
$742,860,000 General Obligafion Bonds, Taxable Series 20I5B
(the "Series 2015B Bonds")

Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have acted as Bond Counsel in connection with the sale and issuance by the
City of Chicago (the "City") of the above-referenced obligations (collecfively, the
"Bonds"). We have rendered our separate opinions, dated the date hereof, as to the
validity, enforceability and tax status of interest on the Bonds. The Series 2015A Bonds
have been delivered this date to the Underwriters pursuant to the terms of the Bond
Purchase Agreement dated July 16, 2015, between the City and the Underwriters (the
"Series 2015A Bond Purchase Agreement") and the Series 201 SB Bonds have been
delivered this date to the Underwriters pursuant to the terms of the Bond Purchase
Agreement dated July 15, 2015, between the City and the Underwriters (the "Series 2015B
Bond Purchase Agreement" and, together with the Series 20ISA Bond Purchase
Agreement, the "Bond Purchase Agreements"). Capitalized terms used herein without
definition shall have the meanings ascribed to such terms in the Bond Purchase
Agreements.
We have not been engaged nor have we undertaken to review or verify the accuracy,
completeness or sufficiency of the information contained in or appended to the Official
Statement dated July 16,2015 (the "Official Statement") or other offering material relating
to the Bonds, except that in our capacity as Bond Counsel in connecfion with the issuance
ofthe Bonds wc have reviewed the information contained in the Official Statement under
the capfions "OFFICIAL STATEMENT SUMMARY," "The BONDS" (except for the information
relating to The Depository Trust Company and its book-entry system and operations),
"SECURITY FOR THE BONDS - General Obligation of the City" (except lor any information

  

referenced under such caption contained under the heading "FINANCIAL DISCUSSION AND
ANALYSIS" and in APPENDIX D - "PROPERTY TAXES") and APPENDIX A - "SUMMARY OF
THE INDENTURES," solely to determine whether such information and summaries conform

to the Bonds, the ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on the 17th day of
June, 2015, authorizing the issuance of the Bonds (as supplemented by the Notification of
Sale dated July 16, 2015 delivered by the Chief Financial Officer of the City, the "Bond
Ordinance ") and the Trust Indentures. The purpose of our professional engagement was
not to establish or confirm factual matters in the Official Statement, and we have not
undertaken any obligation to verify independently any of the factual matters set forth under
these captions and reviewed by us. Subject to the foregoing, the summary descriptions in
the Official Statement under such captions excepting those matters set forth above, as of
the date of the Official Statement and as ofthe date hereof, insofar as such descriptions
purport to describe or summarize certain provisions of the Bonds, the Bond Ordinance and
the Trust Indentures, are accurate summaries of such provisions in all material respects.
Further, we confirm the opinions attributed to us in the Official Statement and consent to
the references to such opinions contained therein. In addition, the information in the
Official Statement under the caption " T A X MATTERS" purporting to describe or summarize
our opinions concerning certain federal tax matters relating to the Bonds has been reviewed
by us and is an accurate summary in all material respects. Except as specifically described
in this paragraph, we express no opinion herein with respect to and have not undertaken to
determine independently the accuracy, fairness or completeness of any statements
contained, appended or incorporated by reference in the Official Statement.
By acceptance of this letter you recognize and acknowledge that: (i) the preceding
paragraph is not a legal opinion but is rather in the nature of observafions based on certain
liniited acfivities performed by specific lawyers in our firm in our role as Bond Counsel to
the City; (ii) the scope of those acfivities performed by us for purposes of delivering this
letter was inherently limited and does not purport to encompass all acfivities necessary for
compliance with applicable securities laws; (iii) those activities performed by us rely on
third party representations, warranties, certifications, statements and opinions, including
and primarily, representations, warranties and certifications made by the City, and are
otherwise subject to the conditions set forth herein; (iv) we have not been engaged to act,
and have not acted, as counsel to the Underwriters for any purpose in connection with the
issuance of the Bonds; (v) no attorney-client relationship exists or has at any time existed
between us and the Underwriters in connection with the Bonds or by virtue of this letter;
and (vi) this letter is based upon our review of proceedings and other documents undertaken
as part of our engagement with the City, and in order to deliver this letter we neither
undertook any duties or responsibilities to the Underwriters nor conducted any activities in
addition lo those undertaken or conducted for the benefit of, and requested by, the City.
Consequently, we make no representation that our review has been adequate for the
Underwriters' purposes.
This letter is given as of the date hereof and we assume no obligafion to revise or
supplement this letter to reflect any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to our
attention. This letter is furnished by us as Bond Counsel to the City. This letter is solely
for the benefit of the Underwriters and the City and may not be used, quoted, relied upon

 or otherwise referred to for any other purpose or by any other person (including any person
purchasing any ofthe Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written consent.
Very truly yours.

 EXHIBIT B-3
L E T T E R S OF S P E C I A L PENSION DISCLOSURE C O U N S E L
LETTER TO UNDERWRITERS

July

,2015

Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreenient
described below
Re:

$345,530,000 City of Chicago
General Obligafion Bonds, Series 2015A
(the "Series 2015A Bonds")
$742,860,000 City of Chicago
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB
(the "Series 2015B Bonds")

Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have acted as special disclosure counsel to the City of Chicago (the "City"),
solely in connection with the information contained under the capfion "FINANCIAL
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS - Pensions" and in Appendix E — "RETIREMENT FUNDS"
(together, the "Pension Sections ") of the Preliminary Official Statement dated July 8,2015
(the "Preliminary Official Statement") and the Official Statement dated July 16,2015 (the
"Official Statement"), each relating to the Series 2015A Bonds and the Series 201 SB
Bonds (together, the "Bond.s") issued by the City on this date.
In accordance with our understanding with the City, we have reviewed the Pension
Sections, certificates of officers ofthe City and other appropriate persons, and such other
records, reports, opinions and documents, and we have made such investigations of law, as
we have deemed appropriate as a basis for the conclusion hereinafter expressed. As to
facts material to the views expressed herein, we have, with your consent, relied upon oral
or written statements or representations of officers or olher representatives or agents of or
consultants to the City and of or to the Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund
of Chicago, the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Firemen's Annuity
and Benefit Fund of Chicago, and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees"
Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago (collectively, the "Retirement Funds"), including
the representations and warranties of the City in the Bond Purchase Agreement dated July
16, 2015, with respect to the Series 2015 A Bonds, and the Bond Purchase Agreement dated
July 15, 2015, with respect to the Series 201 SB Bonds, each between the City and Morgan

 Stanley & Co. LLC, on behalf of itself and the other under'writers named therein
(collectively, the "Underwriters"). We have not independenfiy verified such matters.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in
the Official Statement.
In arriving at the conclusion hereinafter expressed, we are not expressing any
opinion or view on, and with your permission are assuming and relying on, the validity,
accuracy and sufficiency of the records, reports, documents, certificates and opinions
referred to above (including the accuracy of all factual matters represented and legal
conclusions contained therein). We have assumed that all records, reports, documents,
certificates and opinions that we have reviewed, and the signatures thereto, are genuine.
We are not passing upon, and do not assume any responsibility for, the accuracy,
completeness or fairness of any of the statements contained in the Pension Sections and
make no representation that we have independently verified the accuracy, completeness or
fairness of any such statements. In our capacity as special disclosure counsel to the City,
to assist it in discharging its responsibility with respect to the Pension Sections, we
participated in conferences and correspondence with your representatives, representatives
of the City, the City's attorneys, Co-Disclosure Counsel to the City, counsel to the
Underwriters, and other persons involved in the preparafion of information for the Pension
Sections, during which the contents of the Pension Sections and related matters were
discussed and revised. The purpose of our professional engagement was not to establish
or confirm factual matters set forth in the Pension Sections, and we have not undertaken
any obligation to verify independently any of the factual matters set forth therein.
Moreover, many of the determinations required to be made in the preparation of the
Pension Sections involve matters of a non-legal nature. Based on our participation in the
above-mentioned conferences and correspondence, and in reliance thereon and on our
limited review of the records, reports, documents, certificates, statements, representations,
warranties, opinions and matters mentioned above, without independent verification, we
advise you as a matter of fact and not opinion that, during our engagement as special
disclosure counsel to the City in connection with the Pension Sections, no facts came to
the attention of the attorneys in our firm rendering legal services in connection with such
limited role which caused us to believe that the Pension Sections (apart from the financial
statements or other financial, operating, numerical, accounting or statistical data or
forecasts, estimates, projections, assumptions or expressions of opinion, or matters of
litigation contained or incorporated therein, as to which we do not express any conclusion
or belief) contained as of its date or contains as of the date hereof any untrue statement of
a material fact or omitted or omits to state a material fact required to be stated therein or
necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in the light of the circumstances
under which they were made, not misleading. No responsibility is undertaken or statement
rendered herein with respect to any other portions of the Preliminary Official Statement or
the Official Statement or any other disclosure document, materials or activity, or as to any
information from another document or source referred to by or incorporated by reference
in the Preliminary Official Statement or the Official Statement.

 By acceptance of this letter you recognize and acknowledge that: (i) the preceding
paragraph is not a legal opinion but is rather in the nature of negative observations based
on certain liniited activities performed by specific lawyers in our firm during our
engagement to the City as special disclosure counsel in connection with the Pension
Sections; (ii) the scope of those activities performed by us for purposes of delivering this
letter was inherently limited and does not purport to encompass all activities necessary for
compliance with applicable securities laws; (iii) those activities performed by us rely on
third party representations, warranties, certifications, statements and opinions, including
and primarily, representations, warranties and certifications made by the City, and are
otherwise subject to the conditions set forth herein; (iv) we have not been engaged to act,
and have not acted, as your counsel for any purpose in connection with the issuance ofthe
Bonds; (v) no attorney-client relationship exists or has at any time existed between us in
connection with the Bonds or by virtue of this letter; and (vi) this letter is based upon our
review of proceedings and other documents undertaken as part of our engagement with the
City, and in order to deliver this letter we neither undertook any duties or responsibilities
to you nor conducted any activities in addition to those undertaken or conducted for the
benefit of, and requested by, the City. Consequently, we make no representation that our
review has been adequate for your purposes.
We express herein no opinion or belief herein with respect to the validity of the
Bonds or the taxation thereof or of the interest thereon, and our expression of belief with
respect to the Pension Sections assumes the validity ofthe Bonds and the tax treatment of
the interest payable thereon for federal income tax purposes, all as set forth in the opinions
of Co-Bond Counsel.
This letter is furnished by us in our limited capacity as special disclosure counsel
to the City in connection with the Pension Sections and is solely for the benefit of the
Underwriters. This letter may not be used, quoted, relied upon or otherwise referred to for
any other purpose or by any other person (including any person purchasing any of the
Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written consent, except that such letter
may be referenced in the Preliminary Official Statement, the Official Statement and the
Bond Purchase Agreement with respect to each series of the Bonds and included in the
transcript of proceedings for the Bonds. This letter is given as of the date hereof and we
assume no obligation to revise or supplement this letter to reflect any facts or circumstances
lhat may hereafter come to our attention.
Respectfully submitted.

 LETTER TO CITY

July

,2015

City of Chicago

Re:

$345,530,000 City of Chicago
General Obligation Bonds, Series 2015A
(the "Series 2015A Bonds ")
$742,860,000 City of Chicago
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB
(the "Series 2015B Bonds")

Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have acted as special disclosure counsel to you, the City of Chicago (the
"City "), solely in connection with the information contained under the caption "FINANCIAL
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS - Pensions" and in Appendix E — "RETIREMENT FUNDS"
(together, the "Pension Sections ") of the Preliminary Official Statement dated July 8,2015
(the 'Preliminary Official Statement") and the Official Statement dated July 16, 2015 (the
"Official Statement"), each relating to the Series 2015A Bonds and the Series 201 SB
Bonds (together, the "Bonds") issued by the City on this date.
In accordance with our understanding with the City, we have reviewed the Pension
Secfions, certificates of officers ofthe City and other appropriate persons, and such other
records, reports, opinions and documents, and we have made such investigations of law, as
we have deemed appropriate as a basis for the conclusion hereinafter expressed. As to
facts material to the views expressed herein, we have, with your consent, relied upon oral
or written statements or representations of officers or other representatives or agents of or
consultants to the City and of or to the Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund
of Chicago, the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Firemen's Annuity
and Benefit Fund of Chicago, and the Laborers' and Refiremenl Board Employees'
Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago (collectively, the "Retirement Funds"), including
the representations and warranties ofthe City in the Bond Purchase Agreement dated July
16,2015, with respect to the Series 2015A Bonds, and the Bond Purchase Agreement dated
July 15, 2015, with respect to the Series 201 SB Bonds, each between the City and Morgan
Stanley & Co. LLC, on behalf of itself and the other underwriters named therein
(collectively, the "Underwriters"). We have not independently verified such matters.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in
the Official Statement.

  

In arriving at the conclusion hereinafter expressed, we are not expressing any
opinion or view on, and with your pemiission are assuming and relying on, the validity,
accuracy and sufficiency of the records, reports, documents, certificates and opinions
referred to above (including the accuracy of all factual matters represented and legal
conclusions contained therein, including, without limitation, any representations and legal
conclusions regarding the due authorization, issuance, delivery, validity and enforceability
of the Bonds, the tax treatment of interest on the Bonds for federal income tax purposes,
and the application of Bond proceeds in accordance with the authorizafion therefor). We
have assumed that all records, reports, documents, certificates and opinions that we have
reviewed, and the signatures thereto, are genuine.
We are not passing upon, and do not assume any responsibility for, the accuracy,
completeness or fairness of any of the statements contained in the Pension Sections and
make no representafion that we have independenfiy verified the accuracy, completeness or
fairness of any such statements. In our capacity as special disclosure counsel to the City,
to assist you in discharging your responsibility with respect to the Pension Sections, we
participated in conferences and correspondence with representatives ofthe City, the City's
attorneys, Co-Disclosure Counsel to the City, the Underwriters, counsel to the
Underwriters, and other persons involved in the preparation of information for the Pension
Sections, during which the contents of the Pension Sections and related matters were
discussed and revised. The purpose of our professional engagement was not to establish
or confimi factual matters set forth in the Pension Sections, and we have not undertaken
any obligation to verify independently any of the factual matters set forth therein.
Moreover, many of the determinations required to be made in the preparation of the
Pension Sections involve matters of a non-legal nature. Based on our participation in the
above-mentioned conferences and correspondence, and in reliance thereon and on our
limited review of the records, reports, documents, certificates, statements, representations,
warranties, opinions and matters mentioned above, without independent verification, we
advise you as a matter of fact and not opinion that, during our engagement as special
disclosure counsel to the City in connection with the Pension Sections, no facts came to
the attention of the attorneys in our firm rendering legal services in connection with such
liniited role which caused us to believe that the Pension Sections (apart from the financial
statements or other financial, operating, numerical, accounting or statistical data or
forecasts, estimates, projections, assumptions or expressions of opinion, or matters of
litigation contained or incorporated therein, as to which we do not express any conclusion
or belief) contained as of its date or contains as of the date hereof any untrue statement of
a material fact or omitted or omits to state a material fact required to be stated therein or
necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in the light of the circumstances
under which they were made, not misleading. No responsibility is undertaken or statement
rendered herein with respect to any other portions of the Preliminary Official Statement or
the Official Statement or any other dLscIosure document, materials or activity, or as to any
information from another document or source referred to by or incorporated by reference
in the Preliminary Official Statement or the Official Statement.
By acceptance of this letter you recognize and acknowledge that: (i) the preceding
paragraph is not a legal opinion but is rather in the nature of negative observations based

 on certain liniited activities performed by specific lawyers in our firm during our
engagement to the City as special disclosure counsel in connection with the Pension
Sections; (ii) the scope of those activities performed by us for purposes of delivering this
letter was inherently limited and does nol purport to encompass all activities necessary for
compliance with applicable securities laws; and (iii) those activities performed by us rely
on third party representations, warranties, certifications, statements and opinions, including
and primarily, representations, warranties and certifications made by the City, and are
otherwise subject to the conditions set forth herein.
We express herein no opinion or belief herein with respect to the validity of the
Bonds or the taxation thereof or of the interest thereon, and our expression of belief with
respect to the Pension Sections assumes the validity of the Bonds and the tax treatment of
the interest payable thereon for federal income tax purposes, all as set forth in the opinions
of Co-Bond Counsel.
This letter is furnished by us in our limited capacity as special disclosure counsel
to the City in connection with the Pension Sections. This letter may not be used, quoted,
relied upon or otherwise referred to for any other purpose or by any other person (including
any person purchasing any of the Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written
consent, except that such letter may be referenced in the Preliminary Official Statement,
the Official Statement and the Bond Purchase Agreement with respect to each series ofthe
Bonds and included in the transcript of proceedings for the Bonds. This letter is given as
of the date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or supplement this letter to reflect
any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to our attention.
Respectfully submitted.

 EXHIBIT C
OPINION OF CORPORATION COUNSEL OF THE C I T Y

July 21, 2015

Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, as Representative
of the Underwriters named in the Bond Purchase
Agreement, dated July 16, 2015, between such
Underwriters and the City of Chicago

Ladies and Gentlemen:
This opinion is given to you pursuant to Section I0(a)(vi) of that certain Bond
Purchase Agreement dated July 16, 2015 (the "2015A Bond Purchase Agreement")
between the City of Chicago (the "City") and Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, as representative
of a group of underwriters (the "Representative"), with respect to the purchase of the City
of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Series 201 SA (the "Series 2015 A Bonds") and that
certain Bond Purchase Agreement dated July 15, 2015 (the "201 SB Bond Purchase
Agreement" and together with the 2015A Bond Purchase Agreement, the "Bond Purchase
Agreements") between the City and the Representative, with respect to the purchase of the
City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB (the "Taxable Series
2015B Bonds" and together with the Series 2015A Bonds, the "Bonds"). The Series 2015A
Bonds are being issued in accordance with the Trust Indenture between the City and Zions
First National Bank, as tmstee (the "Trustee") dated as of July 1, 2015 (the "Series 20 ISA
Indenture"). The Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds are being issued in accordance with the
Trust Indenture between the City and Zions First National Bank, as trustee, dated as of July
1, 2015 (the "Taxable Series 201 SB Indenture," and collectively with the Series 2015A
Indenture, the "Indentures"). The Bonds are authorized by an ordinance of the City adopted
by the City Council of the City (the "City Council") on June 17, 2015. Unless otherwise
defined herein, capitalized terms used herein shall have the meanings assigned to them in
the Bond Purchase Agreements.
In connection with the issuance of the Bonds, I have caused to be examined a
certified copy of the record of proceedings ofthe City Council pertaining to the issuance
of the Bonds by the City, and executed counterparts, where applicable, of the following
documents:

 (a)

the Ordinance;

(b)

the Indentures;

(c)

the Bond Purchase Agreements; and

(d)
that certain Continuing Disclosure Undertaking dated the date hereof
pursuant to the requirements of Secfion (b) (5) of Rule 15c-12 of the Securities and
Exchange Commission (the "Undertaking").

On the basis of such examination and review of such other information, records and
documents as was deemed necessary or advisable, I am of the opinion that:
1.
The City is a home rule unit of local government duly organized and
existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois with full power and
authority, among other things, to adopt the Ordinance, to authorize the issuance of the
Bonds, and to execute and deliver the Indentures, the Bond Purchase Agreements and the
Undertaking.
2.
The Bond Purchase Agreements, the Indentures and the Undertaking have
been duly authorized, executed and delivered by, and the Ordinance has been duly adopted
by, the City, and, assuming the due execution and delivery by the other parties thereto, as
appropriate, such instruments constitute legal and valid obligations of the City in each case
enforceable in accordance with their respective terms except as may be limited by
bankruptcy, insolvency and other laws affecting creditors' rights or remedies and the
availability of equitable remedies generally.
3.
To my knowledge, compliance with the provisions of the Bonds, the
Ordinance, the Indentures, the Bond Purchase Agreenients and the Undertaking does not
conflict in a material manner with, or constitute a material breach of or material default
under, any applicable law, administrative regulation, court order or consent decree of the
State of Illinois, or any department, division, agency or instrumentality thereof or of the
United States of America or any ordinance, agreenient or other instmment to which the
City is a party or is otherwise subject.
4.
To my knowledge, all approvals, consents and orders of and filings (except
with respect to state "blue sky" or securities laws) with any governmental authority, board,
agency or commission having jurisdiction which would constitute conditions precedent to
the performance by the City of its obligations under the Ordinance, the Indentures, the
Bond Purchase Agreement, the Undertaking and the Bonds have been obtained.
5.
There is no litigafion or proceeding pending, or to my knowledge, threatened,
materially affecting the existence of the City or seeking to restrain or enjoin the issuance
of the Bonds, or contesting the validity or enforceability ofthe Bonds, the Ordinance, the

 Indentures, the Bond Purchase Agreements or the Undertaking, or the completeness or
accuracy of the Official Statement, or the powers of the City or its authority with respect
to the Bonds, the Ordinance, the Indentures, the Bond Purchase Agreements or the
Undertaking.
Nothing has come to my attention which would lead me to believe that the Official
Statement (excluding information under the captions "THE BONDS - Book-Entry System"
relating to the Depository Trust Company ("DTC"), "RATINGS," "UNDERWRITING,"
and "TAX MATTERS," "APPENDIX B -ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC
INFORMATION" and "APPENDIX F ~ OPINIONS OF CO-BOND COUNSEL,"
information sourced to sources other than the City or departments thereof, any information
in or omitted from the Official Statement relating to DTC, any information in or omitted
from the Official Statement relating to any information furnished by the Underwriters for
use in the Official Statement, the financial statements and all other financial and statistical
data contained in the Official Statement, including the Appendices thereto) contains an
untrue statement of a material fact or omits to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements therein, in the light of the circumstances under which they were made, not
misleading in any material respect.
No opinion is expressed as to any "blue sky" or other securities laws or as to the
laws regarding taxation of any state or the United States of America, or any disclosure or
compliance related thereto.
The statements contained herein are made in an official capacity and not personally
and no personal responsibility shall derive from them. Further, the only opinions that are
expressed are the opinions specifically set forth herein, and no opinion is implied or should
be inferred as to any other matter or transaction.
No one other than you shall be entitled to rely on this opinion.
Very truly yours.

Stephen R. Patton
Corporation Counsel

 EXHIBIT D
OPINION OF CO-DISCLOSURE COUNSEL

July 21, 2015

City of Chicago, Illinois
Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, as
Representative ofthe Underwriters named
in the Bond Purchase Agreements (defined
herein) between such Underwriters and the
City of Chicago
$1,088,390,000
C I T Y OF CHICAGO
$345,530,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Series 2015A

$742,860,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Series 201 SB

Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have acted as Co-Disclosure Counsel to the City of Chicago (the "City") in
connection with the offering by the City of its General Obligafion Bonds, Series 2015A
(the "Series 201 SA Bonds") and its General Obligafion Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB (the
"Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds" and, together with the Series 20 ISA Bonds, the "Bonds").
The Bonds are authorized by an ordinance of the City Council of the City (the "City
Council") adopted on June 17, 2015, and the Bonds of each Series will be issued pursuant
to and secured by a separate Trust Indenture each dated as of July 1, 2015 (collectively, the
"Indentures"), between the City and Zions First National Bank, as bond trustee.
This opinion is being rendered pursuant to Secfion 10(a)(viii) of the Bond Purchase
Agreenient dated July 16, 2015 between the City and Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, as
representative (the "Representative") of the underwriters named therein (the
"Underwriters") with respect to the Series 2015A Bonds (the "Series 2015A Bond
Purchase Agreement"), and Section 10(a)(viii) of the Bond Purchase Agreement dated July
15,2015, between the City and the Representative with respect to the Taxable Series 201 SB
Bonds (the "Series 201 SB Bond Purchase Agreement," and together with the Series 201 SA
Bond Purchase Agreeinent, the "Bond Purchase Agreements"). Capitalized terms used
herein and not otherwise defined shall have the meanings sel forth in the Bond Purchase
Agreements.
For purposes of rendering this opinion, we have examined originals or executed
copies, certified or otherwise identified to our satisfaction, o f (i) the Indentures, (ii) the

 Bond Purchase Agreements, (iii) the Undertaking and (iv) the legal opinions, agreements
and certificates delivered in connection with the reoffering of the Bonds. We have also
participated in the preparation of the Preliminary Official Statement and the Official
Statement. In our examinations, we have assumed the legal capacity of natural persons,
the genuineness of signatures on, and the authenticity of, all documents so examined, the
conformity to originals of all documents submitted to us as copies, and that all records and
other information made available to us, and on which we have relied, are complete in all
respects.
Based upon and subject to our examination as described above and subject to the
qualifications set forth herein, we are of the opinion that:
1.
No registration is required under the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended, with respect to the offering of the Bonds, and neither of the Indentures is
required to be qualified under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended.
2.
The Undertaking complies with the requirements of paragraph
(b)(5) of Regulafion §240.l5c2-12 (Rule I5c2-12) adopted by the Securities and
Exchange Commission under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as in effect as
of the date of the Closing.
3.
The statements contained in the Official Statement under the caption
"SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE" insofar as such statements purport to
summarize certain provisions of the Undertaking, constitute a fair and accurate
.summary of such provisions.
We are not expressing (and cannot express) any opinion or view with respect to the
authorization, issuance, delivery or validity ofthe Bonds, or the federal tax exemption for
the interest paid on the Series 20ISA Bonds. Because the purpose of our professional
engagement was not to establish factual matters and because of the wholly or partially
nonlegal character of many of the determinations involved in the preparation ofthe Official
Statement, except as explicitly stated in paragraph 3 above, we are not passing upon nor
do we assume responsibility for the accuracy, completeness or fairness of the statements
contained in the Official Statement and we make no representation that we have
independently verified the accuracy, completeness or fairness of such statements. Without
limiting the foregoing, we assume no responsibility for, and have not independently
verified, the accuracy, completeness or fairness of the financial statements, noles lo
financial statements, tables and other financial, economic, market and statistical data
included or incorporated by reference in the Official Statement and the appendices to the
Official Statement, and we have not reviewed the accounting,financialor statistical records
from which such financial statements, schedules, appendices and data are derived. We
note that we are not experts within the meaning ofthe Securities Act of 1933, as amended,
with respect to such financial statements or schedules or the other financial, economic,
market, or statistical data included or incorporated by reference therein. During the
preparation of the Official Statement, however, we participated in conferences with you,
Co-Bond Counsel, the City's Corporation Counsel, officials, employees and agents ofthe
City and Underwriters' counsel at which conferences the contents of the Official Statement

 and related matters were discussed. On the basis of the foregoing, but without independent
verification of factual matters, nothing has come to our attention which would lead us to
believe that the Official Statement contains any statement which, at the time and in the
light of the circumstances under which it is made, is false or misleading with respect to any
material fact or omits to state a material fact necessary to make the statements therein, at
the time and in the light of the circumstances under which they are made, not false or
misleading; provided that we express no view as to: (i) financial statements, notes to
financial statements, tables and any financial, forward-looking, technical, economic,
market and statistical information included in the Official Statement or the Appendices
thereto, (ii) the description of DTC and the information under the caption "THE BONDS—
Book-Entry System" included in the Official Statement, (iii) any information included in
APPENDIX B—"ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION," APPENDIX
C—"CITY OF CHICAGO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR
ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2014," and APPENDIX E—"RETIREMENT FUNDS," or (iv)
the legal opinions or forms thereof included as APPENDIX F—"OPINIONS OF COBOND COUNSEL."
Our opinions and views expressed herein are limited to the matters expressly stated
herein and no opinion or view is implied or may be inferred beyond the matters expressly
stated.
Our opinions and views expressed herein are rendered as of the date hereof and are
based on existing law which is subject to change. Wc do not undertake to advise you of
any changes in the opinions and views expressed herein from matters that may hereafter
arise or be brought to our attention or to revise or supplement such opinions and views
should the present laws of any jurisdiction be changed by legislative action, judicial
decision, or otherwise.
This opinion and views herein set forth are solely for the information of the
addressees hereof and are not to be quoted in whole or in part or otherwise referred to
(except in a list of closing documents), nor are they to be filed with any governmental
agency or other person, without our prior written consent. Other than the addressees
hereof, no one is entitled to rely on this opinion and views herein set forth.

Very truly yours,

 EXHIBIT E
REPRESENTATION L E T T E R

City of Chicago
J)epartnient of Finance

Attn.: Deputy Comptroller of Financial Policy

Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
as Representafive of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreements,
dated July 15, 2015 and July 16, 2015,
between such Underwriters and the City of
Chicago

Pursuant to the Bond Purchase Agreement dated July 16, 2015 (the "201 SA Bond
Purchase Agreement"), among the City of Chicago (the "City") and Morgan Stanley & Co.
LLC, as representative (the "Representative") of the underwriters named therein (each an
"Underwriter") relating to the City's General Obligation Bonds, Series 201 SA (the "Series
2015A Bonds"), and the Bond Purchase Agreement dated July 15, 2015 (the "201 SB Bond
Purchase Agreement" and together with the 2015A Bond Purchase Agreement, the
"Purchase Agreement"), among the City and the Representative of the Underwriters
relating to the General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 2015B (the "Series 201 SB Bonds"
and, together with the Series 2015A Bonds, the "Bonds"), each of the undersigned
Underwriters severally represents to the City that:
(1)
Neither the Underwriter, nor any Affiliate thereof is listed on any ofthe
following lists maintained by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S. Department
of the Treasury, the Bureau of Industry and Security of the U.S. Department of Commerce,
the U.S. Department of State or their successors, or on any other list of persons or enfities
with which the City may not do business under any applicable law, rule, regulation, order
or judgment: the Specially Designated Nationals List, the Denied Persons List, the
Unverified List, the Entity List, the List of Statutorily Debarred Parties and the Excluded
Parties List.
For purposes of this representation, "Affiliate. " when used to indicate a
relationship with a specified person or entity, tneans a person or entity that, directly or
indirectly, through one or more intermediaries, controls, is controlled by or is under
common control with such specified person or entity, and a person or entity shall be
deemed to be controlled by another person or entity, if controlled in any manner
whatsoever that results in control in fact by that other person or entity (or that other person
or entity and any persons or entities with M'hom that other person or entity is actingjointly
or in concert), whether directly or indirectly and whether through share ownership, a trust,
a contract or otherwise.
(2)
The undersigned Underwriters agree that in the event that any Underwriter
or any of its Affiliates appears on any of the lists described in paragraph (1) above, at any
time prior to the Closing (as defined in the Purchase Agreement) with respect to the Bonds,
that Underwriter shall be deemed to have submitted to the Representative its Withdrawal
From Agreement Among Underwriters.

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as ofthe date
written below.
Dated: July 16, 2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:]
Its:

By:
Its:

lagmgUirecior

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parfies hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as ofthe date
written below.
Dated: July 16, 2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBERT BRAN
LL

SHANK & CO.,

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its:
BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

•

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parfies hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
"connecfion with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16, 2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:_
Its: Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:
CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.
By:
Its:

ESTR
INC.
By:
Its:

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY
By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as ofthe date
written below.
Dated: July 16, 2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC .

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:
Its:

By:.
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INi

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY
By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written belovv.
Dated: July 16,2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:.
Its:

By:
Its:

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:.
Its:

By:
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Its:
J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

By:
Its:

MELVIN & COMPANY
By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:.
Its:

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the. parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as ofthe date
written below.
Dated: July 16,2015
MORGAN STANLEY; & €0. LLC

WILLIAM. BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
.
Its: Managing Director

By:.
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFOKD';SiMNK:& CO.,
LLC

ACAElEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:.
Its:

By:
Its:

BMO C A P I T A L ' M A m B ^ G J ^ t m C .

Cm©K0JJP:GLO©AL MARKETS, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

ESTRADA HINQJ0SA-&^eOMI^Ai^rY,
INC.

GEORGE I t BAUM & COMPANY'

By:.
Its:

By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, -W.L.. LYON$, LLC

MELVIN &. COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC

 TN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16,2015
& COMPANY^

MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC
By:
Its: Managing Director
SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:.
Its:

By:
Its:

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:
Its:

By:.
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:.
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connecfion with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16, 2015
MORGAN STANLEY.& CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:.
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

A

By:.
Its:
BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:.
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:.
Its:

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as ofthe date
written below.
Dated: July 16,2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its:
BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.
By;
Its:
ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.
By:
Its:

:

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY
By:
Its;

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By;
Its:

By;
Its;

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated; July 16,2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
.
Its; Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its;

By;
Its;

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its;

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.
By:
Its:
J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVn^ & COMPANY

By:
Its;

By;
Its;

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By;
Its;

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16, 2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:.
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its:

By:.
Its:

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GL08AL MARKETS, INC.

By:.
Its:

By:.
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:.
Its:
J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC
By:.
Its:
NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

By:
Its:

[

 EXHIBIT 2

TAXABLE SERIES 20158 BOND PURCHASE AGREEMENT

BOND PURCHASE AGREEMENT

$742,860,000
C I T Y OF CHICAGO
G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS,
T A X A B L E SERIES 2015B

July 15,2015
City of Chicago
Office ofthe City Comptroller

Ladies and Gentlemen:
The undersigned, Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC (the "Representative"), on behalf of
itself and the other underwriters listed below (collectively, the "Underwriters"), hereby offers
to enter into this Bond Purchase Agreement (the "Agreement") with the City of Chicago (the
"City"), for the purchase by the Underwriters, and sale by the City, of all but not less than all
ofthe City's General Obligafion Bonds, Taxable Series 2015B (the "Series 2015B Bonds").
This offer is made subject to the acceptance by the City, evidenced by the signature of a duly
authorized officer of the City in the space provided below, on or before 5:00 P.M., Chicago
time on the date hereof, and upon such acceptance this Agreenient shall be in full force and
effect in accordance with its terms and shall be binding on the City and the Underwriters.
The Representative is authorized, and hereby represents and warrants that it is
authorized, to act as Representative of the Underwriters and to execute this Agreement and
has full authority to take such action as it may deem advisable with respect to all matters
pertaining to this Agreement. Each Underwriter hereby severally represents to the City that it
is registered and in good standing under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(the "1934 Act"), as a municipal securities dealer.
The primary role of the Underwriters is to purchase the Series 201 SB Bonds, for
resale to investors, in an arm's-length commercial transaction between the City and the
Underwriters. The Underwriters have financial and other interests that differ from those of
the City.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defmed herein shall have the meanings ascribed
thereto in the Preliminary Official Statement, as defined herein.
1.

Agreement to Sell and Purchase.

(a)
Upon the terms and conditions and based upon the representations, warranties
and covenants herein set forth, the Undei'writers, jointly and severally, hereby agree to
purcha.se from the City and the City hereby agrees to sell to the Underwriters the Series 201 SB

 

it} '?li??gbi . .,

 

Bonds at a price equal to $726,784,205.13 (which represents the aggregate principal amount
of the Series 2015B Bonds less an original issue discount of $11,396,932.85 and less an
Underwriters' discount of $4,678,862.02).
(b)
It shall be a condition to the Cily's obligation to sell and deliver the Series
2015B Bonds that all the Series 2015B Bonds be purchased and paid for by the Underwriters
at the Closing (as defined in Section 7 hereof) and a condition to the Underwriters" obligation
to purchase and pay for the Series 2015B Bonds that all Series 201 SB Bonds be issued, sold
and delivered by the City at the Closing.
(c)
The City and the Underwriters expect to execute on July 16, 2015, an
agreement (the "Series 20ISA Bond Purchase Agreement") with respect to the sale and
delivery by the City and the purchase by the Underwriters of the General Obligation Bonds,
Series 20 ISA ofthe City (the "Series 2015A Bonds" and, together with the Series 201 SB
Bonds, the "Bonds").
2.
Bond Authorization. The Series 2015B Bonds are authorized by an ordinance
ofthe City adopted by the City Council ofthe City (the "City Council") on June 17,2015 (the
"Ordinance"), and the Series 201 SB Bonds will be issued pursuant to and secured by a Tmst
Indenture dated as of July 1, 2015 (the "Tmst Indenture"), between the City and Zions First
National Bank, as Tmstee, Bond Registrar and Paying Agent for the Series 201 SB Bonds (the
"Trustee"). The Series 2015B Bonds will mature, bear interest and have such other terms and
conditions as are set forth on Schedule I hereto.
3.
The Preliminarv Official Statement. Attached hereto as Exhibit A is a copy
of the Preliminary Official Statement of the City, dated July 8, 2015, relafing to the Series
2015B Bonds (the "Preliminary Official Statement"). For purposes of Rule 15c2-12 ("Rule
lSc2-12") adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") under the 1934
Act, the Preliminary Official Statement is "deemed final" by the City with respect to the Series
201 SB Bonds as of its date except for the omission of such information as is permitted by
Rule 15c2-12(b)(1).
4.
Public Offering Price. The Underwriters have agreed to make a bona fide
public offering of the Scries 201 SB Bonds at the initial offering prices set forth on Schedule
I.
5.

The Official Statement.

(a)
The City shall provide, or cause to be provided, at its expense, to the
Underwriters no later than the earlier of (i) seven (7) business days after the date of this
Agreenient or (ii) one (1) day prior to the Closing, three copies of the Official Stateinent of
the City relating to the Bonds (the "Official Statement"), signed on behalf of the City by the
Chief Financial Officer and the Official Statement so delivered shall be "final" for purposes
of Rule 15c2-12. Such delivery of the Official Statement shall occur in sufficient fime to
accompany any confirmation that requests payment from any customer and in sufficient
quantity to comply with the mles of the SEC and the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board
(the "MSRB").

 (b)
If on or prior to the Closing or within twenty-five (25) days afler the "end of
the underwriting period" (as hereinafter defined) any event known to the City relating to or
affecfing the City, the Ordinance or the Series 201 SB Bonds, shall occur which would cause
any statement of a material fact contained in the Official Statement to be materially incorrect
or materially incomplete, the City will promptly notify the Representative in wrifing ofthe
circumstances and details of such event. If, as a result of such event, it is necessary, in the
joint opinion of the City and the Representative to amend or supplement the Official Statement
by stating or restafing any material fact necessary in order to make the statements made
therein, in light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading, the City
will forthwith prepare and fumish to the Underwriters a reasonable number of copies of an
amendment of or a supplement to such Official Statement in form and substance satisfactory
to the City and the Representative, at the City's sole cost and expense, which will so amend
or supplement such Official Statement so that, as amended or supplemented, tlie Official
Statement v^ll not contain any untme statement of a material fact or omit to state any material
fact necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in light of the circumstances
under which they were made, not misleading. For purposes of this Agreement, the temi "end
of the underwrifing period" shall mean the later of the date of Closing or the date on which an
Underwriter no longer retains an unsold balance of the Series 2015B Bonds for sale to the
public. The Underwriters agree that the date on which the end ofthe underwriting period shall
occur shall be the date of the Closing, unless the Underwriters otherwise notify the City in
writing prior to twenty-five (25) days after the date of the Closing that, to the best of their
knowledge, the Undenvriters retain for sale to the public an unsold balance of the Series
201 SB Bonds, in which case the end of the underwriting period shall be extended for
additional periods of thirty (30) days each upon receipt of additional written notification from
the Underwriters that, to the best of their knowledge, there exists an unsold balance of the
Series 201 SB Bonds, but in no event shall the end of the underwriting period be extended
longer than sixty (60) days after the date of Closing.
The Official Statement shall be provided for distribution, at the expense of the City,
in such quantity as may be requested by the Underwriters as set forth above in order to
permit the Underwriters to comply with Rule 15c2-12, and the applicable rules ofthe
MSRB, with respect to distribution of the Official Statement. The City shall prepare the
Official Statement, including any amendments thereto, in word-searchable PDF format as
described in the MSRB Rule G-32 and shall provide the electronic copy of the wordsearchable PDF format of the Official Statement to the Underwriters no later than one ( I )
business day prior to July 21, 2015, to enable the Underwriters to comply with MSRB Rule
G-32.
(c)
At or prior to the Closing, the Representative shall file, or cause to be filed,
the Official Statement with the MSRB in compliance with the rules of the SEC and the MSRB.
Promptly after the date after which the Underwriters are no longer obligated under Rule 15c212(b)(4) to deliver to potential customers the Official Statement, the Representative shall
notify the City of such date.
6.
Representations. Warranties and Covenants of the City. The City represents
and warrants to the Undenvriters as of the dale hereof that:

 (a)
The City is a municipal corporafion and home mle unit of local govemment,
exisfing under the Constitufion and laws of the State of Illinois (the "State").
(b)
The City Council has: (i) duly adopted the Ordinance, which remains in full
force and effect; (ii) duly approved the execution and delivery ofthe Tmst Indenture; (iii) duly
authorized the use of the Preliminary Official Statement prior to the date hereof in connection
with the public offering and sale of the Bonds and duly authorized the execution, delivery and
distribution of the Official Statement in connection with the public offering and sale of the
Bonds; and (iv) duly authorized and approved the execution and delivery ofthe Series 201 SB
Bonds, this Agreement and a confinuing disclosure undertaking pursuant to the provisions of
Section (b)(5) of Rule 15c2-12 (the "Undertaking").
(c)
With the exception of the disclosure described in the Preliminary Official
Statement in the secfion titled "SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE - Corrective
Action Related to Certain Bond Disclosure Requirements", the City has not failed during
the previous five years to comply in all material respects with any previous undertakings
in a written continuing disclosure contract or agreement under Rule 15c2-12.
(d)
The City has full legal right, power and authority to: (i) adopt the Ordinance;
(ii) execute and deliver this Agreement, the Trust Indenture, the Undertaking and the Official
Statement; (iii) issue, sell and deliver the Series 201 SB Bonds to the Underwriters pursuant to
the Ordinance and the Tmst Indenture and as provided in this Agreement; and (iv) pay for the
Series 201 SB Bonds from the sources pledged under the Ordinance and the Tmst Indenture
for their payment.
(e)
The adoption ofthe Ordinance and compliance with the provisions thereof do
not, and the execufion and delivery of this Agreement, the Tmst Indenture, the Undertaking
and the Official Statement will not, in any material manner, violate any applicable law or
administrative regulafion of the State or any department, division, agency or instrumentality
thereof or of the United States of America (the "United States") or of £my department, division,
agency or instmmentality thereof, or any applicable judgment or decree to which the City is
subject, or conflict with, in a material manner, or constitute a material breach of, or a material
default under, any ordinance, agreement or other instmment to which the City is a party or is
otherwise bound.
(f)
All approvals, consents and orders of, and filings (except, i f any, under
applicable state "blue sky" laws) with, any govemmental authority, board, agency or
commission having jurisdiction which would constitute a condition precedent to the
performance by the City of its obligations under this Agreement, the Undertaking, the
Ordinance, the Trust Indenture, and the Series 201 SB Bonds have been obtained or made.
(g)
The financial statements of the City contained in the Official Statement fairly
present the financial posifion and results of operations ofthe City as ofthe date and for the
periods therein set forth and the City has no reason to believe thai such financial statements
have not been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as
applied to govemmental units, consistently applied except as otherwise noted therein.

 (h)
The Official Statement (excluding any description of The Depository Trust
Company ("DTC"), information under the captions "THE BONDS - Book-Entry System,"
"RATINGS," "UNDERWRITING," "TAX MATTERS," APPENDIX A — "SUMMARY
OF THE INDENTURES", APPENDIX B — "ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC
INFORMATION (with respect to the information under the headings "— Economy," "—
Percentage of Total Non-Farm Employment by Major Industry Sector" and "and "—
Housing Market," and informafion relating to population, per capita personal income and
employment, and unemployment rate with respect to the United States, the State of Illinois,
Cook County and the Chicago MSA), Tables I-10 included in APPENDIX E —
"RETIREMENT FUNDS," APPENDIX F — "OPINIONS OF CO-BOND COUNSEL,"
and information furnished by the Underwriters for use in the Official Statement) as of its
date does not, and at the Closing will not, contain any untrue statement of a material fact
or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements therein, in light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading in any material respect.
(i)
Information in the Third Party Sourced Retirement Fund Tables is sourced
from documents published by the Retirement Funds and the City takes no responsibility
for the accuracy and completeness of such information; however, nothing has come to the
attention of the City which would lead the City to believe that the Third Party Sourced
Retirement Fund Tables are not true and correct in all material respects;
(j)
The Ordinance, the Tmst Indenture, this Agreement, and the Undertaking,
when duly executed and delivered by the parties thereto, as appropriate, will constitute legal,
valid and binding obligations of the City enforceable in accordance with their terms (except
to the extent that enforceability may be limited by bankmptcy, insolvency and other laws
affecting creditors' rights or remedies and the availability of equitable remedies generally).
(k)
When delivered to the Representative, and paid for by the Underwriters at the
Closing in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, the Series 201 SB Bonds will be
duly authorized, executed and delivered and will consfitute legal, valid and binding
obligations ofthe City enforceable in accordance with their terms (except to the extent that
enforceability may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency and other laws affecting creditors'
rights or remedies and the availability of equitable remedies generally).
(I)
Except as disclosed in the Official Statement, there is no action, suit or
proceeding, at law or in equity, or before or by a court, public board or body, pending or, to
the City's knowledge, threatened, against the City wherein an unfavorable decision, ruling or
finding would materially adversely affecl the validity or enforceability of the Series 2015B
Bonds, the Ordinance, the Tmst Indenture, this Agreement, or the Undertaking.
(m)
Any certificate signed by any Authorized Officer ofthe City and delivered to
the Representative at the Closing in connection with the issuance or sale of the Series 201 SB
Bonds shall be deemed to be a representation and warranty by the City to the Underwriters as
to the statements made therein as of the date so delivered.
(n)
The City will make available such infonnation, execute such instruments and
take such other action in cooperation with the Underwriters as the Representative may

 reasonably request to qualify the Series 201 SB Bonds for offering and sale tmder the "blue
sky" or other securities laws and regulations of such states and other jurisdictions of the United
Slates as the Underwriters may designate in writing; provided, however, that nothing in this
Section 6(n) shall require the City to consent to general service of process in any state or
jurisdiction other than the State.
(o)
The City will apply the proceeds of the Series 201 SB Bonds in accordance
with the Ordinance and the Tmst Indenture.
(p)
The City acknowledges and agrees that: (i) the transaction contemplated by
this Agreement is an arm's length, commercial transaction between the City and the
Underwriters in which the Underwriters are acting solely as a principal and not acfing as a
municipal advisor, financial advisor or fiduciary to the City; (ii) the Underwriters have not
assumed any advisory or fiduciary responsibility to the City with respect to the transaction
contemplated hereby and the discussions, undertakings and procedures leading thereto
(irrespective of whether any Underwriter has provided other services or is currently providing
other services to the City on other matters); (iii) the Underwriters have financial and other
interests that differ from those of the City; and (iv) the City has consulted its own legal,
account, tax, financial and other advisors, as applicable, to the extent it has deemed
appropriate.
7.
Closing. Subject to the conditions set forth in this Agreement, the closing (the
"Closing") ofthe sale of the Series 201 SB Bonds by the City and the purchase of the Series
2015B Bonds by the Underwriters, shall take place at approximately 9:00 a.m., Chicago fime,
on July 21,2015, at the offices of Chapman and Cutler LLP, 111 W. Monroe Street, Chicago,
Illinois (or at such other time, date and place as the City and the Representative mutually
agree).
(a)
At the Closing, the City shall deliver or cause to be delivered to DTC, as
securities depository, for the account of the Underwriters one fully registered certificate for
each, interest rate and maturity of the Series 201 SB Bonds in the aggregate principal amount
thereof, registered in the name of Cede & Co., as nominee for DTC.
(b)
Upon delivery ofthe Series 201 SB Bonds to the Representative at the Closing,
the City will deliver to the Representative the closing documents as set forth in Section 10
hereof
(c)
The Representative will accept delivery of the Series 2015B Bonds and pay
the purchase price therefor at the Closing by delivering federal funds checks or making federal
funds wire transfers or otherwise confirming deposits of same day funds, as the City shall
direct, to the City's account at a bank specified by the City, in an aggregate amount equal to
the purchase price of the Series 201 SB Bonds pursuant to Section 1 hereof.
8.
Reliance and Further Conditions of the Underwriters. The Underwriters have
entered into this Agreement in reliance upon the representations, warranties and agreements
ofthe City herein and the performance by the City of its obligations hereunder, both as of the
date hereof and as of the date of the Closing. The Underwriters' obligations under this

 Agreement are and shall be subject to the following further condition that at the time ofthe
Closing, the Ordinance, the Tmst Indenture, the Undertaking, and this Agreement shall be in
full force and effect and the Ordinance and the Official Statement shall not have been
amended, modified or supplemented except as may have been agreed to with respect to the
Official Statement pursuant to Section 5 hereof, and the City shall have duly adopted and there
shall be in full force and effect such ordinances as, in the opinion of Chapman and Cutler
LLP, Chicago, Illinois, and Hardwick Law Firm, Chicago, Illinois, as co-bond counsel ("CoBond Counsel") shall be necessary in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby
and thereby.
9.

Termination of Agreement.

(a)
The Underwriters shall have the right to cancel their obligations to purchase
the Series 201 SB Bonds and have the further right to temiinate this Agreement, without
liability therefor, by written notice to the City from the Representative, if, between the date
hereof and the Closing:
(i)
legislation shall have been enacted by the Congress of the United
States to become effective on or prior to the Closing, or a decision of a court ofthe
United States shall be rendered, or a stop order, ruling, regulation or proposed
regulation by or on behalf ofthe SEC or other agency having jurisdiction over the
subject matter shall be issued or made, to the effect that the issuance, sale and
delivery of the Series 201 SB Bonds, or any similar obligations of any similar public
body of the general character of the City, is in violation of, or has the effect of
requiring the contemplated offering, sale and distribution of the Series 201 SB Bonds
to be registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the enactment of
the Ordinance or any ordinance of similar character is in violation of the Trust
Indenture Act of 1939, as amended, or with the purpose or effect of otherwise
prohibiting the issuance, sale or delivery of the Series 201 SB Bonds as
contemplated hereby or by the Official Statement or of obligations of the general
character of the Series 201 SB Bonds which, in the Representative's reasonable
opinion, does materially adversely affect the market price or marketability of the
Series 201 SB Bonds, or
(ii)
there shall have occurred any event which in the Representative's
reasonable opinion, after consultation with its legal counsel, makes the Official
Statement either (A) contain an untrue statement of a material fact or (B) omit to
state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the statements
contained therein not misleading in any material respect, and the City fails to
prepare or furnish or fails to cause to be prepared or furnished to the Underwriters
an amendment or supplement to the Official Statement, pursuant to Section 5
hereof, which will amend or supplement the Official Statement so that, as amended
or supplemented, the Official Statement will not contain any untrue statement of a
material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary
to make the statements contained therein not misleading in a material respect, or
(iii)

there shall be in force a general suspension of trading on The New

 York Stock Exchange, Inc., or minimum or maximum prices for trading shall have
been fixed and be in force, or maximum ranges for prices for securities shall have
been required and be in force on The New York Stock Exchange, Inc., whether by
virtue of a determination by that Exchange or by order of the SEC or any other
governmental authority having jurisdiction, or
(iv)
a general banking moratorium shall have been declared by either
federal. State or New York authorities having jurisdiction and be in force, or
(v)
any legislation, ordinance, rule or regulation shall be enacted by the
City or State, or any department or agency thereof, or a decision by any court of
competent jurisdiction within the State shall be rendered which, in the reasonable
opinion of the Representative, would have a material adverse effect on the market
price or marketability of the Series 201 SB Bonds, or
(vi)
a war involving the United States, an outbreak or escalation of or
adverse development in hostilities or terrorist activities or other national or
international calamity or crisis shall have occurred which, in the reasonable opinion
ofthe Representative, materially adversely affects the market price or marketability
of the Series 201 SB Bonds, or
(vii)
there shall be any proceeding or threatened proceeding by the SEC
against the City and such proceeding or threatened proceeding, in the reasonable
opinion of the Representative, materially adversely affects the market price or
marketability of the Series 201 SB Bonds, or
(viii)
an event identified in the 2015ABond Purchase Agreement shall
occur giving the Underwriters the right to cancel their obligation to purchase the
Series 2015A Bonds pursuant to the Series 20ISA Bond Purchase Agreement.
(b)
If the City shall be unable to satisfy the conditions contained in this Agreement
or i f the Underwriters' obligations shall be terminated for any reason permitted by this
Agreement, this Agreement shall temiinate and neither the City nor the Underwriters shall
have any further obligations hereunder.
10.

Closing Condifions.

(a)
The Underwriters' obligations to purchase, to accept delivery of and to pay for
the Series 2015B Bonds at the Closing shall be conditioned upon the City's performance of
its obligafions imder Sections 6, 7 and 8 hereof and the Underwriters' receipt of the following
documents:
(i)
three copies of the Official Statement manually executed by the Chief
Financial Officer;
(ii)
the approving opinions, dated the date of the Closing, of Co-Bond
Counsel to the City, substantially in the fonn attached to the Official Statement as
Appendix F;

 (iii)
the letters dated the date of the closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters and to the City, of Co-Bond Counsel,
substanfially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit B-1;
(iv)
the letters dated the date of the closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters and to the City, of Co-Bond Counsel,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit B-2:
(v)
a letter dated the date of the closing and addressed to the City of
Chapman and Cutler LLP, Special Pension Disclosure Counsel to the City in
connection with certain pension matters described in the Official Statement,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit B-3. which letter shall also
either be addressed to or accompanied by a reliance letter to the Representative on
behalf of the Underwriters;
(vi)
an opinion, dated the date of the Closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, ofthe Corporation Coimsel of the City,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit C:
(vii)
an opinion or opinions, dated the date of the Closing and addressed to
the Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, of Mayer Brown LLP, Chicago,
Illinois, as counsel for the Underwriters ("Underwriters' Counsel"), in form and
substance satisfactory to the Representative;
(viii)
an opinion or opinions, dated the date of the Closing and addressed to
the Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, of Duane Morris LLP, Chicago,
Illinois, and Shanahan & Shanahan LLP, Chicago, Illinois, Co-Disclosure Counsel
to the City, substanfially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit D;
(ix)
a certificate, dated the date of the Closing, signed by the Chief
Financial Officer, to the effect that (A) the representations and warranties of the
City herein are correct in all material respects as of the date of the Closing; and (B)
there has been no material adverse change in the financial condition of the City
since December 31, 2014, as reflected in Appendix C to the Official Statement,
except as set forth in the Official Statement;
(x)
a certificate of the Trustee to the effect that the Trustee has full legal
right, power and authority to act as the Trustee, Bond Registrar, and Paying Agent
under the Ordinance and the Trust Indenture;
(xi)
a certificate, dated the date of the Closing, signed by the
Representative, in form and substance satisfactory to the City and Co-Bond
Counsel;
(xii)
an executed copy of the Undertaking substantially in the form
summarized in the Official Statement under the heading "SECONDARY
MARKET DISCLOSURE";

 (xiii)

an executed copy ofthe Trust Indenture;

(xiv)
a copy of an agreement between the City and DTC relating to the
safekeeping and book-entry form of the Series 201 SB Bonds;
(xv)
a copy, duly certified by the City Clerk of the City, of the Ordinance,
as passed by the City Council and approved by the Mayor;
(xvi)
evidence safisfactory to the Representative that the Series 201 SB
Bonds have ratings of "BBB+" (negafive outlook) by Standard & Poor's, a division
of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., "BBB+" (negative outlook) by Fitch, and
"A-" (stable outlook) by Kroll Bond Rating Agency;
(xvii)
such additional closing certificates and agreements related to the
Series 2015B Bonds, as Co-Bond Counsel shall reasonably determine to be
necessary to deliver their opinions as provided hereinabove.
(b)
All of the opinions, letters, certificates, instmments and other documents
mentioned above or elsewhere in this Agreement will be deemed to be in compliance with the
provisions hereof if, but only if, they are in form and substance safisfactory to the
Representative, in its reasonable judgment. Payment for the Series 2015B Bonds and
acceptance of the Series 2015B Bonds by the Underwriters shall constitute acknowledgment
by the Underwriters of the City's full performance hereunder.
11.
Expenses. The Underwriters shall be under no obligation to pay, and the City
shall pay, any and all expenses incident to the perfomiance of the City's obligations
hereunder, including but not liniited to: (a) the cost of the preparafion and printing or other
reproduction of the Ordinance, the Tmst Indenture, the Preliminary Official Statement and
the Official Statement, as well as the cost of shipping the Official Statement; (b) the cost of
the preparation and printing ofthe Series 2015B Bonds; (c) the fees and disbursements of CoBond Counsel and Co-Disclosure Counsel; (d) the fees and disbursements of any experts or
consuhants retained by the City; (e) the fees of the Tmstee; and (f) the fees for the municipal
bond ratings on the Series 2015B Bonds. The City shall be responsible for any meal, travel
and lodging expenses of its own officials and employees. The Underwriters will pay the
expenses incurred by them or any of them in connection with their public offering and
distribufion of the Series 2015B Bonds, including, but not limited to, the CUSIP Service
Bureau charges, the fees and expenses of Underwriters' Counsel and advertising expenses
directly incurred by the Underwriters.
The City shall pay for any expenses (included in the expense component of the
Underwriters' discount) incurred by the Underwriters on behalf of the City in connection
with the marketing, issuance and delivery of the Series 201 SB Bonds, including, but not
limited to, meals, transportation, lodging, and entertainment of the City's employees and
representatives.

10

 12.
Notices. Any notice or other communication to be given to the Cily under this
Agreement shall be given by delivering the same in writing at the address set forth above, and
any such notice or other communicafion to be given to the Underwriters shall be given by
delivering the same in •writing to the Representafive at the following address:

Attention; William Daley, Managing Director
13.
No Third Party Beneficiaries. Survival. Etc. This Agreement is made solely
for the benefit of the City and the Underwriters (including the successors or assigns of any
Underwriter), and no other person, partnership, association or corporation including any
purchaser ofthe Series 201 SB Bonds shall acquire or have any right hereunder or by virtue
hereof All of the representafions and agreenients by the City in this Agreement shall remain
operafive and in full force and effect regardless of any investigation made by or on behalf of
the Underwriters and shall survive the delivery of and payment for the Series 201 SB Bonds.
14.
Governing Law. The rights and obligafions of the parties to this Agreement
shall be governed by, construed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the State, without
giving effect to the conflict of laws provisions thereof
15.
Representations and Warranties of the Underwriters. The Underwriters
represent and warrant that:
(a)
They have heretofore authorized the Representative to execute any
document on behalf of or exercise any authority of and otherwise to act for, the
Underwriters in all matters under or pertaining to this Agreement. Each Underwriter has
warranted and confirmed to the Representative, and the Representative warrants and
confirms to the City that: (i) it is duly registered under the 1934 Act, as a broker/dealer or
municipal securities dealer and has duly paid the fee prescribed by MSRB Rule A-12 or is
exempt from such requirements, (ii) it is (a) a member in good standing of the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority ("FINRA") or (b) otherwise eligible under FINRA rules to
receive underwriting discounts and concessions available to such members with respect to
underwriters of municipal securities, and (iii) it has complied with the dealer registration
requirements, i f any, of the various jurisdicfions in which it offers Series 201 SB Bonds for
sale. The Underwriters represent, warrant and covenant that they are and will be in
compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations in connection with the offering,
issuance and sale ofthe Series 2015B Bonds.
(b)
To the knowledge of the Underwriters, no person holding office of the City,
either by election or appointment, is in any manner financially interested, either directly in
the officer's own name or indirecfiy in the name of any other person, association, trust or
corporation, in any contract being entered into or the performance of any work to be carried
out in connection with the issuance and sale of the Series 201 SB Bonds upon which said
officer may be called upon to act or vote.

  

(c)
Each Underwriter severally represents to the City that neither the
Underwriter, nor any Affiliate thereof is listed on any of the following lists maintained by
the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States Department of the Treasury, the
Bureau of Industry and Security ofthe United States Department of Commerce, the United
States Department of State or their successors, or on any other list of persons or entities
with which the City may not do business under any applicable law, rule, regulation, order
or judgment; the Specially Designated Nationals List, the Denied Persons List, the
Unverified List, the Entity List, the List of Statutorily Debarred Parties and the Excluded
Parties List. Such representation shall be provided to the City in the form attached hereto
as Exhibit E.
For purposes of this representation. "Affiliate." when used to indicate a
relationship with a specified person or entity, means a person or entity that, directly or
indirectly, through one or more intermediaries, controls, is controlled by or is under
common control wilh such specified person or entity, and a person or entity shall be
deemed lo be controlled by another person or entity, if controlled in any manner
whatsoever that results in control in fact by that other person or entity (or that other person
or entity and any persons or entities with whom that other person or entity is actingjointly
or in concert), whether directly or indirectly and whether through share ownership, a trust,
a contract or otherwise.
(d)
The Underwriters may enter into distribution agreements with certain
financial institutions for the retail distribution of municipal securities, including the Series
201 SB Bonds, at the initial public offering price. In accordance with such arrangements,
the Underwriters may share a portion of its underwriting compensation.
16.
Approval. The approval of the Underwriters when required hereunder or
the determination of their satisfaction as to any document referred to herein shall be in
writing signed by the Representative and delivered to the Cily.
17.
Successors and Assigns. This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be
binding upon the parties and their successors and assigns, and will not confer any rights upon
any other person. The temis "successors" and "assigns" shall not include any purchaser of
any Series 201 SB Bond or Bonds from the Underwriters merely because of such purchase.
18.
Enforceabilitv. If any provision of this Agreement shall be held or deemed to
be or shall, in fact, be invalid, inoperative or unenforceable as applied in any particular case
in any jurisdicfion or jurisdicfions, or in all jurisdictions, because it conflicts with any
provisions of any constitution, statute, mle or public policy, or for any other reason, such
circumstances shall not have the effect of rendering the provision in question invalid,
inoperative or unenforceable in any other case or circumstances, or of rendering any other
provision or provisions of this Agreement invalid, inoperative or unenforceable to any extent
whatsoever.
19.
Counterparts. This Agreenient may be executed in several counterparts, each
of which shall be regarded as the original and all of which shall constitute one and the same
document.

12

 20.
Cooperation with Citv Inspector General. As acknowledged by each
Underwriter's Representation Letter, each Underwriter understands and agrees that it is
required to and will comply with the provisions of Chapter 2-56 ofthe Municipal Code of
Chicago. Pursuant to Section 2-56-090 of the Municipal Code of Chicago, it shall be the
duty of each Underwriter to cooperate with the inspector general in any investigation or
hearing undertaken pursuant to Chapter 2-56. Every Underwriter shall report, directly and
without undue delay, to the City's inspector general any and all information concerning
conduct by any person which such Underwriter knows to involve corrupt activity, pursuant
to Secfion 2-156-018(b) of the Municipal Code of Chicago. As acknowledged by each
Underwriter's Representation Letter, any Underwriter's knowing failure to report corrupt
activity as required in subsection (b) of Secfion 2-156-018 of the Municipal Code of
Chicago, shall constitute an event of default under this Agreement. For purposes of
subsecfion (b) of Section 2-156-018 of the Municipal Code of Chicago, "corrupt acfivity"
shall mean any conduct set forth in subparagraph (a)(1), (2) or (3) of Secfion 1-23-020 of
the Municipal Code of Chicago:
(a)
bribery or attempted bribery, or its equivalent under any local, state
or federal law, of any public officer or employee of the City or of any sister agency;
or
(b)
theft, fraud, forgery, perjury, dishonesty or deceit, or attempted
theft, fraud, forgery, perjury, dishonesty or deceit, or its equivalent under any local,
state or federal law, against the City or of any sister agency; or
(c)

conspiring to engage in any of the acts set forth in items (a) or (b) of

above.
The Underwriter (individually and collectively) agrees and covenants that no
payment, gratuity or offer of employment shall be made in connection with this Agreement,
by or on behalf of a subcontractor to the Underwriter or any higher-tier subcontractor or
any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order
related to this Agreement.
21.
Entire Agreement. This Agreement consfitutes the entire agreement between
the parties hereto with respect to the matters covered hereby, and supersedes all prior
agreements and understandings between the parties. This Agreenient shall only be amended,
supplemented or modified in a •writing signed by both of the parties hereto.

13

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Bond Purchase
Agreement in conneclion with the City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Taxable
Series 201 SB, to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date first
above written.
Very truly yours,
THE UNDERWRITERS
Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
William Blair & Company

Seibert Brandford Shank & Co., LLC
Academy Securities, Inc.
BMO Capital Markets GKST Inc.
Citigroup Global Markets, Inc.
Estrada Hinojosa & Company, Inc.
George K. Baum & Company
J.J.B. Hilliard, W.L. Lyons. LLC
Melvin & Company
North South Capital LLC
By: MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC
As Representative

Bruce Gurley
Executive Director
Accepted by the City:

Chairman, Commiltee on
Finance ofthe City Council

 SCHEDULE I

T E R M S O F C I T Y O F C H I C A G O G E N E R A L O B L I G A T I O N BONDS,
T A X A B L E S E R I E S 2015B
1.
Aggregate Principal Amount: $742,860,000

2.
Dated: Date o f Issuance (Expected to be July 21, 20 IS)

3.
Maturities, Principal Amounts, Interest Rates, Prices and CUSIP Nunibers;
Maturity
(Jnnuarv 1)

PrinciDiil Amount

Price

CUSIP

5,020,000

5.383%

100.000%

I67486VX4

2020

5.290,000

5.633

100.000

167486VV2

2021

5,585,000

5.962

100.000

I67486VZ9

2022

5,920,000

6.212

100.000

I67486WA3

2023

6,290,000

6.361

100.000

I67486WBI

2033

321.695,000

7.375

99.309

167486VV8

2042

393.060,000

7.750

97.666

I67486VW6

2019

4.

Interest
R.->te

$

Redemption.

The Series 2015B Bonds are subject to both optional and mandatory redemption prior to
maturity, as described below, only in principal amounts of 51,000 and integral multiples thereof
Optional Redemption. Optional Redemption of the Series 2015B Bonds with Make Whole
Payment. The Series 2015B Bonds maturing on or before January 1, 2033, shall be subject to
redemption prior to maturity at the option ofthe City, in whole or in part, on any Business Day (as
defined below) at a redemption price (the "Make Whole Redemption Price") equal to the greater
of: (A) the principal amount of Series 201 SB Bonds to be redeemed, or (B) the sum of the present
values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on such Series 2015B Bonds
to be redeemed, not including any portion of those payments of interest accrued and unpaid as of
the date such Series 2015B Bonds are to be redeemed, discounted to the date of redemption of such
Series 2015B Bonds to be redeemed on a semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of
twelve 30-day months) at the Trea.sury Rate (defined below) plus 50 basis points plus accrued
interest on such Series 201 SB Bonds being redeemed to the date fixed for redemption.
The Make Whole Redemption Price of the Scries 201 SB Bonds to be redeemed will be
calculated by an independent accounting firm, investment banking firm or financial advisor (the
"Calculation Agent") retained by the City at the City's expense. The Bond Registrar and the City
may rely on the Calculation Agent's determination of the Make Whole Redemption Price and will
not be liable for such reliance. An authorized officer of the City shall confirm and transmit the

 Make Whole Redemption Price as so calculated on such dates and to such parlies as shall be
necessary to effectuate such redemption.
The "Treasury Rate" is, as of any redemption date, the yield to maturity as of such
redemption date of U.S. Treasury securities with a constant maturity (as compiled and published in
the most recent Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.15 (519) that has become publicly available
four Business Days (as defined below) prior to the redemption date (excluding inflation indexed
securities) (or, i f such Statistical Release is no longer published, any publicly available source of
similar market data)) most nearly equal to (i) in the case of the Series 201 SB Bonds maturing on
January 1 of the years 2019 through 2023, inclusive, the period from the redemption date to the
maturity date of such Series 201 SB Bonds to be redeemed, and (ii) in the case ofthe Series 201 SB
Bonds maturing on January 1, 2033, the then remaining average life of such maturity ofthe Series
201 SB Bonds to be redeemed; provided, however, that i f the period from the redemption dale to
such maturity date is less than one year, the weekly average yield on actually traded U.S. Treasury
securities adjusted to a constant maturity of one year will be used. "Business Day" means any day
other than a day on which banks in New York, New York, Chicago, Illinois, or the city in which
the Bond Registrar maintains its designated office are required or authorized to close. The Treasury
Rate will be determined by an independent accounting firm, investment banking firm or financial
advisor retained by the City at the City's expense.
"Business Day" means any day other than (i) a Saturday or Sunday, (ii) a day on which
banks located in the city where the Designated Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee is located are
authorized or required to close, and (iii) a day on which The New York Stock Exchange, Inc., is
closed.
The Treasury Rate will be determined by an independent accounting firm, investment
banking firm, or financial advisor retained by the City at the City's expense.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call the Series 201 SB
Bonds for optional redemption.
Optional Redemption of the Series 2015B Bonds at par. The Series 201 SB Bonds maturing
on January 1, 2042, are subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option ofthe City, in whole
or in part, on any date on or after January 1, 2025, and i f less than all of the outstanding Series
201 SB Bonds of such maturity are to be redeemed, the Series 201 SB Bonds called shall be called
in such principal amounts as the City shall determine, at a redemption price equal to the principal
amount of the Series 201 SB Bonds of such maturity being redeemed plus accrued interest to the
dale fixed for redemption.
The Cily is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call any ofthe Series
201 SB Bonds for optional redemption, in whole or in part.
If less than all of the Series 201 SB Bonds are to be redeemed prior to maturity, the
particular Series 201 SB Bonds lo be redeemed shall be selected on a pro-rata basis as de.scribed in
the Official Statement.

 Mandatory Redemption of the Series 2015B Bonds.
The Series 201 SB Bonds due January 1, 2033, are subject to mandatory redemption prior
lo maturity, at par and accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption, on January 1 of the
following years and in the following principal amounts:
Veiir

Princinal Aniount

2024
202S
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033*

$ 10,66S,000
9,990,000
3,0S0,000
3,300,000
3,620,000
3,950,000
45,105,000
55,175,000
154,145,000
32,695,000

* Final Maturity
The Series 201 SB Bonds due January I , 2042, are subject to mandatory redemption prior
to malurity, at par and accrued interest to the date fi.\ed for redemption, on January I of the
following years and in the following principal amounts:
Year

Principal Aniount

2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042*

$ 73,925,000
173,680,000
18,845,000
15,495,000
16,800,000
25,525,000
32,385,000
17,505,000
18,900,000

Final Maturity

 EXHIBIT A

PRELIMINARY OFFICIAL STATEMENT

E X H I B I T B-1
SUPPLEMENTAL OPINION OF C O - B O N D COUNSEL

July _ , 2015

Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
Chicago, Illinois
as Representative ofthe Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement
described below (the "Underwriters")
Re;

City of Chicago

City of Chicago
,000 General Obligation Bonds, Series 2015A
(the "Series 2015A Bonds")
$742,860,000 General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB
(the "Series 2015B Bonds")
$

Ladies and Gentlemen;
We have on this date delivered to you our approving opinions (the "Approving
Opinions") in connection with the issuance by the City of Chicago (the "City") of the
above-referenced obligations (collectively, the "Bonds"). The Series 2015A Bonds have
been delivered this date to the Underwriters pursuant to the terms of the Bond Purchase
Agreement dated July 16, 2015, between the City and the Underwriters (the "Series 2015A
Bond Purchase Agreemenl") and the Series 2015B Bonds have been delivered this date to
the Underwriters pursuant to the terms of the Bond Purchase Agreement dated July IS,
2015, between the City and the Underwriters (the "Series 2015B Bond Purchase
Agreenient" and, together with the Series 201 SA Bond Purchase Agreement, the "Bond
Purchase Agreements "). Capitalized terms used herein without definition shall have the
meanings ascribed to such terms in the hereafter defined Official Statement.
Based upon our examination as Bond Counsel of the proceedings described in the
Approving Opinions, we are of the opinion that;
1.
Pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the City Council on the 17th
day of June, 2015, authorizing the issuance of the Bonds (as supplemented by a
Notification of Sale, the "Bond Ordinance"), the City has duly authorized,
executed and delivered the Bond Purchase Agreements, the Indentures and the
Undertaking (together with the Bond Purchase Agreements and the Indentures, the
"City Documents"), and, assuming the due authorization, execufion, delivery and
the binding effect on the other parties thereto, each of the City Documents
constitutes a legal, valid and binding obligation of the City, enforceable against the

  

City in accordance with its respective terms, except that the enforceability of the
City Documents may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, moratorium,
reorganization and other similar laws affecting creditors' rights and by equitable
principles, whether considered at law or in equity, including the exercise of judicial
discretion.
2.
Based upon our examination of such documents and questions of
law as we have deemed relevant in connection with the offering and sale of the
Bonds under the circumstances described in the Official Statement dated July 16,
2015, relating to the Bonds (the "Official Statement"), we are of the opinion that,
under existing law, the Bonds are not required to be registered under the Securities
Act of 1933, as amended, and the Bond Ordinance and the Trust Indentures are not
required to be qualified under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended.
Our opinion represents our legal judgment based upon our review of the law and
the facts that we deem relevant to render such opinion, and is not a guarantee of a resull.
This opinion is given as of the date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or
supplement this opinion to reflect any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to
our attention or any changes in law that may hereafter occur.
This opinion is furnished by us as Bond Counsel to the City. No attorney-client
relationship has existed or exists between our firm and the Underwriters in connection with
the Bonds or by virtue of this opinion. This opinion is solely for the benefit of the
Underwriters and the City and may not be used, quoted, relied upon or otherwise referred
to for any other purpose or by any other person (including any person purchasing any of
the Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written consent.
Very truly yours.

 E X H I B I T B-2
LETTER OF CO-BOND COUNSEL

July _,201S

Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
Chicago, Illinois
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreeinent
described below (the "Underwriters")
Re:

_City of Chicago

City of Chicago
,000 General Obligation Bonds, Series 2015A
(the "Series 2015A Bonds")
$742,860,000 General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB
(the "Series 2015B Bonds ")
$

Ladies and Gentlemen;
We have acted as Bond Counsel in connection with the sale and issuance by the
City of Chicago (the "City") of the above-referenced obligations (collectively, the
"Bonds"). We have rendered our separate opinions, dated the date hereof, as to the
validity, enforceability and tax status of interest on the Bonds. The Series 201 SA Bonds
have been delivered this date to the Underwriters pursuant to the terms of the Bond
Purchase Agreenient dated July 16, 2015, between the City and the Underwriters (the
"Series 20ISA Bond Purchase Agreement") and the Series 201 SB Bonds have been
delivered this date to the Underwriters pursuant to the terms of the Bond Purchase
Agreement dated July 15, 2015, between the City and the Underwriters (the "Series 2015B
Bond Purchase Agreement" and, together with the Series 201 SA Bond Purchase
Agreement, the "Bond Purchase Agreements"). Capitalized terms used herein without
definition shall have the meanings ascribed to such terms in the hereafter defined Official
Statement.
We have not been engaged nor have we undertaken to review or verify the accuracy,
completeness or sufficiency of the information contained in or appended to the Official
Statement dated July 16, 2015 (the "Official Statemeni") or other offering material relating
to the Bonds, except that in our capacity as Bond Counsel in connection with the issuance
ofthe Bonds we have reviewed the information contained in the Official Statement under
the captions "OFFICIAL STATEMENT SUMMARY," "The BONDS" (except for the information
relating to The Depository Trust Company and its book-entry system and operations),
"SECURITY FOR THE BONDS - General Obligafion of the City" (except for any information
referenced under such caption contained under the heading "FINANCIAL DISCUSSION AND

  

ANALYSIS" and in APPENDIX D - "PROPERTY TAXES") and APPENDIX A - "SUMMARY OF

solely to detemiine whether such information and summaries conform
to the Bonds, the ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on the 17th day of
June, 2015, authorizing the issuance ofthe Bonds (as supplemented by the Nofification of
Sale dated July ,2015 delivered by the Chief Financial Officer ofthe City, the "Bond
Ordinance") and the Trust Indentures. The purpose of our professional engagement was
not to establish or confirm factual matters in the Official Statement, and we have not
undertaken any obligation to verify independently any of the factual matters set forth under
these captions and reviewed by us. Subject to the foregoing, the summary descriptions in
the Official Statement under such captions excepting those matters set forth above, as of
the date of the Official Statement and as of the date hereof, insofar as such descriptions
purport to describe or summarize certain provisions of the Bonds, the Bond Ordinance and
the Trust Indentures, are accurate summaries of such provisions in all material respects.
Further, we confirm the opinions attributed to us in the Official Statement and consent to
the references to such opinions contained therein. In addition, the informafion in the
Official Statement under the caption " T A X MATTERS" purporting to describe or summarize
our opinions concerning certain federal tax matters relating to the Bonds has been reviewed
by us and is an accurate summary in all material respects. Except as specifically described
in this paragraph, we express no opinion herein with respect to and have not undertaken to
determine independently the accuracy, fairness or completeness of any statements
contained, appended or incorporated by reference in the Official Statement.
THE INDENTURES,"

By acceptance of this letter you recognize and acknowledge that: (i) the preceding
paragraph is not a legal opinion but is rather in the nature of observations based on certain
limited acfivities performed by specific lawyers in our firm in our role as Bond Counsel to
the City; (ii) the scope of those activities performed by us for purposes of delivering this
letter was inherently limited and does not purport to encompass all activities necessary for
compliance with applicable securities laws; (iii) those activities performed by us rely on
third party representafions, warranties, certifications, statements and opinions, including
and primarily, representations, warranties and certifications made by the City, and are
otherwise subject to the conditions set forth herein; (iv) we have not been engaged to act,
and have not acted, as counsel to the Underwriters for any purpose in connection with the
issuance of the Bonds; (v) no attorney-client relationship exists or has at any time existed
between us and the Underwriters in connection with the Bonds or by virtue of this letter;
and (vi) this letter is based upon our review of proceedings and other documents undertaken
as part of our engagement with the City, and in order to deliver this letter we neither
undertook any duties or responsibilities to the Underwriters nor conducted any activities in
addition to those undertaken or conducted for the benefit of, and requested by, the City.
Consequently, we make no representation that our review has been adequate for the
Underwriters' purposes.
This letter is given as ofthe date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or
supplement this letter to reflect any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to our
attention. This letter is furnished by us as Bond Counsel to the City. This letter is solely
for the benefit ofthe Underwriters and the City and may not be used, quoted, relied upon

 or otherwise referred to for any other purpose or by any other person (including any person
purchasing any of the Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written consent.
Very truly yours.

 E X H I B I T B-3
LETTERS OF SPECIAL PENSION DISCLOSURE COUNSEL
LETTER TO UNDERWRITERS

July

,2015

Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement
described below
Re:

$
City of Chicago
General Obligafion Bonds, Series 201 SA
(the "Series 2015A Bonds ")
$742,860,000 City of Chicago
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB
(the "Series 2015B Bonds ")

Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have acted as special disclosure counsel to the City of Chicago (the "City"),
solely in connection with the information contained under the caption "FINANCIAL
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS - Pensions" and in Appendix E — "RETIREMENT FUNDS"
(together, the "Pension Sections") of the Preliminary Official Statement dated July
,
2015 (the "Preliminary Official Statement") and the Official Statement dated July
,
2015 (the "Official Statement"), each relating to the Series 20ISA Bonds and the Series
201 SB Bonds (together, the "Bonds") issued by the City on this date.
In accordance with our understanding with the City, we have reviewed the Pension
Sections, certificates of officers of the City and other appropriate persons, and such other
records, reports, opinions and documents, and we have made such investigations of law, as
we have deemed appropriate as a basis for the conclusion hereinafter expressed. As to
facts material to the views expressed herein, we have, with your consent, relied upon oral
or written statements or representations of officers or other representatives or agents of or
con.sullants lo the City and of or to the Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund
of Chicago, the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Firemen's Annuity
and Benefit Fund of Chicago, and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees'
Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago (collectively, the "Retirement Funds "), including
the representations and warranties of the City in the Bond Purchase Agreement dated July
16, 2015, with respect to the Series 2015A Bonds, and in the Bond Purchase Agreement
dated July 15, 2015, with re.spect to the Series 201 SB Bonds, each between the Cily and

 Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, on behalf of itself and the other underwriters named therein
(collectively, the "Underwriters"). We have not independently verified such matters.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in
the Official Statement.
In arriving at the conclusion hereinafter expressed, we are not expressing any
opinion or view on, and with your permission are assuming and relying on, the validity,
accuracy and sufficiency of the records, reports, documents, certificates and opinions
referred to above (including the accuracy of all factual matters represented and legal
conclusions contained therein). We have assumed that all records, reports, documents,
certificates and opinions that we have reviewed, and the signatures thereto, are genuine.
We are not passing upon, and do not assume any responsibility for, the accuracy,
completeness or fairness of any of the statements contained in the Pension Sections and
make no representation that we have independently verified the accuracy, completeness or
fairness of any such statements. In our capacity as special disclosure counsel to the City,
to assist it in discharging its responsibility with respect to the Pension Sections, we
participated in conferences and correspondence with your representatives, representatives
of the City, the City's attorneys, Co-Disclosure Counsel to the City, counsel to the
Underwriters, and other persons involved in the preparation of informafion for the Pension
Sections, during which the contents of the Pension Sections and related matters were
discussed and revised. The purpose of our professional engagement was not to establish
or confirm factual matters set forth in the Pension Sections, and we have not undertaken
any obligation to verify independently any of the factual matters set forth therein.
Moreover, many of the determinations required to be made in the preparation of the
Pension Sections involve matters of a non-legal nature. Based on our participation in the
above-mentioned conferences and correspondence, and in reliance thereon and on our
liniited review ofthe records, reports, documents, certificates, statements, representations,
warranties, opinions and matters mentioned above, without independent verification, we
advise you as a matter of fact and not opinion that, during our engagement as special
disclosure counsel to the City in connection with the Pension Sections, no facts came to
the attention of the attorneys in our firm rendering legal services in connection with such
limited role which caused us to believe that the Pension Sections (apart from the financial
statements or other financial, operating, numerical, accounting or statistical data or
forecasts, estimates, projections, assumptions or expressions of opinion, or matters of
litigation contained or incorporated therein, as to which we do not express any conclusion
or belief) contained as of its date or contains as ofthe dale hereof any untrue statement of
a material fact or omitted or omits to state a material fact required to be stated therein or
necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in the light of the circumstances
under which they were made, not misleading. No responsibility is undertaken or statement
rendered herein with respect to any other portions of the Preliminary Official Statement or
the Official Statement or any other disclcsure document, materials or acfivity, or as to any
information from another document or source referred to by or incorporated by reference
in the Preliminary Official Statement or the Official Statement.

 By acceptance of this letter you recognize and acknowledge that: (i) the preceding
paragraph is not a legal opinion but is rather in the nature of negative observations based
on certain limited acfivities performed by specific lawyers in our firm during our
engagement to the City as special disclosure counsel in connection with the Pension
Sections; (ii) the scope of those acfivities performed by us for purposes of delivering this
letter was inherently limited and does not purport to encompass all activities necessary for
compliance with applicable securities laws; (iii) those activities performed by us rely on
third party representations, warranties, certifications, statements and opinions, including
and primarily, representations, warranties and certifications made by the City, and are
otherwise subject to the conditions set forth herein; (iv) we have not been engaged to act,
and have not acted, as your counsel for any purpose in connection with the issuance of the
Bonds; (v) no attorney-client relationship exists or has at any time existed between us in
connection with the Bonds or by virtue of this letter; and (vi) this letter is based upon our
review of proceedings and other documents undertaken as part of our engagement with the
City, and in order to deliver this letter we neither undertook any duties or responsibilities
to you nor conducted any activities in addition to those undertaken or conducted for the
benefit of, and requested by, the City. Consequently, we make no representation that our
review has been adequate for your purposes.
We express herein no opinion or belief herein with respect to the validity of the
Bonds or the taxation thereof or of the interest thereon, and our expression of belief with
respect to the Pension Sections assumes the validity of the Bonds and the tax treatment of
the interest payable thereon for federal income tax purposes, all as set forth in the opinions
of Co-Bond Coun.sel.
This letter is furnished by us in our limited capacity as special disclosure counsel
to the City in connection with the Pension Secfions and is solely for the benefit of the
Underwriters. This letter may not be used, quoted, relied upon or otherwise referred to for
any other purpose or by any other person (including any person purchasing any of the
Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written consent, except that such letter
may be referenced in the Preliminary Official Statement, the Official Statement and the
Bond Purchase Agreenient with respect to each series of the Bonds and included in the
transcript of proceedings for the Bonds. This letter is given as ofthe date hereof and we
assume no obligation to revise or supplement this letter to reflect any facts or circumstances
that may hereafter come to our attention.
Respectfully submitted.

    

LETTER TO CITY

July

,2015

City of ChicaE

Re:

$
City of Chicago
General Obligation Bonds, Series 201 SA
(the "Series 2015A Bonds")
$742,860,000 City of Chicago
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB
(the "Series 2015B Bonds")

Ladies and Gentlemen;
We have acted as special disclosure counsel to you, the City of Chicago (the
"City"), solely in connection with the information contained under the caption "FINANCIAL
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS - Pensions" and in Appendix E — "RETIREMENT FUNDS"
(together, the "Pension Sections") of the Preliminary Official Statement dated July
,
2015 (the "Preliminary Official Statement") and the Official Statement dated July
,
2015 (the "Official Statement"), each relating to the Series 201 SA Bonds and the Series
201 SB Bonds (together, the "Bonds'"), issued by the City on this date.
In accordance with our understanding with the City, we have reviewed the Pension
Sections, certificates of officers of the City and other appropriate persons, and such other
records, reports, opinions and documents, and we have made such investigations of law, as
We have deemed appropriate as a basis for the conclusion hereinafter expressed. As to
facts material to the views expressed herein, we have, with your consent, relied upon oral
or written statements or representations of officers or other representatives or agents of or
consultants to the City and of or to the Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund
of Chicago, the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Firemen's Annuity
and Benefit Fund of Chicago, and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees'
Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago (collectively, the "Retirement Funds"), including
the representations and warranties of the City in the Bond Purchase Agreement dated July
16, 2015, with respect to the Series 201 SA Bonds, and in the Bond Purchase Agreement
dated July 15, 2015, with respect to the Series 201SB Bonds, each between the City and
Morgan Stanley, on behalf of itself and the other underwriters named therein (collecfively,
the "Underwriters"). We have not independently verified such matters. Capitalized terms
not olherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in the Official
Statement.

  

In arriving at the conclusion hereinafter expressed, we are not expressing any
opinion or view on, and with your permission are assuming and relying on, the validity,
accuracy and sufficiency of the records, reports, documents, certificates and opinions
referred to above (including the accuracy of all factual matters represented and legal
conclusions contained therein, including, without limitation, any representations and legal
conclusions regarding the due authorization, issuance, delivery, validity and enforceability
of the Bonds, the tax treatment of interest on the Bonds for federal income tax purposes,
and the application of Bond proceeds in accordance with the authorizafion therefor). We
have assumed that all records, reports, documents, certificates and opinions that we have
reviewed, and the signatures thereto, are genuine.
We are not passing upon, and do not assume any responsibility for, the accuracy,
completeness or fairness of any of the statements contained in the Pension Sections and
make no representation that we have independently verified the accuracy, completeness or
fairness of any such statements. In our capacity as special disclosure counsel to the City,
to assist you in discharging your responsibility with respect to the Pension Sections, we
participated in conferences and correspondence with representatives of the City, the City's
attorneys, Co-Disclosure Counsel to the City, the Underwriters, counsel to the
Underwriters, and other persons involved in the preparation of information for the Pension
Sections, during which the contents of the Pension Sections and related matters were
discussed and revised. The purpose of our professional engagement was not to establish
or confirm factual matters set forth in the Pension Sections, and we have not undertaken
any obligation to verify independently any of the factual matters set forth therein.
Moreover, many of the determinations required to be made in the preparation of the
Pension Sections involve matters of a non-legal nature. Based on our participation in the
above-mentioned conferences and correspondence, and in reliance thereon and on our
limited review of the records, reports, documents, certificates, statements, representations,
warranties, opinions and matters mentioned above, without independent verification, we
advise you as a matter of fact and not opinion that, during our engagement as special
disclosure counsel to the City in connection with the Pension Sections, no facts came to
the attenfion of the attorneys in our firm rendering legal services in connection with such
limited role which caused us to believe that the Pension Sections (apart from the financial
statements or other financial, operating, numerical, accounfing or stafistical data or
forecasts, estimates, projections, assumptions or expressions of opinion, or matters of
litigation contained or incorporated therein, as to which we do not express any conclusion
or belief) contained as of its date or contains as of the date hereof any untrue statement of
a material fact or omitted or omits to state a material fact required to be stated therein or
necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in the light of the circumstances
under which they were made, not misleading. No responsibility is undertaken or statement
rendered herein with respect to any other portions of the Preliminary Official Statement or
the Official Statement or any other disclosure document, materials or activity, or as to any
information from another document or source referred to by or incoiporated by reference
in the Preliminary Official Statement or the Official Statement.
By acceptance of this letter you recognize and acknowledge that: (i) the preceding
paragraph is not a legal opinion bul is rather in the nature of negalive observations based

 on certain limited activities performed by specific lawyers in our firm during our
engagement to the City as special disclosure counsel in connection with the Pension
Sections; (ii) the scope of those activities performed by us for purposes of delivering this
letter was inherently liniited and does not purport to encompass all activities necessary for
compliance with applicable securities laws; and (iii) those activities performed by us rely
on third party representations, warranties, certifications, statements and opinions, including
and primarily, representations, warranties and certifications made by the City, and are
otherwise subject to the conditions set forth herein.
We express herein no opinion or belief herein with respect to the validity of the
Bonds or the taxafion thereof or of the interest thereon, and our expression of belief with
respect to the Pension Sections assumes the validity ofthe Bonds and the tax treatment of
the interest payable thereon for federal income tax purposes, all as set forth in the opinions
of Co-Bond Counsel.
This letter is furnished by us in our limited capacity as special disclosure counsel
to the City in connection with the Pension Sections. This letter may not be used, quoted,
relied upon or otherwise referred to for any other purpose or by any other person (including
any person purchasing any of the Bonds from the Underwriters) without our prior written
consent, except that such letter may be referenced in the Preliminary Official Statement,
the Official Statement and the Bond Purchase Agreement with respect to each series of the
Bonds and included in the transcript of proceedings for the Bonds. This letter is given as
of the date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or supplement this letter to reflect
any facts or circumstances that may hereafter come to our attention.
Respectfully submitted.

 EXHIBIT C
OPINION OF CORPORATION COUNSEL OF THE C I T V

July 21, 2015

Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, as Representative
ofthe Underwriters named in the Bond Purchase
Agreement, dated July [16], 2015, between such
Underwriters and the City of Chicago

Ladies and Genfiemen:
This opinion is given to you pursuant to Section 10(a)(vi) of that certain Bond
Purchase Agreement dated July 16, 2015 (the "2015A Bond Purchase Agreement"),
between the City of Chicago (the "City") and Morgan Stanley Co. LLC, as representative
of a group of underwriters, with respect to the purchase of the City of Chicago General
Obligafion Bonds, Series 2015A (the "Series 20ISA Bonds") and the Bond Purchase
Agreement dated July 15, 2015 (the "201 SB Bond Purchase Agreement" and together with
the 2015A Bond Purchase Agreement, the "Bond Purchase Agreements") between the City
and Morgan Stanley Co. LLC, as representative of a group of underwriters, with respect to
the purchase of the City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB (the
"Taxable Series 2015B Bonds" and together with the Series 201 SA Bonds, the "Bonds").
The Series 201 SA Bonds are being issued in accordance with the Trust Indenture between
the City and Zions First National Bank, as trustee (the "Trustee") dated as of July 1, 2015
(the "Series 201 SA Indenture"). The Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds arc being issued in
accordance with the Trust Indenture between the City and Zions First National Bank, as
trustee, dated as of July 1, 2015 (the "Taxable Series 201 SB Indenture," and collectively
with the Series 2015A Indenture, the "Indentures"). The Bonds are authorized by an
ordinance of the City adopted by the City Council ofthe City (the "City Council") on June
17, 2015. Unless olherwise defined herein, capitalized terms u.scd herein shall have the
meanings assigned to them in the Bond Purchase Agreements.
In connection with the issuance of the Bonds, I have caused to be examined a
certified copy ofthe record of proceedings of the City Council pertaining to the issuance
of the Bonds by the City, and executed counterparts, where applicable, of the following
documents;

 (a)

the Ordinance;

(b)

the Indentures;

(c)

the Bond Purchase Agreements; and

(d)
that certain Continuing Disclosure Undertaking dated the date hereof
pursuant to the requirements of Section (b) (5) of Rule 15c-12 of the Securifies and
Exchange Commission (the "Undertaking").

On the basis of such examination and review of such other information, records and
documents as was deemed necessary or advisable, I am of the opinion that:
1.
The City is a home rule unit of local government duly organized and
existing under the Constitufion and laws of the State of Illinois with full power and
authority, among other things, to adopt the Ordinance, to authorize the issuance of the
Bonds, and to execute and deliver the Indentures, the Bond Purchase Agreements and the
Undertaking.
2.
The Bond Purchase Agreements, the Indentures and the Undertaking have
been duly authorized, executed and delivered by, and the Ordinance has been duly adopted
by, the City, and, assuming the due execution and delivery by the other parties thereto, as
appropriate, such instruments constitute legal and valid obligations of the City in each case
enforceable in accordance with their respective terms except as may be limited by
bankruptcy, insolvency and other laws affecting creditors' rights or remedies and the
availability of equitable remedies generally.
3.
To my knowledge, compliance with the provisions of the Bonds, the
Ordinance, the Indentures, the Bond Purchase Agreements and the Undertaking does not
conflict in a material manner with, or constitute a material breach of or material default
under, any applicable law, administrative regulation, court order or consent decree of the
Stale of Illinois, or any department, division, agency or instrumentality thereof or of the
United States of America or any ordinance, agreement or other instrument to which the
City is a party or is otherwise subject.
4.
To my knowledge, all approvals, consents and orders of and filings (except
vvith respect to state "blue sky" or securities laws) with any governmental authority, board,
agency or commission having jurisdiction which would constitute conditions precedent to
the performance by the City of its obligations under the Ordinance, the Indentures, the
Bond Purchase Agreements, the Undertaking and the Bonds have been obtained.
5.
There is no lifigation or proceeding pending, or to my knowledge, threatened,
materially affecting the existence ofthe City or seeking to restrain or enjoin the issuance
of the Bonds, or contesting the validity or enforceability of the Bonds, the Ordinance, the

 Indentures, the Bond Purchase Agreements or the Undertaking, or the completeness or
accuracy ofthe Official Statement, or the powers of the City or its authority with respect
to the Bonds, the Ordinance, the Indentures, the Bond Purchase Agreements or the
Undertaking.
Nothing has come to my attention which would lead me to believe that the Official
Statement (excluding information under the captions "THE BONDS - Book-Entry System"
relating to the Depository Trust Company ("DTC"), "RATINGS," "UNDERWRITING,"
and "TAX MATTERS," "APPENDIX B -ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC
INFORMATION" and "APPENDIX F ~ OPINIONS OF CO-BOND COUNSEL,"
information sourced to sources other than the City or departments thereof, any information
in or omitted from the Official Statement relating to DTC, any information in or omitted
from the Official Statement relating to any information furnished by the Underwriters for
use in the Official Statement, the financial statements and all other financial and statistical
data contained in the Official Statement, including the Appendices thereto) contains an
untrue statement of a material fact or omits to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements therein, in the light of the circumstances under which they were made, not
misleading in any material respect.
No opinion is expressed as to any "blue sky" or other securities laws or as to the
laws regarding taxation of any state or the United States of America, or any disclosure or
compliance related thereto.
The statements contained herein are made in an official capacity and not personally
and no personal responsibility shall derive from them. Further, the only opinions that are
expressed are the opinions specifically set forth herein, and no opinion is implied or should
be inferred as to any other matter or transaction.

No one other than you shall be enfified to rely on this opinion.
Very truly yours.

Stephen R. Patton
Corporation Counsel

 EXHIBIT D
OPINION OF CO-DISCLOSURE COUNSEL

July 21, 2015

City of Chicago, Illinois
Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, as
Representative of the Underwriters named
in the Bond Purchase Agreements (defined
herein) between such Underwriters and the
City of Chicago
$

C I T Y OF CHICAGO
$
General Obligation Bonds,
Series 2015A

$742,860,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Series 2015B

Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have acted as Co-Disclosure Counsel to the City of Chicago (the "City") in
connecfion with the offering by the City of its General Obligation Bonds, Series 201 SA
(the "Series 201 SA Bonds") and its General Obligafion Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB (the
"Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds" and, together with the Series 2015A Bonds, the "Bonds").
The Bonds are authorized by an ordinance of the City Council of the City (the "City
Council") adopted on June 17, 2015, and the Bonds of each Series will be issued pursuant
to and secured by a separate Trust Indenture each dated as of July 1, 2015 (collectively, the
"Indentures"), between the City and Zions First National Bank, as bond trustee.
This opinion is being rendered pursuant to Section 10(a)(viii) ofthe Bond Purchase
Agreement dated July 16, 2015 between the City and Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, as
representative (the "Representative'") of the underwriters named therein (the
"Underwriters") with respect to the Series 20ISA Bonds (the "Series 20ISA Bond
Purchase Agreement"), and Section 10(a)(viii) ofthe Bond Purchase Agreenient dated July
15,2015, between the City and the Representative with respect to the Taxable Series 201 SB
Bonds (the "Series 201 SB Bond Purchase Agreement," and together with the Series 2015 A
Bond Purchase Agreement, the "Bond Purchase Agreements"). Capitalized terms used
herein and not otherwise defined shall have the meanings set forth in the Bond Purchase
Agreements.
For purposes of rendering this opinion, we have examined originals or executed
copies, certified or otherwise idenfified to our satisfaction, o f (i) the Indentures, (ii) the

 Bond Purchase Agreements, (iii) the Undertaking and (iv) the legal opinions, agreements
and certificates delivered in connection with the reoffering of the Bonds. We have also
participated in the preparation of the Preliminary Official Statement and the Official
Statement. In our examinations, we have assumed the legal capacity of natural persons,
the genuineness of signatures on, and the authenticity of, all documents so examined, the
conformity to originals of all documents submitted to us as copies, and that all records and
other information made available to us, and on which we have relied, are complete in all
respects.
Based upon and subject to our examination as described above and subject to the
qualifications set forth herein, we are of the opinion that:
1.
No registrafion is required under the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended, with respect to the offering of the Bonds, and neither of the Indentures is
required to be qualified under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended.
2.
The Undertaking complies with the requirements of paragraph
(b)(5) of Regulation §240.15c2-l2 (Rule 15c2-12) adopted by the Securifies and
Exchange Commission under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as in effect as
of the date of the Closing.
3.
The statements contained in the Official Statement under the caption
"SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE" insofar as such statements purport to
summarize certain provisions of the Undertaking, constitute a fair and accurate
summary of such provisions.
We are not expressing (and cannot express) any opinion or view with respect to the
authorization, issuance, delivery or validity of the Bonds, or the federal tax exemption for
the interest paid on the Series 201 SA Bonds. Because the purpose of our professional
engagement was not to establish factual matters and because of the wholly or partially
nonlegal character of many ofthe determinations involved in the preparation of the Official
Statement, except as explicitly stated in paragraph 3 above, we are not passing upon nor
do we assume responsibility for the accuracy, completeness or fairness ofthe statements
contained in the Official Statement and we make no representation that we have
independently verified the accuracy, completeness or fairness of such statements. Without
limiting the foregoing, we assume no responsibility for, and have not independently
verified, the accuracy, completeness or fairness of the financial statements, notes to
financial statements, tables and other financial, economic, market and statistical data
included or incorporated by reference in the Official Statement and the appendices to the
Official Statement, and we have not reviewed the accounting, financial or statistical records
from which such financial statements, schedules, appendices and data are derived. We
note that we are not experts within the meaning of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended,
with respect to such financial statements or schedules or the other financial, economic,
market, or statistical data included or incorporated by reference therein. During the
preparation of the Official Statement, however, we participated in conferences with you,
Co-Bond Counsel, the City's Corporation Counsel, officials, employees and agents ofthe
Citv and Underwriters' counsel at which conferences the contents ofthe Official Statement

 and related matters were discussed. On the basis of the foregoing, but without independent
verification of factual matters, nothing has come to our attention which would lead us to
believe that the Official Statement contains any statement which, at the time and in the
light of the circumstances under which it is made, is false or misleading with respect to any
material fact or omits to state a material fact necessary to make the statements therein, at
the time and in the light of the circumstances under which they are made, not false or
misleading; provided that we express no view as to: (i) financial statements, notes to
financial statements, tables and any financial, forward-looking, technical, economic,
market and statistical information included in the Official Statement or the Appendices
thereto, (ii) the description of DTC and the information under the caption "THE BONDS—
Book-Entry System" included in the Official Statement, (iii) any information included in
APPENDIX B—"ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION," APPENDIX
C—"CITY OF CHICAGO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR
ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2014," and APPENDIX E—"RETIREMENT FUNDS," or (iv)
the legal opinions or forms thereof included as APPENDIX F—"OPINIONS OF COBOND COUNSEL."
Our opinions and views expressed herein are limited to the matters expressly stated
herein and no opinion or view is implied or may be inferred beyond the matters expressly
stated.
Our opinions and views expressed herein are rendered as ofthe date hereof and are
based on existing law which is subject to change. We do not undertake to advise you of
any changes in the opinions and views expressed herein from matters that may hereafter
arise or be brought to our attention or to revise or supplement such opinions and views
should the present laws of any jurisdiction be changed by legislative action, judicial
decision, or otherwise.
This opinion and views herein set forth are solely for the information of the
addressees hereof and are not to be quoted in whole or in part or otherwise referred to
(except in a list of closing documents), nor are they to be filed with any governmental
agency or other person, without our prior written consent. Other than the addressees
hereof, no one is entitled to rely on this opinion and views herein set forth.

Very truly yours.

 EXHIBIT E
REPRESENTATION LETTER

City of Chicago
DepartmenLoflElliaDcg

Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
. ^
as Representative of the Underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreements,
dated July 15, 2015 and July 16, 2015,
)eputy Comptroller of Financial Policy between such Underwriters and the City of
Chicago

Pursuant to the Bond Purchase Agreement dated July 16, 2015 (the "2015A Bond
Purchase Agreement"), aniong the City of Chicago (the "City") and Morgan Stanley & Co.
LLC, as representative (the "Representative") of the underwriters named therein (each an
"Underwriter") relafing to the City's General Obligation Bonds, Series 20ISA (the "Series
20ISA Bonds"), and the Bond Purchase Agreement dated July 15, 2015 (the "2015B Bond
Purchase Agreement" and together with the 201 SA Bond Purchase Agreement, the
"Purchase Agreemenf), among the City and the Representative of the Underwriters
relating to the General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB (the "Series 201 SB Bonds"
and, together with the Series 2015 A Bonds, the "Bonds"), each of the undersigned
Underwriters severally represents to the City that:
(I)
Neither the Underwriter, nor any Affiliate thereof is listed on any of the
following lists maintained by the Office of Foreign Assets Control ofthe U.S. Department
of the Treasury, the Bureau of Industry and Security of the U.S. Department of Commerce,
the U.S. Department of State or their successors, or on any other list of persons or entities
with which the City may not do business under any applicable law, rule, regulation, order
or judgment: the Specially Designated Nationals List, the Denied Persons List, the
Unverified List, the Entity List, the List of Statutorily Debarred Parties and the Excluded
Parties List.
For purposes of this representation, "Affiliate," when used lo indicate a
relationship with a specified person or entity, tneans a person or entity that, directly or
indirectly, through one or more intermediaries, controls, is controlled by or is under
common control with such specified person or entity, and a person or entity shall be
deemed to be controlled by another person or entity, if controlled in any manner
whatsoever that results in control in fact by that other person or entity (or that other person
or entity and any persons or entities with whom that other person or entity is actingjointly
or in concert), whether directly or indirectly and whether through share ownership, a trust,
a contract or otherwise.
(2)

The undersigned Underwriters agree that in the event that any Underwriter or
any of its Affiliates appears on any of the lists described in paragraph (1) above,
at any time prior to the Closing (as defined in the Purchase Agreement) with
respect to the Bonds, that Underwriter shall be deemed to have submitted to the

  

Representative its Withdrawal From Agreement Among Underwriters.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation
Letter in connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives
as of the date written below.
Dated:

2015

MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By;
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By;
Its;

By:
Its:

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Ils:

By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By;
Its;

By;
Its;

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
writlen below.
Dated; July 16,2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR 8c COMPANY

Its: Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By;
Its:

By:
Its:

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:
Its:

By:.
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Us;

By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its;

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parfies hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16,2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBER^TBRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LI

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its:
BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:.
Its;

By;
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by iheir duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16,2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By;
Its:

By;
Its;
CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.
By:
Its;

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPAr
INC.
By:
Its:

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY
By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By;
Its;

By;
Its;

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By;
Its:

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16,2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:.
Its:

By:.
Its:

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:
Its:

By:.
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
IN(

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY
By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:.
Its:

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16,2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Its:
J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS. LLC

By:
Its:

MELVIN & COMPANY
By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

 I N WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16,2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLLAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:.
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its:

By:.
Its:

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GRST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOBAL MARKETS, INC.

By;
Its;

By:
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA &. COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY
By:
Its:

By:.
Its:
J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:.
Its:
SOUTH CAPITAL LLC

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16,2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC
By:
Its; Managing Director
SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES. INC.

By:.
Its:

By:
Its:

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:.
Its:

By:.
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:.
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representafives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16, 2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

AC

By:
Its:
BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS. INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
E^C.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:

 FN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16, 2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By;
Its; Managing Director

By;
Its;

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its:
BMO CAPITAL iMARKETS GKST INC.

RKETS, INC.

By:
Its:
ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.
By:
Its:

[

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY
By:
Its;

:

J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By;
Its;

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:
Its;

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the dale
written below.
Dated; July 16, 2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By;
Its: Managing Director

By;
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its:

By;
Its;

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOGAL MARKETS, INC.

By:
Its:

By;
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.
By:
Its:
J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC

MELVIN & COMPANY

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:.
Its:

  

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation Letter in
connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as of the date
written below.
Dated: July 16,2015
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC

WILLIAM BLAIR & COMPANY

By:
Its: Managing Director

By:
Its:

SEIBERT BRANDFORD SHANK & CO.,
LLC

ACADEMY SECURITIES, INC.

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

BMO CAPITAL MARKETS GKST INC.

CITIGROUP GLOSAL MARKETS, INC.

By:.
Its:

By:.
Its:

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.

GEORGE K. BAUM & COMPANY

By:
Its:
J.J.B. HILLIARD, W.L. LYONS, LLC
By:.
Its:
NORTH SOUTH CAPITAL LLC
By:.
Its:

By:
Its:

 EXHIBIT 3

OFFICIAL STATEMENT DATED JULY 16, 2015

NEW ISSUE-GLOBAL BOOK ENTRY

RATINGS: See "RATINGS" herein.

Subject lo complimirc by llic Ci'/./y toilli rcrUiin cnnenmit.';. in llic i c-spccHvc opinions of Chnpniiin mid Culler LLP.
Chicnijo, Illinois, iinil Ihe ll<inln;i,(:k Lair, Finn J^LC, Cliicdijo, Iltiiidis, Co-lionil Connsi'.l. iiiiilcr prc.sp.iil lani, inlprest on
the aerie's 2015.'\ Bonds /.s e.rclud(it)le.from (jross income of llie oirner.'i IhrrcoJ Jor Jcdcral income tii.r purpo.te.f and !.•< not
inchnird as an item of ta.v preference in comjnitin/j the federal altcniativcminimiun
ta.r.for individuals and corporations,
but such inleresi is taken into account in compulinr) an adjiistinent used in delin'inininij lite.federal ullernalive mini inn in
lux for cerlnin corporations.
Inleresi ov the Taxable Scries 2015B Bond.s is includible in gro.ss income of Ihe owners
thereof for federal income ta.x purposes. Interest on the Bonds is not c.ieni.pl from present State of lliivois income Icuves.
See "TAX MATTERS" herein Jor a more complete discii.'ssion.

$1,088,390,000
CITY OF CHICAGO
$345,530,000
General Obligation Bonds
Series 2015A

$742,860,000
General Obligation Bonds
Taxable Series 2015B

Dated: Date of Delivery

Due: .January 1, as shown on the inside front cover

The General Obligation Bond.s, Scries 20ir)A (the "Scries 2015A Bonds") and the General Obligalion Bond.s, Ta.\ab]o
Seiies 2015B (the 'T;ixablc Scries 2015B Bonds" and together wilh the Series 201.5A Bonds, the "Bonds") are i.ssiiable ;is fully
registered bonds and will be registered in the naiue of Cede & Co., as registered owner and nominee of The Depository Tiiist
Company, New York, New York ("DTC"). DTC will act ;LS securities dcpositoiy for the Bonds. Purcliasers of the Bonds will
not receive certificates representing their interests in the Bonds i)nr(:li;used. Ownershij) l)y tju; bent!ficial owners o f t h e Bonds
will be evidenced by book-enti'y only. 'ITie Series 2015A Bonds are i.ssuable in denominations of $5,000 or tiny integral multiple
thereof The Taxable Series 201i5B Bonds are issuable in denomin.-uions of .$1,000 or .-uiy integral muUiple ihereof
Interest on tho Bonds will accrue from the date of issuance and be payable on each January 1 and .July I , commencing
Jaiuiaiy 1, 2016. Prir\cij)al of anil interest on the Bon<ls will be paid by Zions First National Baiik, Chicago, Illinois, as tmstee
under each of the Indentures described herein, to DTC, which in turn will remit such ]>rincipal luid inlerest payments to ils
participants for subsequent disbursement I o Ihe beneficial owners ofthe Bonds. As long as Cede & Co. is the registered owner
a.s nominee of DTC, payments on the Bonds will he made to such registered owner, and disbursal of .such jiaymcnts will be the
responsibility of DTC and its participants. See "THE BONDS — Book-Entry System."
The proceeds of the Bonds will be used to Ci) rejjay indebtedness incurred by the Cily under ils Short Term Borrowing
Program de.scribed herein; (ii) fund the cost of terminating the sale/leaseback o f l h e Or.'uige Line rapid transit rail line; (iii)
reimburse the City's Genera) Fund for the cost of tenninating an interest rate swap associated with the City's sales tax
revenue bonds; (iv) fund ccrlain capitalized interest on the Boiitls; and (v) pay costs of issuance o f t h e Bonds. See "PLAN OF
FINANCING."
The Bonds are subject to redemption prior to niaturity ;i5 described herein. See "TME BOND.S — Redemption."
For malurilie.'i,
inside front
cover.

principal

amniint.'i, interest

rates,

yields,

prices

and CUSIP numbers

ofthe

Bonds,

see the

The Bonds are direct and general obligations of the City anil all taxable property in Uie Cily is subject to die levy of ad
valorem property taxes to pay the Bonds and the interesl thereon withoul limitation a.s to rate or amount. The City has pledged
its full faith and credit for the paynient of tlie principal of and interest on the Bonds. Sec "SECURITY FOR THE BONDS"
herein.
Prospeclive investors shouki read this Official Statemeni in ils entirety ])rior lo making an investmcnl decision lo
purchase the Bonds.
The Bonds are being offered U'licn, as and ifi.s.<,ne<l. and .subject to the dclivcri/ of approving legal opinions by Chapman
and Culler LLP, Cliicago, Illinois, and the lla.rdwicl; I^inu F i n n LLC, Cincago, Illinois, Co-Iiond Counsel, and to certain
other conditions. Certain legal •matters null be pa.s.sed on.lor Ihe Cily by f i ) ils Coiporalion C'oitiisel. ( i i ) i n connection
ii'illi Die jireparation o.)' this Olficial Slalement, Duane .llon i.^ LLP. Chicago, Illinois, and Shanahan iKc Shanahan LLP,
(.'hicago, Illinois, Co-Disclosiiie Counsel to the Cilij. and ( H i ) in cnnini tion with certain pension inalteis di/.s'-iibed in
this Qliirial Statemeni, Cliapinnn and Culler lA.P, Chicago, Illinois. Special Disclosure Counsel lo the Cily Certain legal
•mailers will he pa.ssed on f o r the Undericriteis by Maijcr Hiown LLP, Chii-.ago. Illinois, I'lideru'rileis' Counsel. I l is
e.rpeci.ed lhal the Bonds nnll be a i)a ilable.foi- di.Hucyy lliioiigli. ihe.larililics of DTC on or nboul -Inly i ' / , 20/.5

Morgan Stanley
Siebert B r a n d f o r d Shank & Co., L.L.C.
Academy Securities, Inc.
Estrada Hinojosa & Company, Inc.
Melvin & Company

u.iifii .Jui.v \G, 2niri

RMO Capital M a r k e t s
George K. Baum & Company

W i l l i a m Blair
Citigroup
.J..J.B. H i l l i a r d , W.L. Lyons, LLC
N o r t l i South Capital L L C

 M A T U R I T I E S , AMOUNTS, I N T E R E S T R A T E S , Y I E L D S , P R I C E S AND ClISIP N U M B E R S
City of Chicago
General Obligiition Bonds
Series 2015A
Maturitj'
(.lanuiiry 1)

Principal
.Amount

2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2026
2027
2028
2029
2034
2035

$4,965,000
7,380,000
7,870.000
8,320,000
8,845,000
5,4)5,000
19,390,000
24,925,000
33,585,000
35,275,000
36,430,000
16,420.000

)ntcrc.st Kate
5.000%
5 000
5 000
5.000
5 000
5 000
5 000
5 250
5 250
5.375
5 500
5 500

Yield

j^ricc

3.900%
4 110
4 400
4 720
4.940
5.090
5.290
5 370
5 450
5 530
5 660
5 670

103 511%
103 579
102 874
101 537
100 366
99 385
97 692
98.980
98 206
98.539
98 179
98 008

CUSIP*
I67486WC9
167486WD7
I67486WE5
I67486WF2
167486WG0
167486WI-18
167486WJ4
167486WKI
167486WL9
1674S6WM7
167486WP0
I67486WQ8

$88,100,000 5.500% Term Bonds due January 1.2033, Yield 5 640%, Price 98 454% CUSIP' 167486WN5
$48,610,000 5.500% Term Bonds due January I . 2039, Yield 5.690%, Price 97 553% CUSIP 167486WR6

Taxable Series 2015B
Maturity
(January I)

Principal
Amount

2019
2020
2021
2022
2023

$5,020,000
5,290,000
5.585,000
5,920,000
6.290,000

Inleresi Rate
5 383%
5.633
5 962
6.212
6 361

Yield

Price

5 383%
5 633
5 962
6 212
6 361

100
100
100
100
100

000%
000
000
000
000

CUSIP
I67486VX4
)67486VY2
I67486VZ9
)67486WA3
I67486WB1

$321,695,000 7 375% Term Bonds due January I , 2033, Yield 7 446%, Price 99.309% CUSIP 167486VV8
$393,060,000 7.750% Teim Bonds due Januaiy 1, 2042, Yield 7 962%, Price 97 666% CUSIP: I67486VW6

Copyright 2(115, .Americim Uniikcrs A.s.soci.ilioii CU.SII^ diit.i IH.TCI]1 iiic pioviiluil liy SuiiidarJ & Poor's, CUSIP Scivicc
Bureau, a Division of The McGraw-Hill Coni i:inK-s, Inc "l lic CU.SII' mtmlicrs listed are heiiig provided solely for the
convenience oflhe bondholders only al ihe lime of sale ofthe Ronds and the Cily does nut make any representation with res >eet
10 siieh numbeis or iindeitake any responsihilily for iheir accuracy now or al .my linie in the lulure 'I he CU.SII' nuiuher for a
speeifie niaUiiily is siihieel to eliange after ihe .sale oflhe DOIKIS as a resull ot various suhsciiucnl aelions ineludini;, hiii nol
limned lo, ,i refunding in whole or in  nirl of sueli malurily or as a resull oflhe proiurenienl of seeondaA' market poiifolio
insurance or other similar enhancemenl hv investors lhat is applicahle lo all or a portion uf ecnain nialuniies oflhe Bonds

 CITY OF CHICAGO
MAYOR
Rahm Emanuel
CITY TREASURER
Kurt A. Summers, Jr
CITY C L E R K
Susana A. Mendoza
CITY COUNCIL
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
Edward M. Burke, Chairman
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
Carole L. Brown
CITY COMPTROLLER
Daniel Widawsky
BUDGET DIRECTOR
Alexandra Holt
CORPORATION COUNSEL
Stephen R. Patton, Esq.
CO-BOND COUNSEL
Chapman and Cutler LLP
Chicago, Illinois
Hardwick Law Firm LLC
Chicago, Illinois
CO-DISCLOSURE COUNSEL
Duane Morris LLP
Chicago, Illinois
Shanahan & Shanahan LLP
Chicago, Illinois
SPECIAL PENSION DISCLOSURE COUNSEL
Chapman and Cutler LLP
Chicago, Illinois
FINANCIAL ADVISOR
Acacia Financial Group, Inc

 Cenain infunnaUon contained in, or ineorporatcd by leferencc m, this Ol'fkial Slalement has been obtained by the City
ol'Chicago (the "City") I'roni The Depository Trust Company and olher sources lhal are deemed reliable No representation or
warranty is made, however, as to the accuracy or completeness of such informauon by Ihe Undeiwriters or the City. 'I'hc
Underwriters have provided ihc followini; sentence for inclusion in ihis Ofiicial Slalcmcnl The Underwriters reviewed the
information in this Official Statemeni in accordance with, and as pan of, ihcir respective responsibilities to investors under the
federal securities laws as applied to the facts and cireuinstaiiees of Ihis traiisaetiun, bul the Underwriters do nol yuaiantee the
accuracy or eompleleness of such infonnation Ihis Official Statemeni is being used in connection with the sale of securilies as
referred lo heiein and may nol be used, in whole or in pail, for any other purpose I he delivery of this Ol'l'icial StuleiiienI at any
time does not imply that information herein is correct as of any time subsequent to its date
No dealer, broker, salesperson or any other person has been aulhorized by Ihe City or ihe t.lnderwriters lo give any
inrormation or to make any representation other than as contained in this Official Stalcmcnt in connection with the offering oflhe
Bonds described herein and, i f given or made, .such other information or representation musl nol be relied upon as having been
authorized by any o f l h e foregoing This Official Slalcmcnl docs not constitute an offer to sell or Ihe .solicilalion of an offer to
buy any sccurilies other than Iho.sc described on the cover page, nor shall there be any offer lo sell, solicitation of an offer to buy
or sale of such securities in any lunsdiclion in which it is unlawful to make such ofl'er, solicilalion or .sale Neither this Official
Stalcmcnt nor any .statement lhat may have been made verbally or in wTiting is to be construed as a contract with the rcgi.stercd or
beneficial owners oflhe Bonds.
This Official Statement, including ihe Appendices (except for certain inl'ormntion in (i) A P P b N D l X l i — " E C O N O M I C
A N D DEMOGRAPHIC I N F O R M A T I O N " and (ii) "Source Information" as del'ined and used in APPENDIX
E—"RETIREMENT FUNDS," all o f which is sourced lo parlies olher than Ihe City), contains certain opinions, estimates and
forward-looking statements and information, including the estimates and projections set forth under the caption " F I N A N C I A L
DISCUSSION A N D ANALYSIS—General Fund—Ceneral Fund Fmancial Forecasts," lhat arc based on the City's beliefs a.s
well as assumptions made by and iiiformalion currently available to the City Such opinions, estimates, prqiections and forwardlooking statements set forth in this Official Statement were not prep.ired with a view toward complying with Ihc guidelines
established by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants with respect to prospective financial information, bul, in
the view of the Cily. were prepared on a reasonable basis, reflect the best currently available estimates and judgments, and
present, to the best of the City's knowledge and belief, the expected course of action and ihc expected future financial
performance o f l h e City. However, this information is nol fact and should nol be relied upon as being necessarily indicative of
future results, and readers of this Olficial Slatcnicnt arc cautioned not to place undue reliance on such opinions, sialements or
prospeclive financial informadon.
Ihe prospective financial information set forth in this Official Statement, except for eertain information sourced lo
parties other than the City, is solely the product of the City Neither the City's independent auditors, nor any other independent
auditors, have compiled, examined, or performed any procedures with respect lo, or been consulted in connection wilh the
preparation of, llie prospective finaneial information and forward-looking statements contained herein I'hc City's independent
auditors assume no responsibility for the content of the prospective financial information set forth in this Official Statement,
including any 2015 year-end estimates and 2016-2017 projections, disclaim any association with such prospective financial
information, and have not, nor have any other independent auditors, e.xpressed any opinion or any olher form of assurance on
such information or its aehicvability
References to web site addresses presented in this Official Stalenient are for ml'ormalional purposes only and maj be in
the form of a hyperlink solely for the reader's convenience Unless specified otherwise, such web sites and the information or
links contained therein are not incorporated into, and are not part of, this Official Statement
THESE SECURI'I'IES H A V E NOT BEEN APPROVED OR DISAPPROVED BY f H E S E C U R I f l E S A N D
1-.\'CIIANGE COMMISSION OK A N Y S'fA'lE SECURITIES COMMISSION NOR HAS I H E SECURI ilES A N D
E.X'CIIANGE COMMISSION OR A N Y STATE SECURI'III-'S COMMISSION PASSED UPON I H E A C C U R A C Y OR
ADEQUACY OF THIS OI-I'ICIAL STATEMEN I'
A N Y REPRLSENI A'I'ION TO I HE CON'I'RARY M A Y BE A
C R I M I N A L OFFENSE
I HE BONDS H A V E N O I ' BEEN REGl.S'I'ERED UNDER T I I E SECUKI UBS A C T OF l')33, AS A M E N D E D , NOR
HAVE THE INDENTURES BEEN QUAEIFIED UNDER THE TRUST INDENTURE ACT OF 1939, AS A M E N D E D . IN
RELIANCE UPON EXEMPTIONS CON TAINED IN SUCH ACTS THE REGIS TRATION OR Ol.IALIFICA TION OF THE
UONDS IN ACCORDANCE W I T H APPLICABLE PROVISIONS OF L A W OF I H E STATES IN WHICH THE BONDS
H A V E BEEN REd'IS'TERED OR QUALIFIED A N D THE EXEMPTION I ROM REGIS IRA I'lON OR Q U A L I I ICA I'lON IN
OTIIER STA TES CANNOT BE REGARDED AS A RECOMMENDA TION THHRIIOF
IN CONNECTION W I T H THE OFFERING OF 'THE BONDS. THE UNDERWRITERS M A Y O V I . R A L I . O T OR
EFFECT TRANSACTIONS T H A T STABILIZE OR M A I N T A I N H I E M A R K E T PRICES OF THE BONDS A T LEVELS
A B O V E THOSE WHICH M I G H T O'lHERWlSE PREVAIL IN THE OPEN .MARKET
SUCH S T A B I L I Z I N G . II
COMMENCED, M A Y BE DISCONTINUED A T A N Y TIME THE PRICES A N D OTHER TI'RMS RESPECTING THE
OFFERING A N D SALE OF THE BONDS M A Y BE C H A N G E D FROM T I M E TO TIME BY I H E UNDERWRITERS
AFTFR THE BONDS ARE RELEASED FOR SAl E. A N D 'THE BONDS M A Y BE OFFERED A N D SOLD A T PRICES
O ' l l l L R I H A N H I E I N I ' I I A L OFFERING PRICES. INCLUDING SALES 10 DEALERS W H O M A ^ ' SELL I H E BONIXS
I N K ) INVES I MEN I ACCOUNTS

 O F F I C I A L S T A I EiVlENT S U M M A R Y
77;/^ suininaiy is subjecl in all re.spect.^ to the more complete infonnalion and definitions
contained in this Official Stalenient
Prospeclive mvesiors are cannoned not to rely solely upon this
siminiaiy when considering whether to purchase the Bonds. Prospective investors should review this
Official Stalenient in its entirely prior to purchasing the Bonds.
THK IS.S11KR

City of Chicago (the "City") See 'THE CITY "

TIIE BONDS

.SI,088,390,000 City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, consisting of
$345,530,000 Gcnctiil Obligalion Bonds, Scries^2015A (the "Scries 2015A
Bonds") and $742,860,000 General Obligation Bonds, Ta.xable Series 20158
(the 'Ta.xable Series 20I5B Bonds" and together wiih the Series 2015A Bonds,
the "Bonds") The Bonds of each Series will be dated the date of their delivery
and mature in the principal amounts and on the dates as set forth on the inside
cover of this Official Statement See "TMC BONDS "

PAYMENT OF INTEREST

Inlerest on the Bonds of each Series will accrue from ihe date of issuance and
be payable on each January I and July I , commencing January 1, 2016. The
Bonds of each Series will bear interest al the rales per year as set forth on Ihe
inside cover of this Official Statement Intere.st on the Bonds of each Series is
computed on ihe basis of a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months
See " I'HE BONDS—General "

REDEMPTION
Optional Redemption

The Series 2015A Bonds maturing on and al'ler January I , 2026 are subject lo
optional redemplion, on any date occurring on or after January I , 2025, at a
Redemption Pnce of 100% of the principal amounl thereof being redeemed
plus accrued interest, if any, to the date of redemption
See " THE BONDS—Redemption—Optional Redemption of ihe Series 2015.4
Bond.'!"
'The Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds inaliiring on or before January I , 2033 are
subject to redemplion prior to inaturily al the option oflhe City, in whole or in
part, on any Business Day at a Redemption Price equal lo Ihe greater ol': (A)
100% of the principal amounl of such 'faxable Series 20I5B Bonds lo be
redeemed, or (B) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled
payments of principal and inleresi on such Bonds to be redeemed, not including
any portion of those payments of interest accrued and unpaid as of the date
such Uonds arc to be redeemed, discounted lo the date of redemption of such
Bonds to be redeemed on a semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year
consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasuiy Rale plus 50 basis points
plus, in each case, accrued inlerest on such Bonds being redeemed to ihe date
fixed lor redemption
See 'Till'! I30NDS—Redemplion—Optional Redemption ofthe Ta.xable .Series
20158 Bonds al Make-Whole Price "
The Ta.xable Series 20I5B Bonds inauiring on Januarx I , 2042 are subject to
optional ledemption, on any date occuning on oi aftci January I . 2025. al a
Redemption Pnce of 100% of ilie principal amount thereof being redeemed
plus accrued inlcicst, if any, lo the dale of redemplion
See "TUT- BONDS—Redeinptioii—Optional Reileiiipiioii ofthe Icaable Sei les
20158 Bonds at Pai '

S-I

 Mandatory Redemption

The Series 20ISA Bonds due January I , 2033 are subject to mandatory
redemption prior lo maturity, al par and accrued interest lo the date fi.xed for
redemption, on January 1 ofthe years 2031 and 2032
The Series 20I5A Bonds due January 1, 2039 are subject to mandatory
redemption prior lo maturity, at par and accrued interest lo the date fi.xed for
redemption, on January' ' of the years 2036 through 2038
The Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds due January I , 2033 are subjecl lo mandatory
redemption prior to maturity, at par and accrued inlerest to the date fixed for
redemption, on January I oflhe years 2024 through 2032
The Taxable Scries 20)5B Bonds due Jamiary I , 2042 arc subject to mandatory
redemption prior lo maturity, at par and accrued interest lo the dale fixed for
redemption, on January I oflhe years 2034 through 2041
Sec "THE BONDS—Redemption—Mandatory Redemption."

ADTIIORITY FOR ISSUANCE The Bonds are being issued under the aulhorily granted to the City as a home
rule unit of local government under the Illinois Con.stitution of 1970 and are
authorized by an ordinance adopted by the City Council of the Cily (the "City
Council") on June 17, 2015 (the "Bond Ordinance"). Each Series oflhe Bonds
is being issued pursuant to a separate Trusl Indenture, each daled as of July 1,
2015, between the City and Zions First National Bank, as trustee (the
"Trustee")
USE OF PROCEEDS

The proceeds ofthe Bonds will be u.sed to (i) repay indebtedness incurred by
Ihc Cily under us Short Term Borrowing Program described herein; (ii) fund
Ihe cost of terminating the sale/lea.seback ofthe Orange Line rapid transit rail
line; (lii) reimburse the City's General Fund for the cost of terminating an
interest rate swap associated witii the Cily's sales tax revenue bonds; (iv) fund
capitalized interest on the Bonds, and (v) pay cosls of issuance ofthe Bonds.
See "PLAN OF FINANCING" and "SOURCIZS AND USES OF FUNDS."

SECURITY FOR THE BONDS

The Bonds of each Series will be direct and general obligations ofthe Cily and
all taxable property in the City is subject to the levy of ad valorem properly
taxes to pay the Bonds and the interest thereon without limitation as to rate or
amount. The Bonds of each Series shall be payable, as to principal and
interest, from any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of ihe
Cily legally available for such purpose, including, bul not limited lo, ihe
proceeds allocable to such Scries of a direct annual lax levied by the City in the
Bond Ordinance upon all taxable properly located in the City sufficient to pay
the principal of and mlcrcst on the Bonds The Cuy has pledged ils full faith
and credil to the payment of Ihe Bonds See "SECURITY FOR THE
BONDS—General Obligalion ofthe City '
For a discussion of Ihe process by which properly laxcs are levied, billed,
collected and remitted lo the Trustee for each Series ofthe Bonds for payment
of the principal of and interest on such Bonds, sec 'SfrURI'TY FOR THE
BONDS—Properly Tax Collection Process for the Bonds "

INVESTMENT
CONSIDERATIONS

There arc a number of factors a.ssociated with owning the Bonds thai
prospective investors should consider prior lo purchasing the Bonds For a
discussion of Ihese I'aclors, sec 'INVl.SI'MEN T CONSIDERA'I IONS "

S-2

 TRUSTEE

TA.X MATTERS

RATINGS

Zions First National Bank, Chicago, Illinois, as tru.stee under each of the
Indentures
. ..

... .

Subieel lo compliance by Ihc Cily wilh certain covenants, in the respective
opinions of Co-Bond Counsel, under preseni law, interest on the Senes 20ISA
Bonds IS excludable from gross income of the owners theicof for federal
income lax purposes and is nol included as an item of tax preference in
computing Ihe federal alternative minimum lax for individuals and
corporations, bul such interest is taken into account in computing an adjustment
used in determining the federal allernalive minimum tax for certain
corporations Interest on the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds is includible in gtoss
income oflhe owners ihereof for federal income tax purposes Interest on Ihe
Bonds is nol cxcmpl from preseni Stale of Illinois income taxes. See "TAX
MATTERS."
'The Bonds are rated "BBB+" (negalive outlook) by Standard & Poor's
Financial Services LLC, "BBB+" (negative outlook) by Fitch Ratings Inc., and
"A-" (stable outlook) by Kroll Bond Rating Agency See "INVESTMENT
CONSIDERATIONS—Credit Rating Downgmde's ' and "RATINGS."

S-.'

  PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

TABLE OF CON TEN TS
Pane
OFFICIAL STATFMENT SUMMARY
INTRODUCTION
THE CITY
General
Government
THE BONDS
General
Paymenl ofthe Bonds
Redemption
Book-Entry System
Bonds Not Presented for Paymcni
Registration and Transfers
Registered Owner Treated as Absolute Owner
SECURITY FOR THE BONDS
General Obligalion oflhe City
Property Tax Collection Proeess for the Bonds
Additional General Obligation Debt
PLAN OF FINANCING
Repayment of Short Term Borrowing Program
Other Application of Bond Proceeds
SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS
FINANCIAL DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Annual Budget
City Fund Stmcturc
General Fund
Service Concession and Reserve Fund
Capital Improvements
Property Taxes
Cuy Workforce
Pensions
Long-Term Leases, Concessions of Cit>'Facilities
Illinois Sports Facilities Authority
Cily Investment Policy
GENERAL OBLIGATION DEBT
Recent Developments
Long-Term General Obligation Bonds . . .
Short Term Borrowing Program
MRI. l-iiiancing LLC Promissory Note . .
Capital Lease
USX South Works
INVE.STMENI CONSIDERATIONS
Credil Rating Downgrades
...
Unfunded Pensions
..
. .
Pension Reform l.iligaiion
. ...
.
.
Overlapping Taxing Di.stncts.
. . .
Siructuial Deficit and Debt Rcstruclurint! .
.
.

...

. . ..
. . .
'.

..
.

.

S-1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
8
10
10
11
12
12
12
14
14
14
15
16
16
16
18
19
35
.. 36
37
45
46
53
54
55
55
55
56
. . . .
.60
62
62
. . . .63
. .63
63
. 6 4
64
64
65

 Loss of Liquidity
Increased Debt Levels
Financial Condition of Chicago Public Schools. ..
Reductions and Delays in Receipt of State Revenues
Cap on Properly Taxes
Adverse Change in Laws
Bankruptcy
Uncertain Enforcement Remedies
Force Majeure Events
Forward-Looking Staternents
LITIGATION
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS
RATINGS
FINANCIAL ADVISOR AND INDEPENDENT REGISTERED MUNICIPAL ADVISOR
UNDERWRITING
TAX MATTERS
The Series 20ISA Bonds
The Taxable Series 2015B Bonds
Stale and Local Considerations
APPROVAL OF LEGAL MATTERS
SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE
Annua! Financial Information Disclosure
Reportable Events Disclosure
Consequences of Failure ofthe City to Provide Information
Amendment; Waiver
EMMA
Termination of Undertaking.
Additional Information
Corrective Action Related to Certain Bond Di.sclosure Requirements
MISCELLANEOUS
APPENDIX A — SUMMARY OF THE INDENTURES
APPENDIX B — ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
APPENDIX C — CTTY OF CHICAGO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMEN TS •OR
THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2014
APPENDIX D — PROPERTY TAXES
APPENDIX E — RETIREMENT FUNDS
APPENDIX 1- — OPINIONS OF CO-BOND COUNSEL

65
66
66
66
66
67
67
67
67
68
68
70
70
70
70
72
72
74
74
74
75
75
76
77
77
78
78
78
. 78
..80

 OFFICIAL ST.VTEMENT
.SI,088,390,000
CITY OF CHICAGO
$345,530,000
General Obligalion Bonds,
Scries 20I5A

$742,860,000
Gcncriil Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Scries 20I5B
INTRODUCrrON

This OlTicial Statement is furnished by the City of Chicago (the "Cily") to provide information
with respect to the City's General Obligation Bonds, Series 2015A (the "Series 2015A Bonds") and
General Obligation Bond.s, Taxable Series 2015B (the "Taxable Series 2015B Bonds" and together with
the Series 2015A Bonds, the "Bonds"). Certain capitalized lerms used in this Official Slalemciit, unless
olherwise defined, are defined tn APPENDIX A—"SUMMARY OF TIIE INDENTURES—Glo.ssar>' of
Terms."
'The Bonds arc direct and general obligations of the Cily and all taxable property in the City is
siibject to the levy of ad valorem property taxes to pay the Bonds and the interest thereon without
limitation as lo rate or amount. The Bonds of each Series shall be payable, as lo principal and interest,
from any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City legally available for such
purpose, including, but not limited to, the proceeds allocable to such Series of a direct annual tax levied
by the City in the Bond Ordinance (hereinafter defined) upon all taxable property located in the City
sufficieni lo pay the principal of and interest on the Bonds. The Cily has pledged ils full failh and credil
to the payment ofthe Bonds. See "SECURITY FOR THE BONDS."
The proceeds ofthe Bonds will be used to (i) repay indebtedness incurred by the City under its
Short Term Borrowing Program (as defined herein); (ii) fund the cosl of terminating liie sale/leaseback of
the Orange Line rapid transit rail line; (iii) reimburse the Cit>''s General Fund for the cost of terminating
an interest rate swap as.sociated with the City's sales tax revenue bonds; (iv) fund capitalized interest on
the Bonds; and (v) pay costs of issuance of the Bonds See "PLAN OF FINANCING" and "SOURCES
AND USES OF FLfNDS."
The Bonds are being issued under Ihe authority granted to ihc Cily under Ihe Illinois Conslilution
of 1970 and arc authorized by an ordinance adopted by the City Council ofthe City (the "Cit\' Council")
on June 17, 2015 (the "Bond Ordinance") The Bonds of each Series will be issued puisuanl lo a separate
'Trusl Indenture, each dated as of July 1. 2015 (each an "Indenture" and colieclively Ihe "Indentures")
between the City and Zions First National Bank, Chicago, Illinois, as trustee for such Series As used
herein with reference to the Bonds of a Series, the term "Trustee" refers to the 'Trustee for that Series of
Bonds
THE CI TY
Cieneral
Chicago IS the third largest city in the United States with a population of approximaicly 2 7
million The City, located on Ihe shores of Lake Michigan in the Midwestein United States, is the
commercial and culUiral ccnlcr of a large and diverse regional econoniy that produced a gross domestic
product of .S590 billion in 2(113 'Trade, proiessional and business services, real estate, finance and

 insurance, and education services and health care are among the Chicago region's laigest industry' sectors
The Cily's transportation and distribution network includes Chicago O'Hare International Airport, ranked
fil\h worldwide and second in the United Stales in 2013 in terms of tolal passengers, rail traffic
interchanges for the country's six largest freight railroad companies, and two ports capable of handling
ocean-going ships and barges. Tourism and busine.ss travel lo Chicago accounted for an estimated 50
million visiWs in 2014. See APPENDIX B—"ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMA TION."
Government

The Cily was incorporated in 1837. The City is a municipal corporation and home rule unit of
local government under the Illinois Constitution of 1970 and as such, "may exercise any power and
perform any function pertaining to its government and affairs including, but not limited to, the power to
regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare; to license; to tax; and to incur
debt" except that il can "impose taxes upon or measured by income or earnings or upon occupation" only
if authorized by statute.
The Mayor and the City Council govern the City. The City Clerk and the City Treasurer along
with Ihe Mayor are the only three citywide elected officials. The City is divided into fifty legislative
districts, or wards. Each ward is represented by an alderman who is elected by their constituency. The
citywide officials and the fifty aldermen are elected to serve coterminous four-year lerms. The aldermen
comprise the 50-person City Council, which serves as the legislative branch of governmenl of the Ctty.
The legislative powers of the City Council are granted by the Slate legislature and by home rule
provisions of ihe Illinois Constitution.
As the legislative body oflhe City, the Cily Council usually meets once every month to exercise
general and specific powers delegated by state law. The Cily Council votes on loans extended by the Cily
lhat exceed eertain limits, bond issues, the City's short lerm borrowing programs (whether general
obligalion or revenue), land acquisitions and sales, zoning changes, traffic control issues, certain mayoral
appointees, andfinancialappropriations. Its standing commiltees work with individual departments on the
execution of city aclivities, and review proposed ordinances, resolutions and orders before Ihey are voted
on by the full City Council.
The Commillee on Finance of the Cily Council considers ordinances, orders or resolutions lhat
are referred or submitted to the Committee on Finance by aldermen, the Office oflhe Mayor, various City
departmenls, and the general public. The Committee on Finance has jurisdiction overfinancialniallers,
including tax levies; general obligation bonds and revenue bonds, thefinancingof municipal services and
capital improvements; mailers generally affecting the Depariment of Finance, the Cily ComplroUer, and
ihe City Treasurer, claims under the Workmen's Compensation Act, the Condominium Refuse Rebate
Program, and all pecuniary claims against the City.
THE BONDS
(ivncral

The Bonds of each Series mature on January I ofthe years and in the amounts set forth on the
mside front cover of this Official Slalement. The Bonds are lull> regislercd bonds The Series 2015A
Bonds are issuable in denominations of $5,000 or any integral multiple thereof The Taxable Series
20I5B Bonds are issuable m denominations of $1,000 or any integral mulliple thereof
Each Bond will bear inlerest al the rates .set forth on the inside cover of this Official Siateiiient
I'roiii ihe later of its date or ihe most recent Interesl Paymenl Dale lo which inleiesi has been paid or duly

 ptovided for, until the principal amount of such Bond is paid, such interesl being payable on January 1
and July 1 of each year, commencing on January I , 2016. Interest on each Bond will be paid to Ihe
per.son in whose name such Bond is registered at the close of business on the Record Dale next preceding
the applicable Interest Payment Dale
The applicable Trustee for each Series will serve as bond registrar and paying agent for the Bonds
of such Series. 'The Bonds of each Series are registered ihrough a book-enlry only system operated by
The Depository Trusl Company, New York, New York ("D'TC") Details of paymenis of the Bonds of a
Series when in the book-entry only system are described under "—Book-Enlry System" below Except as
described under "— Book-Entry System—General" below. Beneficial Owners ofthe Bonds of a Series
will not receive or have the right to receive physical delivery of such Bonds, and will not be or be
considered to be the Registered Owiiers thereof Accordingly, Beneficial Owners must rely upon (i) the
procedures of D'TC and, if such Beneficial Owner is not a D'TC "Direct Participant" or "Indirect
Participant" (as defined below), the Direct or Indirect Participant who will act on behalf of such
Beneficial Owner lo receive notices and paynients of principal and inlerest or Redemption Price of the
Bonds of such Scries, and to exercise voting rights and (it) the records of D TC and, if such Beiicficial
Owner is not a Direct or Indirect Participant, such Beneficial Owner's Direct or Indirect Participant, to
evidence Us beneficial ownership of such Bonds So long as DTC or its nominee is the Registered Owner
of the Bonds of a Series, references herein to Bondholders or Registered Owners of such Bonds mean
DTC or Its nominee and do not mean the Beneficial Owners of such Bonds The laws of some states may
require that certain purchasers of securities take physical delivery of such securities in definitive form.
Such limits and laws may impair the ability to transfer beneficial interests in a Bond
Paymenl of the Bonds
The principal oflhe Bonds of each Series and any redemption premium will be payable in lawful
money of the Uniled States of America which, at the respective dales of payment ihereof, is legal lender
for the payment of public and private debts, upon presentation and surrender thereof at the Designated
Corporate Trust Office ofthe applicable Trustee for such Series
Inleresi on each Bond of a Series will be paid lo the person in whose name such Bond is
registered at the close of business on the Record Date next preceding the applicable Interest Paymenl
Dale, by check or draft oflhe Truslee, or, at the option of any registered owner of $1,000,000 or more in
aggregate principal amount of Bonds of a Series, by wire transfer of immediately available funds lo such
bank in ihe continental United Slates of America as Ihe registered owner of such Bonds requests in
wriiing lo the Truslee
Redemption
The Bonds are subject lo both opiional and mandatory redemption prior to maturity, as described
below The Series 2015A Bonds shall be redeemed only in principal amounts of $5,000 and integral
multiples Ihereof The Taxable Series 2015B Bonds shall be redeemed only in principal amounts of
$1,000 and integral multiples ihereof
Optional Redemplion of Series 2015 A Bonds
The Series 2015A Bonds maturing on and alter January 1.. 2026, are subjecl to redemption prior
lo maturity al Ihe option ofthe Cuy. in whole or in pari, on any date on or after January 1. 2025, and if
less than all ofthe outslanding Series 20I5A Bonds of a single maUirily are lo he redeemed, the Series
2015A Bonds called shall be called by lol in such principal amounts and from such mauiriiics as the Cuy

 shall determine, al a redemplion price equal lo the principal amounl oflhe Series 20I5A Bonds being
redeemed plus accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption.
The Cuy is authorized to sell or waive any right (he City may have lo call any of the Series
20I5A Bonds for optional redemption, in whole or in part; provided, tiiat such sale or waiver will nol
adversely affect the excludability of interest on the Series 2015A Bonds from gross income for federal
income tax purposes.
Optional Redeniplion of the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds al Make-Whole Price
The Taxable Series 2015B Bonds maturing on or before January I , 2033 shall be subject to
redemplion prior lo maturity al the option of the City, m whole or in part, and if in part from such
maturities and inleresi rates as the City shall determine on any Business Day al a redemption price (Ihe
"Make-Whole Redemption Price") equal to the greater of (A) 100% oflhe principal amount of such
Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds to be redeemed, or (B) the .sum oflhe present values ofthe remaining
scheduled payments of principal and interesl on such 'Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds to be redeemed, not
including any portion of those payments of interest accrued and unpaid as of the date such Taxable Series
20I5B Bonds are to be redeemed, discounted to the date of redemption of such Taxable Series 20I5B
Bonds to be redeemed on a semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day
months) al the Treasury Rale (defined below) plus 50 basis poinls plus, in each case, accrued inleresi on
such Taxable Series 2015B Bonds being redeemed to the date fixed for redemplion.
The Make-Whole Redemption Price for any Taxable Series 2015B Bonds to be redeemed will be
calculated by an independent accounting firm, investment banking firm or municipal advisor (the
"Calculalion Agent") retained by the City at the Cily's expense. The 'Trustee and the Cit\' may rely on the
Calculalion Agent's delerminalion of any Make-Whole Redemplion Price and will nol be liable for such
reliance An Authorized Officer shall confirm and transmit the Makc-Wholc Redemption Price as so
calculated on such dates to the Trustee and to such parties as shall be necessary to effectuate such
redemplion.
The "Treasury Rate" is, as of any redemption dale, the yield to maturity as of such redemption
date of Uniled Slates Treasury securities with a constant maturity (as compiled and published in the most
recent Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.15 (519) that has become publicly available at least four
Business Days prior to the redemption date (excluding infialion indexed securities) (or, if such Statistical
Release is no longer published, any publicly available source of similar markel data)) most nearly equal lo
(i) in the ca.se of Taxable Series 2015B Bonds maturing on January I of the years 2019 to 2023, inclusive,
the period from the redemption dale lo the malurity dale of such Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds to be
redeemed and (ii) in the case ofthe Taxable Series 2015B Bonds maturing on January I , 2033, the ihenremaming average life of such maturily of the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds to be redeemed, provided,
however, that if the period from the redemption date to such maturity date is less than one year, ihe
weekly average yield on actually traded United States Treasury securities adjusted to a constant maturity
of one year will be used 'The Treasuiy Rate shall be determined by an independent accounting firm,
invcslmeni banking firm or municipal advisor retained by the City at the City's expense
The Treasury Rate will be delermined by the Calculation Agent or another independent
accounting firm, invcslmeni banking firm or municipal advisor retained by the Cily al Ihe Cily s expense
The City is aulhorized to sell or waive any righl the City may have to call Ihe Taxable Series
2i)l5B Bonds for optional redeniplion

 Ojvional Redemption of the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds at Par
The Taxable Series 2015B Bonds maturing on January 1, 2042, are subjecl lo redemption prior lo
maturity at the option ofthe City, in whole or in part, on any date on or afier January 1, 2025, and i f less
than all oflhe outstanding Taxable Series 2015B Bonds of such maturity are to be redeemed, the Taxable
Series 20I5B Bonds called shall be called in such principal amounts as the City shall determine, al a
redemption price equal to Ihe prihcipal amounl ofthe Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds o f such maturity being
redeemed plus accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption.
"The City is aulhorized to sell or waive any right ihe City may have to call any of the Taxable
Series 20I5B Bonds for optional redemption, in whole or in part.
Mandatory

Redemption

The Series 20I5A Bonds maturing on January I , 2033 and January I , 2039 are subjecl lo
mandatory redemption prior to maturity on January I of the years and in the amounts set forth below, at a
Redemption Price equal to 100 percent o f l h e principal amount thereof plus accrued interest to the date
fixed for redemption.
Scries 2015A Bunds due .lanuary I , 2033
Year
Principal Amount
2031
2032
2033

$ 6,205,000
8,275.000
73,620.000 (maturity)

Se ries 20I5A Bonds due January I , 2U39
Year
Principal Amounl
2036
2037
2038
2039

J 16,135.000
12,620.000
15,875.000
3,980.000 (malurity)

The Taxable Series 2015B Bonds maturing on January 1, 2033 and January 1, 2042 are subjecl lo
mandatory redemption prior to maturity on January 1 ofthe years and in the amounis set forth below, at a
Redemption Price equal lo 100 percenl o f l h e principal amounl Ihereof plus accrued interest lo ihe dale
fixed for redemption
Ta.xable Scries 20I3B Bonds due January I , 2033
Year
Principal Amount
2024
2025
2026
2027
202X
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033

$ 10,665,000
9,990.000
3,050,000
3,300,000
3.620.001)
j.95().ii()0
45.105,000
55,175,000
154.145.000
32.6'->5,noi) (maturity)

 Taxable Series 20l5n Bonds due January I , 2042
Year
Principal Amount
2034
$ 73,925,000
2035
173,680,000
2036
18,845,000
2037
15,495,000
2038
16,800,000
2039
25,525,000
2040
32,385,000
2041
17,505,000
2042
18,900,000 (maturity)
Reduction of Mandaloiy Redemption Amounts
The principal amount of the Bonds to be mandatorily redeemed in each year may be reduced
through the earlier optional redemption thereof In the case ofthe Series 2015A Bonds of a maturity, any
partial optional redemplion of such Bonds will be credited against future mandatory redemption
requirements for that maturity in such order of the mandatory redemplion dates as the Ctty may
determine In the case oflhe 'Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds of a maturity', any partial optional redemption
of such Bonds will be credited against future mandatory redemption requirements for lhat maturily on a
pro-rata basis
In addition, on or prior to the sixtieth (60lh) day preceding any mandatory redemption dale, the
Trustee may, and if directed by the City shall, purchase Bonds required to be retired on such mandatory
redemption date at such prices as the City shall determine. Any such Bond so purchased shall be
canceled and (i) in the case of the Series 20I5A Bonds, the principal amount thereof shall be credited
against the payment required on such next mandatory redemplion dale and (ii) in the case oflhe Taxable
Series 20I5B Bonds of a maturily, the principal amount thereof shall be credited against future mandatory
redemption requirements for the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds of that maturity on a pro-rata basis.
Selection of Bonds for Redemplion
Series 2015A Bonds. While the Series 2015A Bonds are registered in the book-enlry system and
so long as D'fC or a successor securities depository is the sole registered owner of the Series 2015A
Bonds, if less than all ofthe Series 2015A Bonds of such maturity are to be redeemed prior to maturity,
the particular Scries 20t5A Bonds or portions of such Bonds will be selected by lol by D'TC or such
successor securities depository in such manner as DTC or such successor sccurilies depository may
determine See "THE BONDS — Book-Enlry System " Ifthe Series 20I5A Bonds are nol registered in
the book-entr)' system, the following procedures for the selection of such Bonds shall apply.
if less than all the Series 20I5A Bonds shall be called for redemption under any provision ofthe
Indenlure pursuant lo which Ihe Series 2015A Bonds are issued permiUmg such parlial redemption, (i)
such rcdempuon shall be by lol in such manner as the Trustee may determine among such Bonds, and (li)
subject lo Olher applicable provisions of such Indenture, the portion of any Series 20I5A Bond lo be
redeemed shall be in a principal aniount equal to an Authorized Denomination In selecting Series 2015A
Bonds for redemption, ihe 'Trustee shall assign lo each Series 2015A Bond of like Malurily Dale, a
distinctive number for each minimum Authorized Denomination of such Bond and shall select by lot from
the numbers .so assigned as many numbers as, al such minimum Aulhori/ed Denomination tor each
number, shall equal the principal amounl of such Bonds lo be redeemed In such case, llie Series 2()I5A
F3onds lo be ledeemed shall be those lo which were assigned numbers so selecled, piovided lhat only so
much ofthe principal amounl of each Series 2015A Bond shall be redeemed as shall equal such minimum
Aiitluinzed Denomination for each number assigned lo il and so selected If il is determined thai one or

 more, bul nol all, of the integral multiples of ihe Aulhorized Denominalion of principal amount
represented by any Series 2015A Bond is to be called for redemption, then, upon notice of intention to
redeem such integral multiple of an Aulhorized Denomination, the Registered Owner of such Bond shall
forthwith surrender such Bond to the 'Trustee for (a) payment to such Registered Owner of the
Redemption Price ofthe integral multiple ofthe Aulhorized Denomination of principal amounl called for
redemption, and (b) delivery to such Registered Owner of a new Series 20ISA Bond or Bonds in the
aggregate principal amount of the unredeemed balance oflhe principal amount of such Bond. New Series
2015A Bonds reprcsenling Ihe unredeemed balance oflhe principal amount of such Bond shall be issued
to the Registered Owner thereof without charge therefor.
Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds. While the Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds are regi.stered in the bookentry system and so long as D'TC or a successor securities depositor^' is the sole registered owner of the
Taxable Series 2015B Bonds, if less than all ofthe 'Taxable Series 2015B Bonds are to be redeemed prior
lo maturity, the particular Taxable Scries 2015B Bonds or portions ihereof lo be redeemed will be
selected on a pro-rata pass-through distribution of principal basis in accordance with DTC procedures,
provided lhat, so long as the Ta.xable Series 2015B Bonds are registered in the book-entry system, the
selection for redemption of such Bonds will be made in accordance with the operational arrangements of
DTC then in effect and, ifthe D'TC operational arrangements do nol allow for redemption on a pro-rata
pass-through distribution of principal basis, the 'Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds subject to redemption will
be selecled for redemplion, in accordance with DTC procedures, by lot.
Ifthe Taxable Series 2015B Bonds arc not registered in the book-enlry system, any redemption of
less than all of such Bonds will be allocated by the Trustee among the registered owners of such Bonds on
a pro-rata basis
Nolice of Redemption
Unless waived by any owner of Bonds of a Series to be redeemed, notice of the call for any such
redemption shall be given by the applicable Truslee on behalf of the City by mailing the redemplion
nolice by first class mail al least 30 days and not more than 60 days prior to the dale fixed for redemption
to the Regislercd Owner of the Bond or Bonds lo be redeemed at the address shown on the Bond Register
or at such olher address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner lo the Truslee, but the failure
lo mail any such nolice or any defect therein as to any Bond shall not affect the validity of the
proceedings for the redemption of any olher Bond. Any notice ol" redemption mailed as provided under
the applicable Indenture shall be conclusively presumed lo have been given whether or nol actually
received by ihe addressee. All notices of redemplion wilh respect to the Bonds of a Series shall slate (1)
the Series designation of the Bonds to be redeemed, (2) the redemption date, (3) the applicable
Redemption Price, (4) if less than all outslanding Bonds of such Series are to be redeemed, the
ideniificalion (and, in ihe case of partial redemption, the respective principal amounts and interest rates)
of the Bonds to be redeemed, (5) lhal on the redemplion dale the applicable Redemption Price will
become due and payable upon each such Bond or portion ihereof called for redemption, and lhat inleresi
thereon shall cease to accrue or compound from and after said date, (6) the place where such Bonds are to
be surrendered for payment ofthe applicable Redemption Price, and (7) such olher information as shall be
deemed necessaiy by Ihe 'Trustee at the lime such nolice is given lo comply wilh law, regulation or
induslr)' standard
With respect to an opiional redemption of Boniis of a Series, such nulice may slate lhal said
redemption is conditioned upon the receipl by the Truslee on or prior lo ihe date fixed for rcdempuon of
moneys sufficient to pay Ihe applicable Redeniplion Price of such Bonds If such moneys are not so
received, such redemplion nolice shall be of no force and cficcl, Ihc City shall nol redeem such Bonds and
such failure to deposit such funds shall nol constitute an Tivcnt of Default under the applicable Indenture

 'i'hc applicable Trustee shall give nolice, in ihe same manner in which the nolice ol" redemption was
given, that such moneys were nol so received and thai such Bonds will not be redeemed Unless the
notice of redemption shall be made conditional as provided above, on or prior to any redemption date for
the Bonds, the City shall deposit wilh the applicable Trustee an amount of money sufficient to pay the
applicable Redemption Price of all the Bonds of such Series or portions ihereof which are lo be redeemed
on lhai dale
Book-Entry System
(jeneral
The following information concerning DTC has been furnished by DTC for use in this Official
Slalement and neither the Cily nor the Undenvriters lake any responsibility for ils accuracy or
completeness.
DTC will act as securilies depository for the Bonds. The Bonds of each Series will be issued as
fully-registered securities registered in the name of Cede & Co. (DTC's partnership nominee) or such
Olher name as may be requested by an authorized representative of D'fC. One fully-registered Bond
certificate will be issued for each malurity of each Series oflhe Bonds, each in the aggregate principal
amounl of such malurity, and will be deposited with DTC.
D'TC, the world's largest securities depository, is a limited-purpose trusl company organized
under the New York Banking Law, a "banking organization" within the meaning of the New York
Banking Law, a member of the Federal Reserve System, a "clearing corporation" within the meaning of
the New York Uniform Commercial Code, and a "clearing agency" registered pursuant to the provisions
of Section I7A oflhe Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the "Exchange Acl"). DTC holds and provides
asset servicing for over 3 5 million issues of U.S. and non-U.S equity issues, corporate and municipal debt
issues, and money market instruments (from over 100 countries) that DTC's participants ("Direct
Pariicipants") deposit wilh DTC. D'TC also facilitales the post-trade seillemenl among Direct Participants
of sales and other securilies transactions in deposited securities, through electronic computerized bookentry transfers and pledges between Direct Participants' accounts. This eliminates the need for physical
movemeni of securilies certificates. Direct Participants include both U S. and non-U S securities brokers
and dealers, banks, trust companies, clearing corporations, and certain olher organizations DTC is a
wholly-owned subsidiary of "The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation ("DTCC") DTCC is the
holding company for DTC, National Securities Clearing Corporation and Fixed Income Clearing
Corpotation, all of which are registered clearing agencies. DTCC is owned by the users of its regulated
subsidiaries Access lo the DTC sy.stem is also available lo others such as bolh U S and non-U S
securities brokers and dealers, banks, trust companies, and clearing corporations that clear through or
niainlam a custodial relationship with a Direct Participant, either directly or indirectly ("Indirect
Pariicipants") DTC has a Standard & Poor's rating of AA+. 'The D'TC Rules applicable to ils
Pailicipanls are on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "Commission") More
mformalion about DTC can be found at www.dtcc com
Purchases of Bonds of a Series under the D'TC system musl be made by or ihrough Direct
Pariicipants. which will receive a credit for such Bonds on DTC's records 'The ownership inlerest of
each actual purchaser of each Bond of a Series ("Beneficial Owner ') is in turn to be recorded on the
Direct and Indirect Participants" records Beneficial Owners will not receive wrilien confirmalion from
DTC of their purchase. Beneficial Owners are, however, expected lo receive written confirmations
providing details ofthe transaction, as well as periodic statements of iheir holdings, fioni Ihe Direct or
Indiieci Parlicipanl through which the Beneficial Owner enlered into ihe transaction Transfers of
ownership inteicsis in the Bonds of a Series arc to be accomplished by enlrics made on the books of

 Dirccl and Indirect Participants acting on behalf of Beneficial Owners Beneficial Owners will nol
receive certificates representing their ownership interests in the Bonds of a Series, except in the event lhat
use ofthe Book-Entry Sy.stem for such Bonds is discontinued
'fo facilitate subsequent transfers, all Bonds ol" a Series deposited by Direct Participants with
D'fC are registered in the name of DTC's partnership nominee. Cede & Co., or such other name as may
be requested by an authorized representative of DTC. The deposit of Bonds with DTC and their
registration in the name of Cede & Co. or such other DTC nominee do nol effect any change in beneficial
ownership D'TC has no knowledge ofthe actual Beneficial Owners ofthe Bonds, DTC's records retleet
only Ihe identity oflhe Direct Pariicipants to whose accounts such Bonds are crediled, which may or may
not be the Beneficial Owners. The Direct and Indirecl Participants will remain responsible for keeping
account of their holdings on behalf of their customers.
Conveyance of notices and olher communications by D'TC to Dirccl Participants, by Direct
Participants to Indirect Participants, and by Direct Participants and Indirect Participants to Beneficial
Owners will be governed by arrangements among them, subject lo any stalulory or regulatory
requirements as may be in effect from time to time
Redemption notices shall be sent to DTC. If less than all of the Bonds of a Series are being
redeemed. DTC's usual practice, which will apply lo the Series 2015A Bonds, is lo determine by lot the
amount of the interest of each Direct Participant in the Scries 2015A Bonds to be redeemed. In
accordance with DTC's procedures, the Cit^' has directed the Truslee to notify DTC that in the event that
less than all ofthe Taxable Series 2015B Bonds are redeemed any such redemption shall be on a pro-rala
basis
Neither DTC nor Cede & Co. (nor any other DTC nominee) will consent or vote with respect to
Bonds unless authorized by a Direct Participant in accordance wilh D TC's MMl Procedures. Under its
usual procedures, D'TC mails an Omnibus Proxy to the City as soon as possible after the record date The
Omnibus Proxy assigns Cede & Co.'s consenting or voting rights to those Direct Participants lo whose
accounts the Bonds are credited on the record date (identified in a listing attached to ihe Omnibus Pro.xy)
Redemption proceeds and principal and interest payments on the Bonds of a Series will be made
to Cede & Co., or such olher nominee as may be requested by an authorized representative of D'TC
D'TC's practice is to credit Direct Participants' accounts upon DTC's receipt of funds and corresponding
detail information from the City or the Trustee for the Bonds of such Series, on the payment date in
accordance with their respective holdings shown on DTC's records. Payments by Participants to
Beneficial Owners will be governed by standing instructions and customary practices, as is the case with
securities held for the accounts of customers m bearer form or registered in "street name,"" and will be the
responsibility of such Participant and not of DTC, any Truslee or the City, subject to any stalulory or
regulatory requirements as may be in effect from lime to time Paymenl of redemplion proceeds and
principal and interest payments to Cede & Co. (or such other nominee as may be requested by an
authorised representative of DTC) is the responsibility oflhe City or the applicable Trustee, disbursement
of such payments to Direct Participants will be the responsibility of D1"C, and disbursement of such
paymenis to the Beneficial Owners will be the responsibility of Direct and Indirect Pariicipants
DTC may disconlmue providing its services as depository with respect lo ihe Bonds of either
Series al any lime by giving reasonable notice to fhe City or the applicable Trustee LInder such
circumstances, in Ihe event that a successor deposilon' is not obtained. Bond cerlificalcs arc required lo be
printed and delivered

 Discontinued Use of Book-Eniiy System
The City may decide lo discontinue use ofthe system of book entry only transfers through DTC
(or a successor securities depository). In lhal evenl. Bond certificates will be prinled and delivered to
D'TC
Procedures May Change
Although D'fC has agreed to these procedures in order lo facilitate transfers of securilies among
DTC and its Participants, DTC is under no obligation to perform or continue to perform these procedures
and these procedures may be discontinued and may be changed at any time by DTC.
The information in this .section concerning D1C and the Book-Entry System has been obtained
from sources that the City believes to be reliable, but neither the City nor the Underwriters take any
responsibility for the accuracy Ihereof
Addilional Information
For every transfer and exchange ofthe Bonds of a Series, DTC, the applicable Truslee and the
Participants may charge the beneficial owner a sum sufficient to cover any tax, fee or other charge that
may be imposed in relation thereto.
NEITHER THE CITY NOR THE APPLICABLE TRUSTEE WILL HAVE ANY
RESPONSIBILITY OR OBLIGATION TO ANY PARTICIPANTS, OR TO THE PERSONS FOR
WHOM THEY ACT AS NOMINEES WITH RESPECT TO THE BONDS OF A SERIES, OR TO ANY
BENEFICIAL OWNER IN RESPECT OF THE ACCURACY OF ANY RECORDS MAIN TAINED BY
D'TC OR ANY PARTICIPANT OR INDIRECT PARTICIPANT OF ANY AMOUN T IN RESPECT OF
THE PRINCIPAL OR INTEREST ON THE BONDS OF SUCH SERIES, OR ANY NOTICE WHICH IS
PERMITTED OR REQUIRED TO BE GIVEN WITH RESPECT TO SUCH BONDS, INCLUDING
ANY NOTICE OF REDEMPTION, THE SELECTION OF SPECIFIC BONDS FOR REDEMPTION,
OR ANY OTHER ACTION TAKEN, BY DTC AS REGISTERED OWNER OF SUCH BONDS
In reading this Official Statement it should be understood that while the Bonds are in the BookEnlry System, references in olher sections of this Official Statemeni lo Registered Owners should be read
to include the person for which a Participant acquires an interest in the Bonds, but (a) all rights of
ownership must be exercised Ihrough DTC and the Book-Entry System, and (b) notices lhat are lo be
given lo Registered Owners will be given only to DTC.
Bonds Not Presented for Payment
If any Bond of a Series is nol presented for payment when the principal amounl thereof becomes
due, eilhcr al maiunty or al a date fixed for redemplion thereof or olherwise, and if moneys sufficient lo
pay such Bond are held by the applicable Trustee for the benefit oflhe Registered Owner of such Bond,
such Tiusiee shall hold such moneys for the benefit of the Registered Owner ol" such Bond without
liabilily lo the Registered Owner for inlerest 'The Registered Owner of such Bond ihercafier shall be
restricted esclusively to such funds for satisfaction of any claims relating to such Bond
Registration and Transfers
The Bond Register for the registration and for ihe transfer ofthe Bonds of each Series will be
kepi al the Designated Corporate 'Trust Office oflhe applicable 'Trustee, as the rcgistiar lor the City in

10

 conneclion with llie Bonds of such Scries. See "TTIE BONDS—Book-Enlry System" lor a discussion of
registration and transfer ofthe beneficial ownership interests in Bonds while they are in the Book-Entr^'
System 'The following provisions relate to the registration and transfer of Bonds of a Series when such
Bonds are in certificated form
Upon surrender for registration of transfer of any Bond of a Series at the Designated Corporate
'Trust Ofi'ice of the applicable Trustee, duly endorsed by, or accompanied by a writlen instrument or
mstrumenls of transfer in form satisfactory to such Truslee and duly executed by the Bondholder or such
Bondholder's attorney duly authorized in writing in such form and with guarantee of signalure as shall be
satisfactoiy to such Trustee, the Cily shall execute, and such Truslee shall authcnticale and deliver, in the
name oflhe transferee or transferees, one or more fully registered Bonds ofthe same Series, inlerest rate
and Malurily Date of Authorized Denominations, for a like principal amount bearing nunibers not
conlemporaneously outstanding. Subject lo the limitations described in the following paragraph. Bonds
of each Series may be exchanged al the Designaled Corporate Trust Office of llie applicable Truslee for a
like aggregate principal amount of Bonds of the same Scries, inleresi rate and Malurity Date of other
Aulhori'zcd Denominations bearing numbers not contemporaneously outstanding
'The applicable 'Trustee shall not be required lo transfer or exchange any Bond of a Series during
the period commencing on the Record Date next preceding any Inlerest Payment Dale of such Bond and
ending on such Interest Payment Date, or to transfer or exchange such Bond after the mailing of notice
calling such Bond for redemption has been made as provided in the Indenture under which such Bond is
Kssucd or during the period of 15 days next preceding the giving of nolice of redemption of Bonds ofthe
same Series and Maturity Date.
No service charge shall be made for any transfer or exchange of Bonds of a Series, but ihe Cily or
ihe applicable Trustee may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other governmental
charge that may be imposed in connection with any transfer or exchange of such Bonds, except lhal no
such payment may be required in the case of the issuance of a Bond or Bonds of a Series for the
unredeemed portion of a Bond surrendered for redemption.
Bonds of a Series delivered upon any regislralion of transfer or exchange will be valid general
obligations ofthe City, evidencing the same debl as the Bonds of such Series surrendered, will be secured
by Ihe Indenlure under which such Bonds were issued and will be enlitled lo all of the security and
benefits of such Indenture and ofthe Bond Ordinance to the same extent as such Bond surrendered
Registered Owner Treated as Absolute Owner
The Cily, the applicable Trustee and any applicable Paying Agent may treat the Registered
Owner of any Bond of a Series as the absolute owner Ihereof for all purpo.ses, whether or nol such Bond
shall be overdue, and shall not be bound by any nolice lo the contrary' All payments of or on account of
the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on any such Bond as provided in the Indenture under which
such Bond is issued shall be made only lo or upon the wrillen order oflhe Regislercd Owner thereof or
such Registered Owner's legal lepresentalive, bul such regislralion may be changed as provided m such
Indenture All such payments shall be valid and effectual lo satisfy and discharge the liability upon such
r3ond to Ihe extent ofthe sum or sums so paid

 SECURITY FOR THE BONDS
General Obligation ofthe City
'The Bonds of each Series arc direct and general obligations ofthe Cily and all taxable property in
the City is subject lo the levy of ad valorem property laxes to pay the Bonds and the interest thereon
without limitation as to rale or amount. The Bonds of each Series shall also be payable, as lo principal
and inlerest, from any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assels or funds ofthe City legally available for
such purpose, including, but not limited to, the proceeds allocable to such Series of a direct annual tax
levied by the City in the Bond Ordinance (the "Bond Property Tax Levy") upon all taxable property
located in the Cily sufficient lo pay the principal of and interest on the Bonds. The Bond Property Tax
Levy will be on file with the County Clerks of Cook and DuPage Counties, Illinois (the "County Clerks")
at the time of issuance ofthe Bonds Sec "FINANCIAL DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS—Property
Taxes" and APPENDIX D—"PROPERTY TAXES."
The Cily has pledged its full faith and credil lo the payment of the Bonds. Under the Bond
Ordinance, the Cily is obligated to appropriate amounts sufficient to pay principal of and interest on the
Bonds for the years such amounts are due, and the City covenants in the Bond Ordinance lo take timely
action as required by law to carry out such obligation; however, if for any such year the City fails to do
so, the Bond Ordinance constitutes a conlinuing approprialion of such amounts without any further action
by the City.
Ifthe revenues raised by the Bond Property Tax Levy would not be available in time to make any
payments of principal of or interest on the Bonds when due, then the appropriate fiscal officers oflhe Cily
are directed in the Bond Ordinance to make such payments from any other moneys, revenues, receipts,
income, assels or funds oflhe Cily lhat are legally available for that purpose in advance ofthe collection
ofthe Bond Properly Tax Levy.
Property Tax Collection Process for the Bonds
The Cily's annual aggregate property tax levy is used primarily lo pay debl service on the City's
general obligation debl and to fund City conlributions lo the Cily's pension plans. See ' FINANCIAL
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS—Properly Taxes." The Bond Property Tax Levy is included in the
calculation ofthe City's annual aggregate property lax levy.

12

 Set forth below is a general schematic oflhe process by which the properly laxes for payment o f
the principal of and inicrest on the Bonds are levied, billed, collected and remilted lo the City in Cook
County (being the Couniy in which approximately 99.99 percent o f l h e taxable properly in the City is
located) and, ultimately, lo the Truslee.
The Bond Ordinance provides for the levy and
collection of a direct annual lax upon all taxable
property in the City for paymenis of debl service on the
Bonds, and a certified copy ofthe Bond Ordinance is
filed with the County' Clerk prior to the issuance of the
Bonds

T.AX I..EV\
SK.R1FS2015
IlONDS

The Cily informs the County Clerk of its annual
aggregate tax levy (which includes confirmation of the
Bond Properly Tax Levy), and Ihe County Clerk
determines the properly tax for the City and all
overlapping taxing districts for each Cily parcel

The County Treasurer issues the tax bills, collects the
property laxes, and remits ihe City's share of property
ta.xes 10 the City Treasurer

The Cily Treasurer deposits ihe portion of llic properly
taxes earmarked for general obligalion debl into the
Bond Redemption and Interest Fund de.scribed below

The City Treasurer remits an amount equal to the
Principal and Interest Account Requirenicnl for each
Scries to the applicable Trustee under each Indenlure for
deposit into the Bond Fund established under such
Indenture prior to the scheduled debt .service payment
dates. If propeily laxcs are in.sufficient, payments to
such 'Trustee arc to be made from any olher legally
available revenues

The applicable 'frustee makes the principal and inlerest
payments for the Bonds of such Series lo ilic
Bondholders on the scheduled debt service payment
dales

.As shown above, when property taxes are remilled by the Cook Countv Treasurer lo Ihe City, the
pioperty laxes lor debt service are deposited and held in the Bond Redemplion and Inleresi Fund
inaiiiUuncd by the City Treasurer riie Bond Redemption and Inlerest Fund is used for the paymcni of
debl service on all ofthe C i i v s general obligation bonds for which a propcitv tax lew has been pledged.

13

 including the Bonds, and is one of a number of governmental funds used by the City lo accounl for us
governmental activities. The Bond Redemption and Interest Fund is not held by a separate trustee and is
not pledged to the paymenl of the Bonds. Bondholders do not have a statutory lien on the Bond
Redemption and Inlerest Fund. See "INVESTMENT CONSIDERATIONS—Uncertain Enforcement
Remedies""
There is no guarantee that the fiow of revenues from the Bond Property 'Tax Levy will always be
maintained as described above. 'The City Council could alter the Bond Property 'Tax Levy or use the
funds held in the Bond Redemption and Interest Fund for other uses besides debt service The Illinois
General Assembly could alter the procedure by which property taxes are extended and collected Ifthe
aniount of property tax revenue is insufficient to pay debt service on the Bonds, the City would still be
obligated lo find other sources of funds to remit to the Trustee for the payment of principal of and intere.st
on the Bonds when due.
For additional information on real property assessment, tax levies and collections, see
APPENDIX D—"PROPERTY TAXES."
Additional General Obligation Debt
The City may from time to time issue debl and incur olher obligations that arc general obligations
oflhe City, including commercial paper and borrowings under revolving lines of credit which comprise
ihc Cily's shorl-term borrowing facililies (the "Short Term Borrowing Program"), all of which are
secured by the full faith and credit of the City. In late 2015 or early 2016, the Cily expects to issue
approximately $700 million of general obligation bonds lo fund capilal projects, for debt restructuring and
to pay capitalized inlerest on such bonds. The City may also issue refunding bonds for cost savings
depending on prevailing market conditions. See "GENERAL OBLIGATION DEBT—Long-Term
General Obligation Bonds."
PLAN OF FINANCING
The proceeds ofthe Bonds will be used to (i) repay indebtedness incurred by the City under the
Short Term Borrowing Program, (ii) fund the cost of terminating the sale/leaseback of the Orange Line
rapid transit rail line; (iii) reimburse the Cily's General T'und for the cost of terminating an inleresi rate
swap associated with the City's sales tax revenue bonds; (iv) fund certain capitalized inleresi on the
Bonds through January I , 2018; and (v) pay costs of issuance of the Bonds.
Repayment of Short Term Borrowing Program
Proceeds of the Bonds will be used to repay amounis outstanding under the Short Term
Borrowing Program The amounts and purposes of short term borrowings to be repaid with Bond
proceeds are as follows
$15) 6 million for cosls incurred in connection with ihe conversion ofthe Cilys general
obligation variable rale bonds to fixed rale bonds, comprised of $131 6 million for bond
redemptions and $20 0 million to fund bond tender prices (resulting from the reon~ering of
converted bonds al a discount) and tran.saclion costs. Oflhe lolal amount, $117 4 million will
be paid from proceeds ofthe Series 20I5A Bonds and $34 2 million will be paid from
proceeds of the Taxable Scries 2015B Bonds
See "GENERAL OBLIGATION
DEB T—Recent Developments—Variable Rale Bond Conversions."

14

 •

$192 1 million for lerminalion of general obligalion interest rale swaps associated with ihe
City's general obligation variable rate bonds and $2 8 million for the termination of a
swaption relating to general obligation fixed rate bonds Ofthe total amount for the swaps,
$31.3 million will be paid from proceeds ofthe Series 2015A Bonds and $160.9 million will
be paid from proceeds ofthe Ta.xable Series 20I5B Bonds. 'The amounl for the swaption will
be paid from proceeds ofthe Taxable Series 2015B Bonds See "GENERAL OBLIGATION
DEBT—Recent Developments—SM'ap Terminations."
$170.0 million to fund debt service on outstanding general obligation bonds on July I , 2015
and January 1, 2016, of which $86.2 million will be paid from proceeds ofthe Series 2015A
Bonds and $83.8 million will be paid from proceeds of the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds See
"GENERAL OBLIGATION DEBT—Long Term Bonds."
$46.6 million from proceeds ofthe Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds for bank fees relating lo
conversion ofthe City's general obligation variable rate bonds to fixed rate bonds and the
Short Term Borrowing Program, including increased fees triggered by the Moody's May 12,
2015 rating downgrade. See "GENERAL OBLIGATION DEBT—Recent Developments"
and "-Short Term Borrowing Program" and "INVESTMEN'T CONSIDERATIONS—Credit
Rating Downgrades "
$35.0 million from proceeds of the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds to pay accrued interest and
principal on acquisition financing of the former Michael Reese Hospital campus. See
"GENERAL OBLIGATION DEBT—MRL Financing LLC Promissory Note."
$2 4 million from proceeds of the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds to terminate two
lease/leaseback transactions for the City's 911/311 Qualified Technological Equipment See
APPENDIX B—"CITY OF CHICAGO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR THE
YEAR ENDED December 31, 2014—Note 7(b) Capital Leases."

•

$62.4 million from proceeds of the Series 2015A Bonds in payment of a judgment relating to
the long-term lease of certain City public garages, and $18.5 million from proceeds oflhe
Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds for a contract claim relating to the concession agreement for the
Cily's on-street metered parking system.
See "FINANCIAL DISCUSSION AND
ANALYSIS—Long Term Leases, Concessions of City Facilities."

Other Application of Bond Proceeds
Proceeds ofthe Bonds will also be used in the amounis and for the purposes set forth below:
Up to $181 0 million from proceeds ofthe Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds to terminate the
sale/leaseback transaction entered into by the Cuy in 2005 with respect to the Orange Line
rapid transit rail line. See "GENERAL OBLlGA'flON DEB'l—Capital Lease."
$24 5 million from proceeds oflhe 'Ta.xable Scries 2015B Bonds to icimbursc the General
Fund for the swap termination payment relating lo the Cily's conversion of sales lax variable
rate bonds to fixed rale bonds
See "GENERAL OBI.IGA'TION DEBT—Recent
Developments—Swap Terminations "

15

 SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS
I he Tollowing table sets forth ihe sources and uses of funds from the sale of the Bonds as
described under 'PLAN OF FINANCING."

.SOURCE OF FUNDS:
Principal Amount of ihc Bonds
Nel Original Issue Discount

Series 20ISA
Bonds

Ta.xable Series
2015B Bonds

Total

$345,530,000
(4,570,044)

$742,860,000
(11,396,933)
$731,463,067

$1,088,390,000
(15,966,977)
$1,072,423,023

41,299,228
2,416,259

$384,249,772
181,000,000
24,500,000
136,537,386
5,175,909

$ 681,494,241
181,000,000
24,500,000
177,836,614
7,592,168

$340,959,956

$731,463,067

$1,072,423,023

$340,959,956

Total Sources of Funds .. .
USES OF FUNDS:
Repayment of .Short Term Borrowing Program
Termination of Orange Line Sale/Leaseback
Termination of .Sales ')"a.\ Interest Rate Swap
Capitalized lnt(;resl
Cosls of Issuance (including the Underwriters' discount).
Tolal Uses of Funds

$297,244,469

Source Cily o f Chicago, Depanmcnl ofTinance

FINANCIAL DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Annual Budget
Budget Process
Each year, the Cily prepares an annual budget that accounts for revenue from taxes and other
sources and .sets forth a plan for how the City intends lo utilize those resources over the course ofthe
following year. In accordance wilh the Illinois Municipal Code, ihc Cily produces a balanced budgcl,
meaning that its appropriated expenditures do not exceed the aniount of resources it esiimates will be
available for that year.
I he budget process begins each summer, when City departments inform the Office of Budget and
Managcniiint ("OBM") of their personnel and non-personnel needs for the upcoming year. OBM then
prepares a preliminary budget ba.sed on the requests submitted by the departments and the resources OBM
expects Will be available to fund those needs.
Throughout the remainder of the summer, OBM continues the process of reviewing each
department's operating and progranimalic needs and developing detailed departmcnial budgets OBM
also estiniales citywide expenses, pension contributions, employee health care and debt service In
addition, OBM prepares estimates on the amount of revenue lhal the City expects to collect in the
following vear
In the fall, the Mayor's Office and OBM work wilh departmenls to develop one final budget for
the entire City government OBM then compiles and balances the Mayor's proposed budget, which is
introduced to the City Council on or before October 15 of each year The Cily Council holds commillee
and puhlu; hearings on the Mayor's proposed budget and may propose amendments to it Once the

16

 proposed budgcl, as amended, is adopted by the City Council, and approved by the Mayor, it becomes the
Annual Appropriation Ordinance.
Budget

Documents

'The documents that are prepared as part of the City's budget process are set forth below. Sitcli
documenls are nol prepared for investors in securities issued by the Cuy. or as a basis for making
inveslnieni decisions with re.spect lo any bonds, notes, or olher debl obligations oflhe City, including llie
Bonds Prospeclive purchasers of the Bonds are cautioned not to rely on any of the information m the
budget documents in conneclion with the offering ofthe Bonds.
Annual Budget Documents
Document

Budget

Purpose

Budget Overview

Provides a summary of the proposed budget and detailed
information on the City's anticipated revenues, expenditures, and
personnel.

Budget
Kcconinicndations

Constitutes the Mayor's proposed budget lo the City Council in
accordance with Illinois state law

Consolidated Plan &
Aclion Plan

The tlve-year plan setting forth priorities for the City's housing and
non-housing community needs based on housing and community
development a.ssessmcnts

Annual Appropriation
Ordinance

'The City's line-item budget as passed by the City Council

Capital Improvement
Program

A comprehensive list of capital improvements scheduled to occur
in the City over the next five years.

Calendar
The general budget calendar of the Cily is presented in the following lable
Annual Budget Calendar
Month

Action

June

Departments submit preliminary revenue and expen.se estimates to
OBM

,^ugllSl/Septcmber

OBM receives detailed budget requests from City departments
holds a series of meetings with each department regarding
department's needs for the coming year OBM works with
Mayor's Office lo match expen.ses with available resources
balance the next year's budgcl

October

On or before October 15. the Mavor submits a proposed budget to
the City Council, and the City Council conducts hearings on the
budgcl, including at least one public hearing to gather comments on
the proposed budget

17

and
Ihc
the
and

 Novemhcr/Dcccmhcr

Additions or changes to the proposed budget are considered. The
City Council must approve a balanced budget by December 31, at
which point the Budget Recommendations become the Annual
Appropriation Ordinance. 'The draft action plan is submitted
annually lo the U S Dcparimcnt of Housing and Urban
Developmenl for funding consideration.

January

The City's Annual Approprialion Ordinance goes inlo effecl

Throughout The Year

Throughout the year, OBM manages the resources allocated
through the Annual Appropriation Ordinance. OBM regularly
reviews revenues, expenditures, and any trends or events that may
affect Cily finances On an ongoing basis, Cily departmenls
provide information about the performance of City programs lo
ensure lhal City resources are used in a manner lhat maximiMs
taxpayer value and provides ihc highest qualily services

City Fund Structure
The City organizes its activities by funds, each of which is accounted for separately. Each fund
has a specific set of revenue sources, which are utilized to support a specific set of city services and
functions. Descriptions of the City's major governmental funds and its special revenue and proprietary
funds are set forth below.
City Funds
Fund

Purpose

General Fund

Tlie General Fund is the City's general operating fund and supports
essential City services and activilies, such as police and fire
protection, trash collection, and public heallh programs. General
Fund revenues come primarily from a variety of local and
inlergovernmental taxes, fees, and fines. See "—General Fund'"
below

Federal, Stale and
Local Grants Fund

Grant funding, largely from ihe state and federal governments,
makes up a significant and recurring source of revenue for ihe City
and is utilized lo provide a range of Cily services and certain
capital improvements

Special Ta.xing Areas
Fund

The Special Taxing Areas Fund accounts for expenditures for
special area operations and maintenance and for redevelopment
project costs as provided by tax levies on special areas, including
tax increment financing districts

 Scr>icc (Concession &
Reserve Fund

Established in connection with ihe long-term lease/concession of
City as.sets to create reserves for unexpected contingencies,
emergencies, or revenue shortfalls These reserves are nol included
in the City's annual operating budget See "—Service Concession
and Reserve Fund" below

Bond, Note
Redemption and
Interest Fund

Accounts for the expenditures for principal and inlerest as provided
by property tax, utility tax, sales tax, transportation tax, and
invcslmeni income

Community
Development and
Improvement Projects
Fund

The Communily Development and Iniprovcmcnl Projects Fund
accounts for proceeds of debl u.sed to acquire property, finance
construction, and finance authorized expenditures and supporting
services for various activities See "—Capital Improvements"
below

Special Revenue
Funds

The City's special revenue funds (the "Special Revenue Funds")
are used to account for revenue from specific sources that by law
are designated to finance particular functions, such as road repair,
snow removal, the library system, emergency management and
special events and tourism promotion.

Proprietary Funds

'The City's proprietary funds (ihe "Enterprise Funds") include ihc
water fund, the sewer fund, and a separate fund for each of the
City's major airports. These funds are self-supporting, in that each
fund derives its revenue from charges and associated user fees

The revenue sources ofthe Federal, State and Local Grants Fund, the Community Development
and Improvement Projects Fund and the Enterprise Funds are reslricted as to use by law and those of the
Special Revenue Funds arc largely dedicated to specific services and functions. 'The revenues from these
funds are not otherwise available to pay for general citywide expenses, including debt service on the
Cily's general obligation bonds (including the Bonds) and the City's pension costs exceeding amounts
properly allocable to the funds
General Fund
The City has historically presented information on the Cily's Corporate Fund in connection with
US general obligation bond issues, fhe Corporate Fund comprises approximately 99.0 percenl o f the
Cit)''s General Fund, which is the City's primaiy operating fund and accounts for all oflhe Cily's sources
and uses of general operating revenue. The General Fund, and not the Corporate Fund, is included in the
City's basic financial statemcnls. The City is presenting information in this Official Statement about the
General Fund in order lo facilitate the reader's review of the City's basic financial sialements
See
APPENDIX C—"CITY OF CHICAGO BASIC FINANCIAL S'TATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR
ENDED DECEMBER 31. 2014 "'
The General Fund does not accounl for the portion ofthe City's pension obligations that are paid
from the Cily's property tax levy or the Enterprise Funds, nor does it accounl for the principal and interest
paymenis on the Cil\ s long-term general obligation bonds lhat are paid from ihe properly tax levy For
information regarding the use o f l h e City's property taxes for the payment of pension costs and general
obligation bond debt service, sec "—Property Taxes—Use of Cuy Property Tax Levy,'' below

 General Fund resources have changed over the past 5 years In 2010, 59 percenl of General Fund
resources came from tax revenues, 25 percent from other revenues, and 16 percenl from other financing
sources This compares lo 2014, when 68 percent of General Fund resources came from tax revenues, 31
percent from other revenues, and 1 percenl from other financing sources. In the period from 2009
Ihrough 2011, an average of $487 million each year, or 15 percenl of General Fund resources, came from
non-recurring revenue sources including transfers in from the Service Concession and Reserve Fund.
Beginning with the 2012 budget, the City phased out the u.se of reserves to subsidize the operating budget
Sec "—Service Concession and Reserve Fund" below
Selecled Financial Information
The following table sets forth revenues and other financing sources (collectively, "resources")
and expenditures and olher financing uses (collectively, "expenditures") for the General Fund on a
historical basis for the years 2010 lo 2014. 'The financial information is based on the modified accrual
basis of accounting for the General Fund as reported in the City's audited basic financial statements for
the years 2010 to 2014, respectively. This table should be read in conjunction with the financial
information .set forth in APPENDIX C—"CITY OF CHICAGO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2014."

20

 General Fund'"
For Fiscal Years Ended 2010-2014
($ in ihousands)
2010
Revenues
Uuliiy fax
Sales l ax
State Income 'Tax
Other laxes
Fcdcral/Statc Grants
Other Revenues'^'
Total Revenues

..

Expenditures
Current
Public Safety
General Government
Oihcr'^'
Debt Service
Tolal Expendiiures
Revenues Under Expenditures
Other Financing Sources (Uses)'
Proceeds of Debt, Net of
Original Discount/Including
Premium
Transfers In
Transfers Out
Total Other Financing
Sources (Uses)
Revenues and Oilier Tinancing
Sources Over (Undei)
Expenditures and Other
Financing Uses
Fund Balance - Beginning of Year
Change in Inventory
Tund Balance - End of Year

$ 467,411
495,842
282,01 I
590.575
1,735
773,278
2,610.852

2011
$ 467,630
536,281
236.521
618.384
1,294
921,056
2,781,166

2012

2013

2014

$ 462,475
572,185
282.779
694.383
1,074
907,760
2,920,656

$ 456,869
583,681
308,899
749,742
1,871
929,429
3,030,491

.$473,496
620,299
278,031
803.961
2,335
998.028
3,176,150

1,828,984
1.895,404
1,956,152
1,953,572 2,020.072
903,890
863.622
864,556
885,268
929,918
296,063
278,561
258,501
267,852
270,899
5,004
2,849
2,160
2,382
10,369
3,033,941
3,040,436 3.081,369 3,109,074 3,231,258
(423,089) (259,270) (160,713)
(78,583) (55,108)

16.500
502,502
(13,600)

95,000
372,744
(14,357)

55,000
31,617
(26,965)

21,018
(10,583)

39.700
(10,081)

505,402

453,387

59,652

10,435

29,619

82,313

194,117

(101,061)

(68,148)

135,541
231,302
54.706
335,533
(1,478)
5.875
3.903
(3,170)
$135,541 $ 3.35,533 $ 231,032 $ 167,057

(25,489)
167,057
(290)
$ 141.278

.Source Cily ol'ChicLigo Coinprchcn.sivL- Annual Financiiil Report (ihc ''Cuy CAFR"), Exhibit 4 for the rcspcclivc years fhe
Cily CM'R l.•^ availahic upon rcqiicsi from llic Dcparlmoni of l-'inancc
"' MIL- (iL-iK-ral Fund is Ihc chief opcraling fund oflhe C;ly 11 is comprised oflhe Corporate Fund a.s well as ollici non-ina Oi
operaling fundi wheie fund balance is nol icslMcted or committed as defined by the Governmenl Accounting Slaiidard.s Hoard
(GASfif
Include? Inlcin.il Scivicc, Licenses and IVrniils. Finos, Investment Income, Charges I'or Services and Miscellaneous
Revenues
'"" Inelude.-' I loallli. Sliecl'i .ind .Saniialion. I ransporlalion. CulUiral and Reciealional and Olher Currenl l-.\pcndilureb
General f und Revenue
The General Fund's revenue sources coiisisi of utility taxes, sales laxcs, stale income taxes, other
taxes, federal and slate giLinis, and olher revenues Wilh the exceplion of federal and state grants, which

 arc less than 1 percent of overall General Fund revenues, the various sources of General Fund revenues
are described below
Utility Taxes. Utility taxes consist of taxes on the purchase of lelecommunicalions services,
electricity, natural gas, and cable television. The following table sets forth the sources of utility tax
revenue for the years 2010 ihrough 2014.
Utility Fax Revenue 2010-2014
($ in Ihousands)
Gas.
Electric
Commonweallh Edison
Tclccomniunication
Infrastructure Mainlenance
Fiber Optics
Cable Television
Total tJtility Tax
Source

2010
$114,254
99,265
91,714
139,516
0
0
22,662
$467,411

2011
$113,681
98,100
90,655
140,998
65
0
24,131
$467,630

2012
$98,791
98,015
90,814
149,336
7
0
25,512
$462,475

2013
$122,139
98,557
90,602
119,348
0
23
26,200
$456,869

2014
$153,274
96,353
90,202
106,129
0
0
27,538
$473,496

Cily CAFR, Schedule A-l for the respective years

These combined taxes have been 15 percent, on average, oftotal General Fund resources between
2010 and 2014 In 2010, utility laxes were $4674 million, increasing to .$473.5 million in 2014. The
reasons forfiuctualionswithin the major categories of utility laxes are discussed below Infrastructure
maintenance, fiber optics and cable television are excluded from the discussion because the amounts are
immaterial.
Gas Tax. The City imposes natural gas-relaled taxes, the revenues of which are dependent upon
weather conditions and price Colder weather increases consumption and associated tax revenues, as
natural gas is used lo heal homes and buildings. In 2010, nalural gas-related la.xcs generated $114 3
million, accounting for 4 percenl oftotal General Fund resources. Prices averaged 55.1 cents per therm
during 2010 and dropped to an average of 35.3 cents per therm in 2012. Natural gas prices began lo rise
in 2013, and by 2014, reached 72 2 cents per therm. Together wilh severely cold weather and the resulting
increase in usage and higher gas prices, natural gas Icxx revenues rose to $153.3 million in 2014 Because
the natural gas utility tax rale is a percentage of gross revenues as opposed to a per unit rale, these
revenues are more directly impacted by price than electricity taxes, vvhich are imposed entirely on a per
unit basis
Electric and Commonwealth Edi.son Taxes. The City's electricity taxes (shown in the lable above
under Electric and Commonwealth Edison) are charged based on the number of kilowatt hours of
electricity used Revenues from electricity taxes are dependent upon consumption and also weather
conditions, particularK summer temperatures due to the electricity needed lo cool homes and buildings
Eleclricity lax revenues have been 6 percent, on average, of lolal General Fund resources over the past
five years, averaging $188 9 million each year and have held relatively constant in recent years
Telecnmniiinicattniis I'ax Revenue from lelecommunicalions taxes, which are levied by the City
on charges for telephone services in the Cily, has declined over the past decade, refiecting trends in the
indiislo' and consumer preferences In 2010, tclccommunicalions tax revenue was $139 5 million and
made up 5 percenl ol"(jeneral Fund resources By 2014, lelecommunicalions lax revenue had dropped lo
$106 1 million. accoLinling for 3 percent oi lolal General Fund resources 'fhe overall decline in revenues

 was due in part to the continuing reduction in the use of landlmes as more customers rely solely on
wireless services, and also a decline in the number of wireless accounts as use of online communication
services such as Skype or other technologies increa.se. In addition, federal lavv exempts mo.st wireless
dala services, such as mobile broadband, from taxation. Consequently, growth in the market for such
wireless services has not resulted in increased telecommunications tax revenues for the City.
Sales Taxes. The following table sets forth sources of sales lax revenue for the years 2010
through 2014
Sales Taxes 2010-2014
($ in ihousands)
Local Sales Taxes
State Sales 'Taxes
Tolal Sales Tax

... .

2010
20II
2012
2013
2014
$229,202 $252,530 $272,312 $267,576 $285,773
266,640 283,751 299,873 316.105 334,526
$495,842 $536,281 $572,185 $583,681 $620,299

Source. Cily CAFR. Schedule A-l for the respedive years

Local Sales Taxes. Local sales lax revenues, as set forth in Ihe lable above, consist of four
separate taxes imposed by the City pursuant to its home rule powers, the Municipal Code and state law
(collectively, the ''Local Sales Taxes"):
HOME RUI.F: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION 'TAX. The Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax is a 1.25 percent lax imposed on the sale of most items of nonlilled tangible personal
properly by retailers in the City. This tax is authorized by the Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax Acl ofthe Stale 'The lax must be imposed in increments of 0.25 percenl, and can only be
imposed ifthe City also imposes a municipal service occupation tax.

HOME

RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.

The Home Rule Municipal Service

Occupation 'Tax is a I 25 percenl tax imposed on the selling price of most items of tangible personal
property acquired as an incident to the purchase of a service from service providers in the Cily This tax
is authorized by ihe Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax Acl ofthe Stale and musl be impo.sed
al the same rate as the Tlome Rule Municipal Retailers Occupation Tax described above.

I loML RULE MUNICIPAL USE '1"A.\ ON

'TI I LED PERSONAL PROPERTY.

'The I lomc Rule Municipal

Use 'Tax on Tilled Personal Properly is a 1.25 percenl lax imposed on the privilege of using within the
City titled personal property that is purchased from a retailer and that is tilled or registered al a location in
the City 'fhis lax is authorized by the Home Rule Municipal Use Tax Act ofthe State.

TIOMF

RULE MUNICIPAL USE TAX ON NONII'I'LED PERSONAL PROPER'TY

The Home Rule

Municipal Use fax on Nonlilled Personal Properly is a I 0 percent lax imposed on ihc privilege of using
wilhin the Cily most items of nonlilled personal properly lhat are purchased from a retailer located oulside
the City This tax is aulhorized by the Home Rule Municipal Use 'Tax Act oflhe Slate The lax must be
imposed in increments of 0 25 percent up lo the maximum rale of 1 0 percent
CurreiilK' thcie is no legal limit on the rale at which the City may impose the Tlome Rule
Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax, the Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax or the Home
Rule Municipal Use lax on Tilled Personal Property Except for the Home Rule Municipal Vise Tax on
Nonlilled Personal Property, the Local Sales Taxes are collecled by the State on behaK ol"the City

23

 Tor purchases subject lo the Home Rule Municipal Retailer's Occupation 'Tax and the Home Rule
Municipal Use 'Tax on Tilled Personal Property, most are subject to a combined tax rate lhal includes, in
addition to the Local Sales Taxes and the slate rate of 6 25 percent, a Regional Transportation Authority
sales tax rate of 1.0 percenl and a Cook Couniy sales tax rate of .75 percent
Revenue from the Local Sales Taxes lhat has been allocated to the General Fund after provision
for .sales tax revenue bonds debt .service has accounted for an average of approximately 8 percent oftotal
General Fund resources between 2010 and 2014 Beginning in ihc fall of 2008, receipts from Local Sales
'Taxes began lo decline due lo the recession, with revenues of $229.2 million by 2010. Moderate growth
continued from 2010 unfil 2012, wilh a modest decline in 2013, due lo a larger portion of Local Sales
Taxes allocated to sales tax bond debt service payments Local Sales Taxes allocated to the General Fund
were $285 8 million in 2014, accounting for 9 percent of General Fund resources.
Slate Sales Taxes. The Cily's share of slate sales lax revenues, as sel forth in the lable above,
consist of four separate taxes imposed by the State as follows (collectively, the "State Sales Taxes"):
ILLINOIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX. The Illinois Retailers' Occupation Tax is imposed by
the State at the rale of 6 25 percenl on the sale of most items of nontitled tangible personal property by
retailers The City receives 1 percent on the sale of such items by retailers in the City, representing 16
percent of the nel receipts of this lax attributable to sales occurring in the City. With respect to tax on
grocery food, drugs and medical appliances, the City receives I percent of the net receipts on the sale of
grocery food, drugs and niedical appliances, representing 100 percent of the net receipts of this tax
attributable to sales occurring in the City.

ILLINOIS SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX The Illinois Service Occupation Tax is imposed by the
State al the rale of 6.25 percent on (he sale of most items of nontitled tangible personal property by
service providers. 'The Cily receives 1 percent on the sale of such items by retailers in the City,
representing 16 percent oflhe net receipts of ihis lax attributable to sales occurring in the City. With
respect to tax on grocery food, drugs and medical appliances, the City receives 1 percent of the net
receipts on the sale of grocer>' food, drugs and niedical appliances, repre.senting 44.44 percent ofthe net
receipts of this tax attributable to sales occurring in the City.
ILLINOIS USE TAX The Illinois U.se Tax is imposed by the Slate at the rate of 6.25 percent on the
privilege of using most items of personal property purchased outside ofthe State. The City receives 4
percenl oflhe net receipts of this tax collected on most items of nontitled personal properly purchased
outside oflhe Stale, subject to annual appropriation by the Illinois General Assembly. Subjecl lo annual
appropriation by ihe Illinois General Assembly, ihe Cily receives 20 percent oflhe nel receipts of this lax
imposed at the rate of 1 percenl on grocery food, drugs and medical appliances purchased outside oflhe
Slate
ILLINOIS SI RVICE USI: 'TAX. The City currenlly receives 4 percent ofthe net receipts oflhe
Illinois Service Use Tax which is impo.sed by the Slate al the rate of 6 25 percenl on the privilege of using
most items of tangible personal property acquired as an incident to the purchase of a service from a
service provider m ihc Slate, subjecl to annual approprialion by the Illinois General Assembly. 'The City
also receives 20 percent of the net receipts of this tax imposed al the rate of one percenl on grocery food,
drugs and medical appliances acquired as an incident lo Ihe purchase of a service from a service provider
in the Stale, subject to annual appropriation by the Illinois General Assembly.

Except as noted above, the Ciiy cunently receives its share of Stale Sales Tax revenues withoul
annual appropriation by the Illinois General Assembly Any change in the lax rales or amounl of net lax

24

 receipls allocated to ihc City from Slate Sales Tax revenues would require the enactment of legislation by
the Illinois General Assembly
Revenue from the Stale Sales Taxes has accounted for an average of approximately 10 percent of
lolal General Fund resources between 2010 and 2014 Following the recession in 2008, revenues had
declined lo $266.6 million in 2010. Steady growlh has continued since 2010, wilh State Sales Tax
revenues increasing lo $334 5 million in 2014, accounting for 10 percent oftotal General Fund resources
State Income Tax. State income tax revenues consist ofthe City's share ofthe state income
la.xcs, including personal properly replacement laxes. 'The following table sets forth sources of stale
income lax revenue received by the General Fund for the years 2010 through 2014:
State Income Tax 2010-2014
($ in thousands)
Income'Ta.xes
Personal Properly Replacement Ta.xes
'Total Slate Income Tax .

2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
$231,531 $200,341 $245,193 $275,979 $250,279
50,480
36,180
37.586
32,920
27.752
$282,011 $236,521 $282,779 $308,899 .$278,031

Souice City CAFK, Schedule A-1 for the respective years
Income Tax Like the Local Sales Taxes and the State Sales Taxes, the City's share of state
income lax revenues experienced growth in pre-recession years and then, with the decline in the
economy, the City's share of this lax declined lo $201.0 million in 2009. 'fhe state income lax revenues
received by the City increased in 2010 to $231.5 million, but then declined again in 2011 due lo a
combination of factors, including continued high state unemployment rates, the decline in population
under the 2010 Census, a timing difference in the receipt of state distributions to the City and changes in
2010 lo the Internal Revenue Code regarding bonus depreciation.
Beginning in the second half of 2011 and conlinuing into 2014, income lax collections gained
momentum with the recovering economy. In addition, in both 2012 and 2013, due lo the timing oflhe
state distributions lo catch up on back paymenis owed lo the City, 13 payments were booked as revenue.
2013 collections were also pushed upward by a one-lime surge in paymenis associated wilh businesses
and individuals selling assets or receiving early dividends or bonuses in anticipation of higher federal tax
rates. Consequently, Cily income tax revenues ended 2013 at the unusually high level of $276 0 million
With only 12 paymenis and no one-time surge in 2014, income lax revenues ended 2014 at .$250 3
million.
In 2011, ihe Stale increased the personal income lax rale from 3 percenl to 5 percenl and ihe
corporate income tax rale from 4 8 percenl to 7 percent However, municipalities did not receive a share
of Ihis increase because the Slale. concurrently wilh increasing lax rales, reduced Ihe percenlage of lolal
income tax receipts lhal How into the local governmenl distribution fund from which municipalities are
paid their share of state income tax revenue As of January I , 2015 the personal income tax rate was
reduced to 3 75 percenl and the corporate income lax rate was reduced lo 5 25 percent
Personal Properi\ Replacement fax The personal properly replacement lax derives its revenues
primarily from an additional Slate income lax levied by the Slale on corporations, partnerships, trusts and
S corporations Currently, corporations pay a 2 5 percent lax on income, while partnerships, trusts, and S
corporations pay a I 5 percent lax on income The personal properly replacement tax also derives some
of Us rcvciuies from various laxes imposed on utililies al various rales The lax is collecled by the Slate

25

 and paid lo local governmenis in order to replace revenues lhat were lost when the Slate eliminaled ihe
authority of local governments to collect personal properly taxes on business entities The Cily has
historically utilized its personal property replacement tax revenue in part to support the General Fund and
in part to pay for the Cit> "s share of pension contributions. Beginning in 2015, the City has changed the
way it records personal properly replacement lax revenues in the General Fund See —Financial
Forecasts—2015 General Fund Budget" below.
'The personal property replacemenl lax has generally followed the same patterns as income tax
revenues. The personal property replacement tax levied on utilities represents approximately 15 percent
ofthe aggregate lax received and is less economically sensitive In recent years, the expected increase in
the amount of llie personal property replacement tax received by the City due to the recovering economy
has been negated in part by legislation enacted by the State since 2010 lhat allows the Slate to reallocate
personal property replacement lax revenue for employment-related costs of certain State Board of
Education personnel and .stale officials
Olher Taxe.s. Other tax revenues consist of various taxes imposed by the City, such as transportation
taxes, transaction taxes, recreation laxes, business laxes as well as the City's share of the state auto rental
tax. The following table sets forth sources of other tax revenue for the years 2010 through 2014.
Other faxes 2010-2014
($ in thousands)
2010
Transportation 'Tax
Parking
....
. ..
$ 92,306
Vehicle Tucl
49,800
Ground Transportation
8,600
Transaction Tax
Real Property . . .
81,302
Personal Properly Lea.se .
. . 108,357
Motor Vehicle Lessor... .
5,426
Recreation Tax
Amusement
85,682
Automatic Amuscmenl
..
990
Liijuor
. . 31,508
Boat Mooring
1,317
Cigarette
19,326
OTf Track Bcuing
929
Soft Drink
18,638
Business Tax
Motel
. .
54,348
23,479
Employers Expense
Foreign Fire Insurance
5,133
3,434
State Auto Rental Tax
$590,575
Total Oilier Taxes

2011

2012

2013

2014

$ 93,449
49,367
9,111

$119,169
49,818
8,903

$124,384
49,089
9,070

$126,516
48,161
10,399

85,986
123,523
5,753

102,571
132,503
6,037

141,907
140,227
6,249

157,194
152,576
6,431

86,055
913
31,584
1,439
18,666
837
19,934

87,843
869
32.620
1,361
18,015
694
21,792

96,739
631
32,048
1,275
16,268
604
21,564

112,895
584
32,113
1,309
24,022
547
22,210

60,082
23,496
4,598
3,591
$618,384

85,634
17,853
4,791
3,910
$694,383

89,851
11,261
4,601
3,974
$749,742

100,407
0
4,422
4,175
$803,961

Source City CAFR. Schedule A-1 for the respective years

With the exceplion of state auto rental laxes, which are immalerial. the various sources of olher
taxes arc described below.
taxes

Transpurtaiion 'Taxes Transportation tax revenues consist primarily of parking and vehicle fuel
Parking taxes, which are imposed on parking garage operators, have consistently made up the

26

 largest portion of this category of revenues. Rale adjustments in 2009 and 2012 contributed lo greater
revenue growlh in those years, wilh an overall increase from $92.3 million in 2010 lo $126.5 million in
2014 Pursuant to a change in state law, the City changed this tax from a tiered tiat rate structure to a
percentage-based rale effective July 1, 2013, reducing the effective tax rale for low cosl parking while
increasing the effective rate for high cosl parking.
The vehicle fuel lax is a 5 cent per gallon lax on the sale of vehicle fuel to a retailer doing
business in the City, or who purchases fuel for use in the City. Vehicle fuel tax revenues declined from
$49.8 million in 2010 lo $48 2 million in 2014, due largely to declines in fuel consumption as gasoline
prices rose, fuel economy standards became more stringent, and fuel-efficient vehicles became more
prevalent
Transaction Ta.xes Transaction taxes include laxes on the transfer of real estate, the lea.se or
rental of personal properly, and the short-term lease of motor vehicles wilhin the city. Combined
transaction taxes have constituted between 6 and 10 percent of total General Fund resources between
2010 and 2014. Fluctuations in these revenue sources track closely with the economy and the real estate
markel.
In the years leading up to Ihe recession, real properly transfer tax collections reached record
levels. The decline in the real eslale market reduced these collections to $61.9 million in 2009. While
commercial real estate activity started to increase in 2010 and continued to improve in 2011, the
residential real estate market was slower to recover and did not show sustained growth until 2012. By
2013, home sales increased by 19 percent and median home prices increased by 10 percent from 2012,
bringing overall real properly transfer lax revenues to $141.9 million. During 2014, median home prices
incrca<;ed by 11 percent over 2013 while home sales decreased by 7 percent due largely to inventory
shortages Due to the increase in median home prices, 2014 revenues increased to $157.2 million.
As with other transaction and consumer-driven tax revenues, collections of personal property
lease transaction taxes, imposed on the lease or rental of personal property at a rate of 9 percent of the
lease or rental price, increased from 2010 to 2014, refiecting improving economies. In 2010, personal
properly lease transaction laxes generated $108.4 million. 'This revenue continued lo grow, starting in
2011, mainly due lo enforcement efforts. Personal property lease tax revenues were $152.6 million in
2014, accounting for 5 percent of lolal General Fund resources.
Recreation Tcixes Recreation taxes include taxes on amusement activities and devices, liquor,
the mooring of boats, cigarettes, off-track betting and non-alcoholic beverages In 2010, recreation laxes
generated $158 4 million for the City, accounting for 5 percent oftotal General Fund resources. By 2014,
this had grown to $193 7 million, accounting for 6 percent of total General l-"und resources, primarily due
to the increase in amusement tax revenues Amusement lax, including Automated Amusement tax,
revenues for 2014 represent 59 percent oftotal recreation tax revenues.
Amusement taxes apply to most large sporting events, theater, and musical performances in ihc
Cit^'
The overall increase in ihesc revenues was due in part to a one percent increase in 2009
Amusement lax revenues also vary signilicanlly Trom year lo year based on the relalivc success of
Chicago's professional sports teanis and ticket prices for such sporting events
Business Taxes
The City s business lax revenues consist primarily of taxes on hotel
accommodations, and the employers' expense tax unlil it was phased out at the end of 2013 Revenues
from the hotel tax experienced a sharp decline in 2009 and recovered slowly in 2010, coinciding with the
recession s impaci on tourism, business, and convention-related travel. In 2010, hotel lax revenues were
$54 3 million The second Ivalf of 201 i. however, saw hotel sales and the relaicd tax revenues bemii to

 rebound, with strong growth in 2012, and further growlh in 2013 and 2014. In 2014, revenue per
available room increased by 4 percent over 2013 and hotel tax revenues were $100.4 million accounting
for 3 percent oftotal General Fund resources
Other Revenues. Olher revenues consist of internal service, licenses and permils, fines,
investment income, charges for services, municipal ulililics, leases, rentals and sales, and miscellaneous
revenues 'fhe following table sets forth the sources of other revenues for the years 2010 through 2014
Other Revenues 2010-2014
($ in thousands)
Internal Service.
Licenses and Permils
Fines
Invesimenl Income
Charges for Services
Municipal Utilities
Leases, Rentals and Sales
Miscellaneous
'Total Olher Revenues

2010
.. $274,574
96,240
258,802
4,200
77,694
6,405
17,604
37,759
$773,278

2011
$306,126
102,702
263,288
3.378
132,587
9,060
22.595
81,320
$921,056

2012
$302,924
117,568
290,799
5.439
124,606
8.415
14,747
43,262
$907,760

2013
$306,523
123,633
313,506
1,436
119,857
6,429
19,008
39,037
$929,429

2014
$305,716
119.940
338,329
1,573
134,593
7,257
24,127
66,493
$998,028

Source Cily CAFR. Schedule A-l for ihc respective years

With the exception of investment income and municipal utilities, which are immaterial sources,
the various categories of olher revenues, including major revenue types within the categories, arc
described below.
Internal Service. Internal service revenues are transfers to the General Fund for services provided
lo other City funds and departments, such as police, fire, and sanitation services provided lo Ihe City's
Enterpri.se Funds Such transfers constitute an average of 10 percenl of General Fund resources, and have
ranged from $274 6 million in 2010 to $305 7 million in 2014.
Licenses and Permits License and permit-related revenue is generated through fees for business
licenses, building permils, and various olher licenses and permils. License and permit activity ofien
reflects economic health, wilh more conslruclion commencing and businesses starling up when Ihc
economy is strong
In 2010, license and permil revenue was $96.2 million, decreasing from prior year levels as
construction activity in the City declined during the recession Permit activity and related revenues began
lo recover in 2012 lo$l 19 9 million in 2014.
Fines Fines consist of fines, forfeitures, and penalties, including parking tickets, red-light and
speed camera lickcls, and fines for items such as building code violations. These revenues have increased
steadily from $258 8 million in 2010 lo $338 3 million in 2014. These revenues accounted for 11 percent
oftotal 2014 General Fund resources 'fhis steady increase in revenues is partly a resull ofthe increased
use of technology, including the implementation of on-line bill payment systems and additional parking
enforcement field technology Incieases in fine and penally rates and improved debt collection have also
impacted overall fine, forfeiture, and penally revenues
Cliarses for Services Charges for services include revenues generated by charging for aclivities
such as inspeclions, emergency medical services (EMS), police .services, and other services for private

28

 benefit In 2010, these activities generated $77 7 million, increasing lo $134.6 million in 2014, due
largely to increased reimbursement for police services and EMS fee increases.
Leases. Rentals and Sales. Leases, rentals and sales include revenues generated from activities
such as the sale of vacant land and buildings, cily-ovvncd property that has been leased to ihe public, and
.sale of materials that are not used by the City. In 2010, these activities generated $17.6 million,
increasing to $24 1 million in 2014, due primarily to the increase in the rental and lease of city-owned
property.
Miscellaneous Miscellaneous revenues include infrequent or one-lime sources of revenues, such
as insurance recoveries, settlements, and cash received from fund closeouts, as well as other revenues that
do not fall into one ofthe revenue categories mentioned above, such as municipal marketing fees and tax
increment financing ("TIF") surpluses These activilies generated $37 8 million in 2010 and $66.5
million in 20)4. 'fhe amount of revenue varies from year to year primarily due lo the availability of'TIF
surpluses.
General Fund Expenditures
Total General Fund expenditures, including olher financing uses, have increased from $3.05
billion in 2010 lo $3 24 billion in 2014. Generally, the relative proportion of lolal General Fund spending
devoted to different activities and expense types has remained fairly consistent from year to year Across
all departments and city services, personnel-related expenditures (including salaries and wages and
employee healthcare costs) make up the largest portion ofthe General Fund budget, averaging 83 percent
oftotal General Fund expenditures from 2010 through 2014.
General Fund expendituies consist of current operaling expenditures and debt service. Debt
service expenditures m ihe General Fund relate lo debt service paynients with respect to an issuance by
the Cuy in 1997 of certain building acquisition certificates which are not paid from property taxes and are
nol malcrial. General Fund current expenditures are described below.
Public Safety. Each year, the largest portion of General Fund expenditures is dedicated to public
safely functions, and includes departmenls such as Police, Fire, and ihe Office of Emergency
Management and Communications I his also includes the aclivities of (i) the Department of Buildings,
which ensures the safety of residential and commercial buildings in the Cily by enforcing design,
conslruclion, and mainlenance standards and promoting conservation and rehabilitation through
permilling and inspection processes, and (ii) the Department of Business Affairs and Consumer
Protection, such as business licensing and support and consumer protection activities, including the
regulation ofthe local tuxicab industry Public safety has remained a primary driver of expenditures,
growing as a percentage of General Fund expendiiures, from 60 percenl in 2010 lo 62 percenl in 2014.
General Government. General government expenditures support functions necessary to provide
essential city services, including accounting and finance, contract management, human resources, legal
advice, admimstralive services, vehicle and facilities maintenance, community services, city
developnient, technology and systems expertise. These expenditures have accounted for between 28 and
30 percent of General Fund expenditures, from 2010 Ihrough 2014

29

 Other Current Expenditures. The following table sets forth the other current e.xpenditures oflhe
General Fund by function for the years 2010 ihrough 2014.
Other Current Expenditures 2010-2014
($ in Ihousands)
Heallh
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation .. . .
Cultural and Recreational .
Other .
Toial Other Current
Expenditures
Source

2010
$ 35,593
177,950
70,032
544
11,944

2011
$ 32,390
175,829
69,683
420
239

2012
2013
$ 24,371 $ 26.552
178,065
186,992
53,815
52,420
13
0
2,237
1,888

2014
$ 25,902
195,390
47,309
0
2,298

$296,063

$278,561

$258,501

$270,899

$267,852

City CAFR, Exhibit 4 for ihc respective years

With the exception of Cultural and Recreational and Other expenditures sel forth in the table
above, which are immaterial in amounis, the categories of Olher Current Expendiiures are described
below.
Health. Heallh expenditures support the operations of the Depariment of Public Health, including
providing heallh education to residents, access to care, guiding public heallh initiatives and monitoring
and inspecting food establishments. Department of Public Health expendiiures have accounted for, on
average, 1 percent of General Fund expenditures from 2010 Ihrough 2014.
Streets and Saniialion Streets and sanitation expenditures support the operations of the
Department of Streets and Sanitation, including garbage and recycling collection, sweeping and plowing
of slrecls, graffiti removal, cleaning of vacant lots, demolition of garages, lowing of illegally parked
vehicles, abatement of rodents and planting, trimming and removal of trees. Expenditures related to the
Department of Streets and Sanitation have accounted for, on average, 6 percent of General Fund
expenditures from 2010 Ihrough 2014.
Transuorlation Transportation expenditures support the operations of the Department of
'Transportafion and have averaged approxinialely 2 percent of annual General Fund expenditures between
2010 and 2014. 'These funds are used to build, repair, and maintain streets, sidewalks, and bridges and
complete the planning and engineering behind the City's infrastructure. Much of the Cily's major
infrastructure conslruclion is funded through slate and federal grants, general obligation bond financing,
TIF revenues and other sources, and thus is not represented as a General Fund expenditure.
Budget Gaps
Each year, the City projects revenues and expenses for the coining year as part of its preliminary
budgcl process Any shortfall between revenue and expenses is referred lo as the "budgcl gap.'" 'The
budget gap is closed each year prioi to the passage of the Annual Appropriation Ordinance, in which
expenditures are balanced with forecasted available resources.

30

 Sel forth below are the budget gaps that were projecled forfiscalyears 2012 ihrough 2015.
Budget Gaps 2012- 2015
($ in millions)

Source

Year

.Amount

2012
2013
2014
2015

$635 7
369 0
338 7
297 3

Cily of Chicago, Office of Budgcl and Management

The decreasing size ofthe gap from 2012 through 2015 is the result ofthe recovering economy's
impact on revenues, as well as the cost reductions made as part oflhe past three budgets. Initiatives such
as the introduction of managed competitions for city services, the transition to grid-based garbage
collcclion, the review and renegotiation of major contractual cosls, and reforms that have reduced the
City's heallhcare costs have all decreased the City's structural deficit, bringing the City's expenses more
closely in line with revenues Notwithstanding the gains achieved by the City in recent years in
addressing its structural budget deficit, the budget gap in coming years is likely to widen from the 2015
level due largely to growing salaries and wages and funding requirements for City pension plans. See "—
2016-2017 General Fund Outlook" below.
The General Fund gap of $297.3 million for 2015 was less than had been projected by the City
before the 2015 budget process began The 2015 budget gap was closed in the Annual Appropriation
Ordinance Ihrough cosl savings, closing tax loopholes and revenue enhancements and natural growth in
economically sensitive revenues
General Fund T'tnancial Forecasts
This section includes a discussion ofthe Cily's year-end estimates for 2015 and projections for
years 2016 and 2017 for the General Fund. The estimates and projections arc based on expectations and
assumptions which existed at the time such estimates and projections were prepared, including, among
olher factors, evaluations of historical revenue and expenditure dala, known changes or events, analyses
of economic trends and currenl and anticipated laws and legislation affecting the City's finances. While
the City believes that the numerous assumptions underlying the estimates and projections arc reasonable,
ihey are subjecl lo certain contingencies and periodic revisions which may involve substantial change,
'fhe City makes no represenlalion or warranty lhat these esiimates and projections will be realized 'fhe
esiimales and projections discussed below and elsewhere herein were nol prepared with a view towards
compliance with the guidelines established by ihe American Institute of Certified Public Accountants
with rcspccl lo prospective financial information The esiimales and projections assume lhal no
subslanlive changes are made to cily operations or the cosl of cily services. No cosl-saving initiatives are
incorporated into the estimates and projections The estimates and projections arc likely to change as
future decisions are made in response lo actual events, new or changing needs and citywide priorities. No
assurance can be given thai actual results will conform to the estiniales and projcclions provided 'This
prospective information is not fact and should nol be relied upon as being necessarily indicative of future
results Purchasers of the Bonds arc caulioncd nol to place undue reliance on this prospective financial
information See "INVESTMENT CONSIDERATIONS—Forward-Lookina Staiemenls."

31

 2015 General Fund Year-End Esninates. 'The following lable sets forth resources and
expendiiures for the General Fund based on actual results for the year 2014, the 2015 budget and the yearend estimates for 2015
General Fund Resources and l<^xpcnditures
Buduetary Basis
($ in millions)
2015
Tax Revenue
Utility Ta.xes and Fees . . .
Transaction Taxes ..
Transportation Taxes
Recreation'faxes
Business Taxes
Sales Taxes
State Income Taxes
Other Intergoverninenial.
.. .
'Total Tax Revenue .
Non-'Tax Revenue
Licenses and Permits
Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties
Charges for Services . .
Municipal Parking
...
Leases, Rentals, Sales
Reimbursement, Inlerest & Olher
Tolal Non-Tax Revenue
Proceeds and Transfers In
Tolal Revenue..
Budgeted Prior Years' Surplus and
Reappropriations
Tolal General Fund Resources
Total Expenditures

2014
Actual'"

2015
Budget'^'

Year-End
Estimates''"

$473 5
3162
185.1
193.7
104.8
620 3
278 0
65
2,178.1

$ 451.9
326 4
1880
205.0
110.9
647.9
420.0
5.8
2,355 9

$ 449.4
345.4
191.1
214.5
111.8
651.3
440.8
6.2
2.410 5

1199
338 3
134.6
73
24.1
373.8
998.0
39.7
3,215.8
45.5

136.9
369.5
132.4
6.5
30.2
470.2
1,145.7
33.1
3,534.7
0.0

129.3
338.7
122 3
7.0
25.0
460.3
1,082.6
41.6
3,534 7
0.0

$3,261.3
$3,261 3

$3,534 7
$3,534.7

$3,534 7
$3,535.1

"' Source E>(hihil C\ City CAFR for ihc year ended December I, 2014.
'"' Souicc 2015 Annual Appioprialion, as amended
'" Source Ofllcc of Dudgel and Management
General Fund resources on a budgetary basis, which includes Budgeied Prior Years' Surplus and
Reappropriations, if applicable, are expected lo meet the budgeted target of $3,534.7 million in 2015.
Economically sensilivc revenues, such as sales taxes, personal property lease and amusement taxes, are
estimated to outperform the budget due lo the improving economy. Slate income taxes are also
aniicipaied lo be $20.8 million higher than Ihe budget as noied below. Gains from these economically
sensitive revenues arc cslimatcd to be sufficient lo offset losses in public utiliiy laxes, permits, fees and
charges for services
General Fund resources arc eslimalcd to total $3,534 7 million in 2015, an increase of $273 3
million or almost 8 percenl over 2014 actual lesouices of $3,261 3 million, $128 8 million of this increase
is the result of a change in the way that the City accounts for us personal property replacement tax

32

 revenue, as discussed below. Excluding this amounl, the growlh m General Fund resources totals $144.5
million, or4 percenl over 2014 actual resources
Ulilily taxes are eslimalcd lo total $449 4 million in 2015, $24.1 million lower than the 2014
actual revenue of $473 5 million, and account for 13 percent of total 2015 estimated General Fund
resources al year-end. The decline is due primarily lo lower gas prices and anticipated cool weather
during the summer months
Business laxes, including hotel taxes, are eslimalcd lo generate $111.8 million in 2015. an
increase of $7 0 million over ihc 2014 actual amount of $104 8 million. Estimates for 2015 anticipate an
approximately 2 percent increase in hotel occupancy and a more than 6 percent increase in daily room
rates.
As a result of the improving economy, the revenues collecled from sales taxes allocated to the
General Fund is estimated lo total $651 3 million in 2015, an increase of $31.0 million over the 2014
actual revenue of $620.3 million. Sales ta.xes in 2015 are anticipated lo grow by 5 percent over the 2014
actual levels Transaction tax revenues, including real property transfer laxes and personal property lease
taxes, are estimated to increase at the rate of approximately 9 percent in 2015, due to strong recovery m
the economy, including commercial real estate sales and housing markets in Chicago.
Stale income lax revenue, which includes personal properly replacement tax revenue, is estimated
to tolal $440.8 million in 2015, an increa.se of 59 percent over the 2014 actual revenue of $278.0 million;
$128.8 million of the increase in 2015 state income tax revenue is the result of the change in how the City
budgets ils personal properly replacemenl lax revenue. A portion of the estimated increase is, however,
due to actual anticipated growth in revenues as wages, capital gains, and corporate profits are expected to
increase in 2015 These increases arc estimated to be offset in part by the State's increasing use of
personal property replacement lax revenues to pay for its own obligations, decreasing the anticipated
disbursement to the City by approximately $10.6 million in 2015.
Local non-tax revenues are estimated to be $1,082.6 million in 2015, an 8 percent increase over
2014 local non-tax revenues of $998 0 million Tolal revenue from licenses and permits is estimated to
total $129.3 million in 2015, an increase of $9 4 million over the 2014 amount of $119.9 million. The
2015 year-end cslimatc offinesrevenue is $338.7 million, consistent wilh 2014 actual results Revenues
from Charges for Services are expected to decrease by 9 percent in 2015 to $122.3 million compared to
the 2014 actual revenue of $134 6 million. The 2015 estimate for reimbursements, inlerest, and olher
revenues is $460.3 million, an increase of $86 5 million, or 23 percenl over the 2014 actual revenue of
$373.8 million, due primarily to the increase in the 911 surcharge.
Year-end expenditures for 2015 arc projected al $3,535 1 million, an increase of 8 percent over
2014 actual expenditures These estimated expenditures slightly exceed the year-end revenue esiimales
by $0 4 million Public .saTety expenditures are expected to increase by approximately 6 percent from
actual 2014 public safely expenditures fhe eslimalcd expenditures accounl for actual changes lo salaries
and wages governed by colleclivc bargaining agreements, employee benefits, conlraclual services and
utilities and motor fuel, 'fhe Cuy has budgeted increased contributions of $89.1 million to the MEABF
and LABF (each as hereafter defined) pension plans in Us 2015 budget and year-end estimates based on
enacled pension reforms, with such increased coninbuiions being payable in 2016.
In 2015, the City has changed the \vay il accounts for the non-property tax portion of Us pension
conlnbutions Tlislorically. the City's pension contribulions nol paid from properly laxes have been paid
from personal properly replacement lax revenues, which were recorded directly into ihe respective
Retirement Funds (as hercaflcr delined) and did not fiow through the General Fund. Sec APPENDIX

 E—"RE'flREMEN'f FUNDS—Delerminalion of Cily's Contributions " Going forward, the lolal receipt
of personal properly replacement tax revenues will be deposited into the General Fund, and a portion of
the City's share of pension contributions will be paid out ofthe General Fund to the Retirement Funds.
The effect of this change in the 2015 budget was $128 8 million This change has the effect of increasing
General Fund revenues by the amounl of Ihe personal properly replacement taxes deposited into the
General Fund, and increasing General Fund expenditures by a like amount. Another change relates to the
way the Enterpri.se Funds pay their allocable share of pension fund costs. See APPENDIX
E—"RE'flREMEN'f FUNDS—Special Revenue and Enterprise Fund Allocation of Retirement Fund
Cosls." Historically, the City's pension conlributions allocable to each of the Enterprise Funds were
reimbursed by those Enterprise Funds lo the General Fund. Going forward, the Enterprise Funds'
allocable portions ofthe City's pension cost will be paid by the Enterprise Funds to the Retirement Funds.
2016-2017 General Fund Oudook. The City projects operaling budget gaps for the General
Fund of $430.2 million and $587.7 million for the years 2016 and 2017, respeclively. Estimated
contribulions to the MEABF and LABF pension funds are included in the projected operating budget gaps
for 2016 and 2017. Statutory obligations to the PABF and FABF pension funds will, in the absence of
legislation modifying the Cit>''s contributions lo these funds, increase the projected budget gaps for 2016
and 2017 by more than $500 million, wilh the estimated City contribution growing each year thereafter.
Further, general obligation debt service payments using General Fund resources may increase
significantly from 2015 levels as the City phases out the use of long-term general obligation bonds to pay
current general obligation debl service. See "INVESTMENT CONSIDERATIONS—Structural Deficit
and Debt Restructuring" and "—Increased Debt Levels."
The City projects General Fund revenue growth of approximately 1.5 percent over the prior year
in both 2016 and 2017. 'fhe revenue growth assumplions do nol take into account the change in the
personal property replacement tax revenue allocation lo the General Fund, as discussed above. Many
economically sensitive revenues have now returned to pre-recession levels, and a conservative approach
is taken in these projections in line wilh the assumption that the economy will conlinue to experience only
moderate growth going forward.
'These projections are based on the continuation of similar trends as discussed above wilh respect
to 2015 for most revenue sources, including recreation taxes, transportation laxes. Local Sales Taxes,
State Sales Taxes and most local non-lax revenues, adjusling for anticipated variations in certain cases A
slightly lower rate of growlh in real properly transfer tax revenue is expected in 2016 and 2017, as the real
eslale market stabilizes following rapid growlh during the recovery years. Utility taxes are expected lo
return to normal growth trends Hotel tax revenues arc projected to grow with increased occupancy and
revenue per available room, and slale income tax revenues are projected to increase at approximately 2 5
percent each year in line with an improving labor market
General Fund operaling expendiiures are projecled to outpace General Fund revenue growlh
during this period, increasing al an average annual rate of 5.3 percent lo $3.69 billion m 2016 and $3.90
billion m 2017 'fhese expenditures do not lake into account the change in how the Cily accounts for its
pension contributions from personal propeit}' replacemenl taxes. Most categories of expendittircs,
mcluding contractual services, worker's compensation, motor fuel, and utilities, are assumed to grow al
their long-term historical average rates Less predictable expendiiures, such as setllcment and judgmentrelated and olher miscellaneous expenses, arc based on ihc average ol"recent annual cxpendilure amounts
Salary and wage and hcallhcaie expendiiures, by far the largest portion ofthe City's operating expenses,
are projecled based on the assumplion that llic number of full-time equivalent positions will remain
approximately flat, meaning, no significant hiring, layoffs, or vacancy eliminations will occur, and lhat
the cosls associateil with those positions will experience growth in line with long-lerm historical trends
In addition, under P A 9S-641 (as defined and described herein) wiih lespecl lo (he MEABF and LABF

34

 pension funds, contributions will increase by approximaicly $50 million in 2016 (payable in 2017) and
$75 million in 2017 (payable in 2018), and the General Fund portion of these payments is incorporated
into the projected budget gaps for those years
Service Concession and Reserve Fund
'The Cily has sel aside reserves Tor unexpected contingencies, emergencies, or revenue shortfalls
These reserves, recorded in the Service Concession and Reserve Fund, are not included in the City's
annual operating budget
The City established long-term reserves of $500 million and $400 million, respectively, with
proceeds oflhe upfront paymenis from the long-term lease or concession of the Chicago Skyway and the
Cily's metered parking .system ("Melered Parking System"). See "—Long-term Leases, Concessions of
City Facilities" below
The interest earned on the Skyway lease reserves was intended to be used for City operating
expenses and has been utilized as planned 'The principal balance remains $500 million and the earned
inlerest has been iransTerred to the General Fund each year, with the dollar amount of the transfer
refiecting variations in inlerest rates.
The reserves from the Melered Parking System were created to replace revenues that would have
been generated from parking meters by transferring interest earnings on Ihe reserves to the General Fund,
with the principal remaining intact al $400 million However, starting in 2009, the City began utilizing
these long-term reserves to subsidize the City's operaling budget. In 2009, $20 million was transferred to
the General Fund, and in 2010. $160 million was used for City operating expenses. The 2011 budget
included a $140 million transfer from the reserves for operaling purposes. Utilizing these reserves
reduced the principal balance substantially below the initial deposit and accordingly reduced the interest
earnings generated by the reserves The ordinance establishing the reserves directed that an annual
transfer of $20 million be made from the reserve fund inlo the General Fund to replace lest meter
revenue. In order to maintain these reserves, the City amended the ordinance in 2012 lo state that only
interest generated from the reserves, and nol principal, must be transferred for this purpose. In addition,
the City began lo rebuild the reserves with a $20 million deposit in 2012, a $15 million deposit in 2013,
and a $5 million deposit in 2014.
Sel forth in Ihe lable below is information about the City's long-lerm reserves as of December 31
oflhe years 2009 through 2014
Long- Term Reserves 2009-2014
($ in millions)
Year
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014

.Skyway
$500
500
500
500
501)
51)11

Metered Parking
System
$380
220
SO
100
115
120

Total'"
$880
720
580
600
615
620

Source Cily ol'Chieaiio. OlTiee ol'Budgel and Manayeiuenl
'" Ihe amuuiils picbcnled .lie ba.sed on eosl of lunds held in the Service Concession and Reserve fund
ihe lunds may vai"\ dcpciidini; on ihe markel value ol iiivesimenls

fhe inaikel \akie ot'

 Capital Improvements
'The City's capital improvement program (see "—Annual Budget—Budget Dociunents," above)
funds the physical improvement or replacemenl of city-owned infrastructure and facilities with long
useful lives, such as roads, buildings and green spaces. The capital improvements program is funded from
general obligation bond issuances, revenue bond issuances (largely for water, sewer, and aviation
improvemenls), slate and federal funding, lax increment financing, and private funding ihrough
public/private ventures.
From 2004 to 2013, the Cily utilized proceeds from the issuance of general obligalion bonds and
motor fuel tax revenue bonds (together referred to as "local bonds") lo fund $1.85 billion in capital
improvements. Local bonds were utilized lo support the lypes of projects described in the table below.
Capital Iniprovcnicnt Projects"*
Project

Description

Greening

Green ways, medians, trees, fountains, communily gardens,
neighborhood parks, wetlands, and other natural areas.

Facililies

Iniprovcmcnl and construction of City buildings and operating
facilities, police and fire siation.s, health clinics, senior centers, and
libraries.

Infrastructure

Construction and maintenance of streets, viaducts, alleys, lighting,
lamps, sidewalks, bridge improvements, tralTic signals, bike lanes,
streetscapes, and shoreline work.

Aldermanic menu
projects

Selected by members of Cily Council, each of whom is allotted
$1 32 million of general obligation bond funding to be spent at
their discretion on a specific menu of improvements in their
respective wards. These funds have been used primarily for
sidewalks, residential street resurfacing, street lighting, and curb
and gultcr replacemenl, with portions of these funds contributed lo
the Chicago Park District ($13 5 million). Board of Education of
the City of Chicago ($2 6 million), and the Chicago Transit
Authority (.$500,000)

Local bonds have also I'undcd a limiled number of other u.ses, which aie discussed under "GENERAL OBLIGATION
DEB'f—Lonu-'ferm General Ohliualiori Bonds "
Set forth in the following table are the capital uses of local bonds from 2010 through 2014.
Capital ILscs of Local Bonds 2010-2014

($ in millions]
2010
Greening
1 aciliUcs
Infiaslrucluic
Akicinianic Menu
Total

2011

2012

5 S $ 42
24 9
12 7
26 0
33 1
84 0
102 0

$ 15 7
40 0
28 9
81 4

$

SI 66(1

$158 7

$134 1

Soiiiee Cilv ol'l-'hicauo Olliee oI'Hiidcei and iVIanaceiiienI

36

2013
$

4.4
36
36 3
84 0

$128 3

2014
$4
4
32
84

6
6
0
0

S125 2

 Local bond-funded capital improvements has decreased since 2009 as Ihe debt service associated
with the Cily's long-term general obligation debt has grown and the Cily has made efforts lo cut overall
cosls.
'fhe Cily's estimated expendiiures for the capital improvement program over the period 2014
through 2018 IS $1 3 billion The City has not determined how much of its capital expendiiures over the
next five years will be paid from local bonds
Property Taxes
The City levies ad valoreni real property taxes pursuant to its authority as a home rule unit of local
government under Ihc Illinois Conslilution of 1970 Real property taxes represent the single largest
revenue source for the Cily As pari of the Cily's budget process each year, the City determines the
aggregate property tax levy that will be levied in the next fiscal year and collected in the following year.
EA V and Property Taxes
The City's aggregate property tax levy is divided by the equalized assessed value ("EAV") of all
property in the City to determine the lax rate that will be applied to an individual taxpayer's property
The tax rate is applied to the EAV ofthe taxpayer's property to determine the tax bill. Changes in EAV
do not affect the amount of the Cily's property tax revenue because the City's property taxes are levied at
a fiat dollar amount. For information on real properly assessment, tax levy and tax collection in Cook
Couniy, see APPENDIX D—"PROPERTY TAXES " "
The following tables present statistical data regarding the City's property tax base, tax rates, tax
levies and tax collections from 2003 forward.

 oo
rUJ <

>

i
eu

in
OO
O O l rn r - " n
ol
'O r n
rn
CN CN o t OJ
r-l m
'O CO oc

O

o

o

tjj li-

c

Esti

o- o-

«—
U 3
KT*

r-l

m m a\ O
rn
OJ OJ o o r n O O r n
\o O l
oo
m
r-^ •n
Ol" o" r - " o" m od oc
oo r n roo 00 oo •n
'n o
r-^ 'n oo OJ^ a^^ oo^
r n Ol' m oC
o" o" —T r 1
oc r n o l
OJ SO o o O l O l
O l O I OJ -n r n m r j O l o l O I

^

•n

o
o

•—

o

O o l r n o i - ^ O v C v O O O N r n r ^
o o o - ^ v o r r m o o ^ — r^Ttot
r n r n CN O O O Cs o ^
* ^ '•'^

I
r»1
O
O

O l VD
CN

a.
u
a.

«

V)

o_
r- o

oo" r-"

4>

= J2 =5
UJ ^

o

o
U

so
—* m
<N
OS

—

m" '
/-Tcs"
•o s o

oe o
r-- so
o
OC^
OS_ oo
r n oo 'n
—
so" r--" n" o' rn oo"
r^'
T}OC o o O l 'O so
o
OS
vO^ OS
'/-)_ orsi" «n"OI_
r n " o"
•n" rsT
o o o•
ao-"o o r— so so so

o

•n

2>

J3

oo

o so OS. so
o SO SO .— r n
r - m oo o o O «n 'sCI oi ln
ro
r~ o r-- o
•n r-~ o- oo OS r n m OS oo s o r~
cx O l O l O l oi O l r n rn O l oi oi O l
1^
OS. • o r s l
rn

3
4)

M

3

-a

•a o
!•£
trt "—'

U
•9
C

m
oo

in

O

rn

.— oo"
.—
rsj"
r-._
•o"
•o"
OJ O l

c
cc
so
0-"

oc

oc oo 'n
oo so
Cs^

CO
o o OS r n
r n so Ol
•o
sO_^ sO_ sO_
o-^
r-."
m i n 0-" •n" r n " Os"
O l o- O l OS rn so OS so
Ol^ m sO_^ OS
TT
so" r n " r n " r n
o"
r n rn o l
Ol r n r n

'/-»
—."o
m m

•*

.—
—."•a-'

—;

SO
rn

ol
—

i

m
so

O l oo
1^
i n o_
rn rn
rr-. OO
OI
Ol

m

OI_

•n

o_ r n 'n
Os" o" 0-"
—."^
ol
'n
— _ o — ool
— oi ro ni Io"
o" o o" oi'
o" o o'
•n

o

_

in
CO
OS
OS O l so i n Os r n r n
CO
r-_^ oo^ Ol^ sO,
sd' oo
of oT so" s o Ol"
in
o 'O O
osO_ oe^
Ol
o

—::

oc

_

—

U

i/i

C

.

oo
m

1

Q a.
c S

r-."

o o s o OS
O l SO r n
OS
s o Cs r n s o oo
CO
o-l^ r n ^ sO_
•n
r n Ol"
•a-"
od
cd
CO
»yn
OS OS SO
rso sC SO
•n

O l OS oo OS s o
r n r s l CS -q- cc
so
o.^
m" —T oi' 0-" Cs"
O O O •n m
rn
Ol
»n
(/I

•o

•
*
"
-=!•

O l os o Os
O
'n O l '
s o sO

be

—.
—

-

rt

g

•
!>

LL,

t/i
13

X
r

O

—
O

I

C

y

T3

.— aj

5

2 S

u

.

lu

3
-o

S

>
o

O

b! ^ i "g

J2 5 -o =^

cc rn so -r
oo o o so
rr-, I — i n
oc o- Ool CO
r~
O l i n oo O l i n
so
—
0-" oo'
r-' OS
o' sO o
r s l o—
l m rn
Ol
oo
so
sC CN
•n c-_ r n r—n —;Cs i n
P-." i n i
o l " of r n od cc Os' cc od
so

rn

V) 5j

" i 1^ -S

' n so

oo c s O

o o o o o o o

— ol rn I f

———— —

O O O O C O O O O O C - O
r l r l o l r.i r i r i r l r l r l r l r l r i

S

-

•=

1^

3

?

•J-: \-

o

CL

:•

^ o o

:C — >

=j 't=

in 'J-,

o =

U

 on
c

OS 'n 'O

oo C\ o ^
rn •— oo *o
X
fX

>

Oui

'•c5

TT r n r - \C. C\ m

4* *C

o

—

O

T— 'O o
ol
Ol vn
m
— — —o CO oi^
in
"^t^
s Ol — os"
r--" oo »n G
Ol O l O l
Ol m

OO

—

c >
H-2 J
41 O

o i—

o l OJ Ol

s o o o o o m m T T o o o o s o

so so

so o-

oo so OS
OS

OS

Cs OS

O

Os cs OS OS OS OS

ft- f~ U 2

U 3

E

o

o- o- -^t

«

I

o

o" "o"

O

C^

rOJ^ o c o o o o o c o o o c - ^ r

CTi

'n

so
oo

t-- vo

qu

em

O o - •
•-S Ol 43
'•>
-y,^
c
= :^ 3
c

Col

^

licet

O
i«

•>:j- rn r-- rn
Ol rn oo Tj-

oo — OS
^
VO^ —

o
e o»

VI

XI
3
t/3

-./I

•:JCN

»n
r—
n of
— rn

>

— I

Ol
O

•n
o

•n

—
,—T —T
ol

rn
so
O
Ol

Z

OS

in
rn
rn
rn

rn

3 =
I- .

\o

e

o- o —
'n rn

o
Ol sO
\0 sO 'n c^
OS C. O'

O. oc OS

i ^£
>

•'f S
tt

a

o o c
: c E

> —

_

o re
rn so oo ri c^. —
OS

a.
o

u

) c: c
• TD ^
! C bO
; "^^ c

O -^r oo o-

i

^ : ^ IO

O O cs OJ
oo CO o-

»

i _

1
J <

O

•n so o 'n
O
o O l sO
o
OS r n —
r- o- o-

9

Ol »n i n

3

—

CQ r ^i
^

' ^ "5 c

"

O

—

0 . 1 0 C > O C s O - ^ s O

i""^ rn ' n ' n o CO
rn ' n —
c c v T r * r t - - T f f n ' r t c o —•

—

O

—
— r r'-i r»-, rf-) m
r*"! r n vC
r - r - o c c c o o s c o o o o c c

'

TP —

= .2 S
= = S
— — (-3

f- J

o
o

-o
o

r I

r I

0
01

O
ol

O
rl

O
ol

O
ol

Q

O

 Use of Cily Properly Tax Levy
Revenue from the City' properly lax levy has been utilized primarily lo pay the City's debl
service and employer pension contributions A small amounl of llie levy is allocated to the library
system.
The amounts and tax rales oflhe Cily's properly lax levy for debl service and employer pension
contribution by Retirement Fund arc sel forth in the Ibllowing tables for the years indicated.
Property Ta.x Levies 2010-2014'"
($ in thousands)

Note Redemplion
anU Interest"'
Bond Rcdempuon
and Interest. .
PABF'" .
MOABF'^'
FABF'"
. ...
LABF'"
Tolal

Chiingc

2012

Ch.angc

2013

Ciiangt

2014

Chaiigr

2010

2UII

.$ 73.377

$ 73,377

0 00%

$ 73,481

0 14%

$ 74,231

1.02%

$ 97.061

30 76%

409,979
140,165
132,531
64,323
13,714

41 1,905
143,785
126.997
66,125
11.759

0 47
2 58
(4 IS)
2 80
114 26)

41 1,489
143,865
129.138
65,461
11,202

(0 10)
0 06
1 69
(1 00)
(4 74)

411,807
138,146
122,066
81,518
10,486

0 08
(3 98)
(5 48)
24 53
(6 39)

412.139
136,680
123,239
81,363
10.934

0 08
(1 06)
0 96
(0 19)
4 27

.t834.()({9

$833,948

(0 02)%

$834,636

$838,254

0.43%

$861,416

2 76%

0.08%

Source Cook County Clerk's Ol'llce
Does not include Ihe levy for the School Building and Improvement Fund which is accounted for in an agency fund
'"' Includes Corporate. Chicago Public Library MainieiiLincc and Operations, Chicago Public Library Building and Sites, and
City Relief Funds
'"' For information regarding the Cily's unfunded pension obligations, sec '—Pension.s—Funded Status of Ihe Retirement
Funds.'

40

 Property l ax Rates Per SlOO
Of Equalized .\sses.scd Valuation 2005-2014

'I'ax
Levy
Year

Extension""^'
(in IliousanJii)

Bond, Nolo
Krdemptioii
and
Interest"'

.Municipal
K.niployees'
.Annuity and
Benefit

I'iremcn's
.Annuity and
Ucncnt

$0 231683
0.197399
0.174302

$0 083243
0 099974
0.088581

-

0.162182
0.153704

0.080787
0.078184

$0.011763
0.015754

1.030
0.986

0 161435
0 169036
0 197892

0 078352
0 088014
0 100313

0.016705
0.015651
0017166

1 016
1.110

0 778719

0.172426
0 167552
0.170734
0 191381
0 220459
0 221494

0 195703

0.130700

0.783368

0 210554

0.189848

0.125339

0.016813
0.016844

2005
2006

$718,071
719,230

$0 696607
0 569261

2007

749,351
834,152

0 588843
0 602842

834,109

0.570806
0 588774

2008
2009
2010

834,089
833.948
834,636
838.254

2011
2012
2013
2014

861,416

Laborers'
and
Retirement
Board
Employees'
.Annuity and
Uenefic

0 645918
0.743122

Pnlicrmcn's
Annuity and
Benefit
$0 231467
0.194953
0 191548

Total
$1 243
1.062
1.044

1.279
1.343
1.327

Source Cook County Clerk's Office.
Docs not include levy for Special Service Areas and nel of collections for TIF districts
'"' Docs nol include the levy for the Schools Building and Improvement Fund, which is accounted for in an agency fund
'•" Includes rates from the Chicago Public l.ibiaiy Bond. Nole Redemplion and Inlerest Fund

The estimated total lax levies for fiscal year 2015 is approximately $868.2 million.
As shown above, the aggregate property tax levies over the period 2008 through 2013 remained
relatively constant. Ihe increases in 2014 and 2015 are due lo property tax surpluses from TIF dislrict
terminations and do not represent increases in the lolal lax levy for those years. See "—TIF Districts"
below
As the City's debt .service and pension expenses have increased, these cosls have exceeded the
City's property tax levy From 2005 Ihrough 2014, an increasing portion oflhe pension contributions
were paid wilh personal properly replacemenl lax revenue and a portion of such year's long-lerm debl
service was covered using olher resources In addition, since al least 2007, the City has issued general
obligation refunding bonds in part to restructure .some of its outstanding general obligation bonds. This
has allowed the City lo reduce ihe properly lax levies for the refunded bonds and keep the aggregate
property tax levy below a desired level for that year Such debt restructuring has extended the property
tax levies into the future in order to repay ihe refunding bonds
•fhe City is one of several taxing districts renecled on a Chicago resident's property tax bill. The
amounl of property laxes collecled by Cook County is divided among these districts, with the City
allocated approxinialely 20 percenl of iiic lolal bill For information on properly laxes levied on real
properly wilhin the City by overlapping laxing districts, see "—Overlapping Taxing Districts" below.
TIF Districts
In addition lo Ihe revenues Ihe City receives from its general property tax levy, the City derives
properly lax revenue from the City's 111- dislncis I'lF revenue musl be utilized for specific lypes of
expenses in specific dislncis aiid is not available lor non-specified governmental uses The City's TIF
program began in 19X4 with the goal of promoting business, industrial, and residential development m

41

 areas ofthe City that struggled lo attract or retain housing, jobs, or commercial activity. The program is
governed by a state law ilial allows municipalities lo capture properly lax revenues derived from the EAV
grovvth above the base EAV that existed before an area was designated as a TIF district for the lerm of the
TIF district, and to use that money (the lax increment) for job training, public improvements and
incentives to attract private investment lo the area.
When a TIF district expires, terminates, is repealed, or the City, under certain circumstances,
declares a surplus in the TIF district, the Cily returns the surplus funds lo the Cook County Treasurer for
distribution to the overlapping taxing districts based upon each district's share under the applicable lax
code. Such surplus declaration occurs typically during the City's annual budget process.
Set forth in the following table is information about the amounl of money returned to taxing
districts from declared surplus or the expiration, repeal or termination of TIF districts from 2010 through
2014.
TIF Surplus 2010-2014
(S in millions)

Declared
.
Expiration . . . .
Repeal
'lerminalion...
Total .. .
... .

2010
$0 00
0 02
0 00
0 02
$0 04

2011
$188.00
15.10
73.30
0.00
$276.40

201 2
$82 90
13 70
0 00
0 00
$96 60

2013
$25 00
8.40
0.50
9.60
$43.50

2014
$39.10
25.40
0.00
0.60
$65 10

Source' City of Chicago. Oftlce of Budgcl and Management.

The City receives approximately 20 percent of all surplus dollars distributed by the Cook County
Treasurer to the overlapping taxing districts.
Upon the expiration, repeal or termination of TIF districts, the incremental EAV ofthe district
becomes a part oflhe aggregate EAV lhat is available lo all overlapping laxing districts. Taxing dislricis,
including the City, have the ability lo recover their portion ofthe revenue from the incremental FAV by
adding it to their levy following a TIF district's dissolution. This practice yielded the City .SI 1 million
from three TIF dislricis in 2012, $3.3 million from 12 TIF districts in 2013. and $16.6 million from six
TIF dislricis in 2014. The City will conlinue lo receive TIF surplus on an annual basis as TIF dislricis arc
repealed, terminated or expire.
Overlapping Taxing Districts
Various governmental entities operate as separate, indcpendcnl iinils of government and have
authority to issue bonds and levy taxes on real property within the City 'fhese governmental entities, or
overlapping taxing dislricis, are the Board of Education oflhe Cily of Chicago ("CBOE"), Cook Couniy,
Illinois ("Cook Couniy"), the Mciro )olitan Water Reclamation Dislrict of Greater Chicago ("MWRD"),
the Chicago I'ark Dislrict (the "Paik District'"), Communily College District Number 508, County of
Cook and Stale of Illinois ("City Colleges"), and the Cook Couniy Forest Preserve District ("Forest
Preserve")
The combined property tax rales oflhe City and overlapping taxing districts are set forth in the
following lable for the years 2005 lo 2014

 r-j
sD
so rN oo
oc O C^
OJ r n •ri
rn
r n C^ OO
ON -t r n CO o
oo
»n •o ^o <5

—

•n

1

^0

*r ^ »- o

3

a. '^

^

rn r l
O oo
r^l o r n -o vO
'r,
<n
o o O o o

'n
o
c
o
rn
•n •n
o o o o c

,—

—

O

l-~

m

o
o

O
O

o o o

•n

oc rn ov Ov
•vO vo
•n 'n
•n o•n VO
O o o
O p o p

o

d

O

o o

E
s

I . TT

£
o

J3 -2

o

c

*) SS

in
m rl
oo VC *n
r n rM r-l r g
o O o o
(/I

•

o o I-- o
rn
vo r- (^1
r~
rn r n .— -*
n
o o c o o o

^

rn o\ a- vO
r~ 'n r l o
rn rn m m m^— m
o o o O O O O
if)
rn 0^

0;2

S (2 ;2

« S!
>..
^<
il

J!

*«^

O

'n o 'n
ov
—'
m
•ao o o

c^ vo o
•n o ov r n
»n •n vo ov ov ov

^

S

u

4>
N

u

rn o
r-l <N
o o o

o

o

o

o

-S

5
Si => .2

U
c
U

y3

nee

ago

o

noi

H

vO
r n r i o — ' n rv  ^
o
r-l ov CO
o CO r- r-l
vo
O 'O »n
r n ' n oo ^ vo vo

'C

I— oo —
r l — Ov
O

<

So "c e*

r~- r-l 'O O

III

vo

C J t/3 ' =

\ 0 O Cv *-n
— — r- "Tf r i
O — r-l r n r n

r n rsi ^
VO
ot O O

O
rn
O

•n so

cc iC; o

— c 1 rn -rr

o o S o o o o o o o
r-l r-l r-l o t or o i r-i r i o i o i

 OS
SC

-C
O

cs
OC r r

o•n r-o
r-l vo

Q
c

'n

o

—

CO

c

'?.
«
H

61)

fn oo

tin
B

c

'5.
a.

C

o
o

o

o o
r- o

>
o

O >>'E

1)

J::

: CL

C

•a

vd
i

c
o

c
o
J3

5

o

ca ^
-3 r5

C

t:

'of
.2 5
J-'^vo'
O

>^

u

2

Q.
u
CJ
X

-

^

Q

° « "a
.a
4-

ro
>J5

!2
O

ri

O

—

O

o c,

O

ri

r~

OS

vo r i

CToe
o
rs 

r-j r i
0
M
«-<~i' r i *

01 r i
vo oc

in
TT r j
so r-l
vo"
in

vo
rn
—*
'n

— v

2 5

-ill
^

u

—

'n

o

•n - r —

CT> O l

O

Q

OS O
r~ T

r i
"-.^

Ol ' n

r j

5 =
=5 "S

r-' od o '

c/:

15<
o.

^

CI)
n oc
vo oc

C

- c:
" 1 '5

?3

O

o
rv 

C
'J ^

— rg

;
o

,=

o

^

o .—c

c^

O

 City Workforce
The Cily has decreased its workforce from 39,654 positions (41,550 full-lime equivalents, or
'TTEs") in 2004 to 32.280 positions (34,045 F'l'Es) in 2014, a decrease of approximately 17 percent.
Approximately 90 peicenl of the Cily's workforce is represented by unions The City is parly lo
collective bargaining agreements with more than 40 dilTerenl unions.
The two largest bargaining units are the Fraternal Order of Police ("FOP") and the Chicago
Firelighters Union, currently with 16,065 combined sworn public safety positions. When police captains,
lieutenants, and sergeants are included, the number of unionized sworn public safety positions comes to
17.507.
The nexl largest group of positions is associated with the Coalition of Union Public Employees
("COUPE"), vvhich currently represents 6,640 trades positions (7,129 FTEs). The American Federation
of State, County, and Municipal Employees ("AFSCME") is the fourth largest group, representing 3,505
positions (3,679 FTEs) lhal provide administrative support for Cily government and services, and the
Service Employees Internalional Union ("'SEIU") currenlly represents 1,912 public safety civilian
positions (2,238 FTEs), such as traffic control aides, delenlion aides, and police communication operators.
'fhe collective bargaining agreements with each of these unions include regular salary increases,
resulting in higher personnel costs each year. The currenl collective bargaining agreement between the
Cily and the Fraternal Order of Police, Chicago Lodge No. 7 (FOP), covering the lerms and conditions of
employment of approximately 10,600 Chicago Police Officers for the period July 1, 2012 through June
30, 2017, was signed and became effective on November 18, 2014 This agreement succeeded the prior
collective bargaining agreement which expired on June 30, 2012 The agreement provides for wage
increases during the five (5) year lerm totaling approximately 10 percenl, including retroactive increases
effective during the period July I , 2012 Ihrough November, 2014. The retroactively ctTcctivc increases
vvere as follows
Effective July 1,2012
Effective January 1,2013
Effective January 1,2014

2%
2%
2%

fhe Cily negotiated a limilation on the retroactive increases for the period July I , 2012 through June 30,
2013, in that these increases vvere applicable only lo ofllcers' base pay/salary and excluded all overtime
earned during this period, 'fhe retroactive increases have been paid by the Cily wilh borrowings under the
Short Term Borrowing Program These borrowings will be repaid with available resources from the
General Fund
An agreemenl with the Chicago Firel'ighters Union, providing for an 11 percent increase over the
period 2012 lo 2017, was ratified by Ihc union m June 2014. The most recenl agreemenl with COUPE
provides for wage rales set at the prevailing rales established regularly by the Illinois Department of
Labor for construction trades employees, for employees noi subject to prevailing rate .schedules, the
agreemenl provides for 2 percenl increases each year from 2013 through 2017 The most recent
agreemenl wilh AFSCME, ralified in lune 2014. provides for a 10% increase over ihe five-year period
2012 to 2017. The currenl SLIU agiecmcnl, ratified in August 2012, includes a 6 percent increase
between 201 I and 2016 Agreemenls raiifietl by the unions representing police sergeants, lieutenants and
caplains in late 2013 and early 2014. each provide for an 8 percenl salarv increase between 2012 and
2016

45

 'fhese increases are in addition lo the raises based on lime in service lhal most employees receive
Historically, non-union employees received salary increases equal lo those negotiated for civilian
positions, however, since 2009, the majority of non-represented employees have not received salary
increases beyond normal step increases for time in service
Pensions
The following is a siimmaiy of certain aspects of the City's Retirement Funds. Additional
information regarding the Retirement Funds is available in APPENDIX E— "'RETIREMENT FUNDS. "
General
The City conlributes to the four defined benefit retirement funds (the "Retirement Funds") which
provide benetlts upon retirement, death or disability lo City employees and their beneficiaries. The
Retirement Funds are eslablished, administered and financed under the Illinois Pension Code (the
"Pension Code") as separate legal entities and for the benefit of the members of the Retirement Funds.
The four Retirement Funds are. (i) the Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago
("MEABF"), which covers most civil servant employees oflhe City and non-teacher employees ofthe
CBOE; (II) the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago
("LABF"), which covers Citj' and certain Chicago Board of Education employees who are employed in a
title recognized as labor service, (iii) the Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago ("FABF"),
which covers the City's sworn firefighters and paramedics; and (iv) the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit
Fund of Chicago ("PABF"), which covers the City's sworn police officers, captains, lieutenants and
sergeants. As of the end of 2014, there were over 114,000 members in the plans, including active and
inactive employees, retirees and beneficiaries.
The benefits paid under the Relirement Funds, contributions to the Retirement Funds and
investments by the Retirement Funds are governed by the Pension Code As defined benefit pension
plans, the Retirement Funds pay periodic benefits to beneficiaries, which generally consists of retired or
disabled employees, their dependenls and their survivors, in a fixed amount (subjecl lo certain scheduled
increases) for life, fhe amount of the benefit is determined at the lime of retirement based, among other
things, on the length of time worked and the salary earned. To fund benefits, bolh the City and the Cily's
employees make contributions lo the Relirement Funds, fhe Relirement Funds invest these contributions
with the goal of achieving projecled investment returns over time and increasing the assets of the
Retirement Funds.
The Retirement Funds' actuaries perform separate actuarial valuations of each oflhe Retirement
Funds on an annual basis 'fhese actuarial valuations calculate, among other things, the employer
contributions, assels and liabilities of the Reliiemenl Funds In the actuarial valuations, Ihe actuaries
niake a variety of assumptions and employ actuarial methods to calculalc such contributions, assets and
liabilities, flie assumptions and methods used by ihe actuaiy have a significant impact on the measures
of financial position of the Reliiemenl funds and are further described in APPENDIX
E—"RETIREMEN f l-UNDS."
Funded Status of die Relirement Funds
The Retiremenl Funds are presently signilicanlly underfunded 'fhe funded status of the
Rcti/'cmcnl Funds as of December 31,2014 is set forth in the followms table

46

 Funding Status ofthe Retirement Funds
as of December 31, 2014'"

($ in iiiiiiions)

MP.AI^F
LABF. .
I'ABF
FABF
Total

Total
Assels
$5,179 5
1,388 1
3,062 0
1,036.0
.SI 0.665.6

UnruiiJrd
Actuarial
Accrued
Liability'"
.$7,127 6
719 0
8.272 8
3,302 6

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability'-'
.$12,307 1
2,107 1
11.334 8
4,338 6
$30,087 6

$19,422.0

Kuiideil
Ratio''"
42 1%
65.9
27.0
23 9
35.5%

Source Actuarial Valualions ol'lhc respective Retireincnl Funds for Ihe tl.scal year ended December 31,2014.
" ' Amounis measured al fair market value where applicable Columns may not sum due lo rounding
'•' "Acluarial Accrued Liability" is the dollar value of plan liiibililics (as delennined by an actuary) See APPENDIX E—
"RIE TIRUMENT FUNDS—Acluarial Methods—/Ic/i/nnn/ Accrued Liabilily "
Unfunded Actuarial Accrued Liabilily'' or "UAAL" is the dollar value by which the plan's liabilities (as determined by an
actuary) exceed the as.sets ofsuch pension plan See APPENDIX E—"RETIREMENT FUNDS—The Actuarial Valuation—
Actuaries and the .Actuarial Process."
" ' "Funded Ratio" represents the plan's a.ssets divided by its liabilities (as as.scis and liabilities are determined by an actuary)
Sec APPENDIX E—' RE I'lREMENT FUND.S—I he Actuarial Valuation—.•Itv/KHv.^.v und the /Utuarial Process "

The funded status oflhe Retirement Funds has deteriorated steadily over time, as demonstrated in
the lable below
Funded Status of tlie Relirement Funds 2005-2014'"
($ in millions)

Year

MEABF
Funded
UAAL
Ualio

2005

$2,893 3

2006

2,635 0

2007

2,958 7

2008

5,642 6

2009

5,663 9

68 7%

PABF
Funded
UAAL
Ratio
$3,767.9

51 2%

3,747 5

52 8

70 3

3.887 1

45 7

5,481 6

47 7

5,410 1

72 2

FABF
UAAL
$1,608 2

LABF

Funded
Ratio

UAAL

44 2%

$83 2

1,696 6

45 1

52 7

1,746 4

35 4

2,397 1

38 1

2.377 2

Funded
Ratio
95.2%

TOTAL
Funded
Ratio
UAAL
$8,352 7
8,107.1

61 3%

28 0

98.4

63.6

45 7

25 5

98.6

8,617.8

62 9

27 6

726 7

62 1

14,248 0

40 9

30 7

642.8

67 5

14,094 0

43.6

2010

6,393 1

46 0

5.770 4

2.548 9

30 3

602 8

70 3

15,3152

42 7

2011

7,239.7

4i 1

6,346 9

33 4

2.858 1

25.8

839 3

61 0

17,284.0

37.9

2012

8.292 7

38 5

6.839 4

32 n

2,987.7

25 7

965 1

58 7

19,083.9

36 1

2013

8,4(17 2

39 2

7,017 1

31 8

3.012 0

27 0

925 8

61 2

19,362 2

36 8

2014

7,127 6'-'

42 1'-'

8,272 8

27 0

3,302 6

23 9

719 0'^*

65 9'-'

19,422 0

35 5

Source Ihe C'omprehonsivc Annual Financial Rcpuils I'or Ihc Rcliicmciu Funds llhc "Reliiemenl Fund CAFRs') for llscal
years 2004 tlirousli 201-1
" ' A l l calculations based on the tair niJiket value ol'.isbcls
'"' Reduction in LABI- .mil MI AHI' U.A.AL .ind incicase in I IMHICII Ralio .iie tluc in larye part to the enactment ol' P A 48-6-11
See AppcndiN C—"Rl-1 IREMl .N F FUNDS — I cyislaliv c Chaiiyc-;-P A 9X-(yl I "

The Cily believes lhal the decrease in the Reliiement Funds' funding levels over the past len
years is due to adveise economic factors (lesulling in invcslmeni leturns below assumed levels combmed

47

 Willi a decreasing asset base), inadequacy of legislatively-mandated employee and Cily contribulions,
automatic annual increases ("AAIs") and changes in benefit levels, changes m actuarial assumptions and
the changed demographic of both the City's workforce and retirees of the Funds
Adverse Economic Factors. The fmancial downturns of 2001 and 2008 resulted in significant
drops in the asset values ofthe Retirement Funds. From 2000 to 2002, the combined aggregate funded
ratio ofthe Retirement Funds declined from approximately 87 percenl lo approximately 62 percent, due
primarily to investment losses. Investment performance improved in the mid-2000s, but this growth was
on a smaller asset pool due to prior losses. During 2008, the Retiremenl Funds sustained a more than
.$4 0 billion loss in asset value, and ihe combined Relirement Funds' funded ratio decreased from
approximately 63 percent to approximately 41 percent Although the investment performance ofthe
Retirement Funds has recovered since 2008, the Retirement Funds' funded ratio continued lo decline to
approximately 36 percent in 2014
Contribution Levels. City employees contribute a fixed percentage of their salary to the
Retirement Funds. Historically, the Cily's contributions to the Retirement Funds had been determined on
the basis of a formula established in the Pension Code This formula required the City to levy an amount
equal lo the employee contribulions two years prior to the year in which the tax was levied multiplied by
a factor established by slalule for each Retirement Fund (the "Multiplier"). The Multiplier is not related
to the contribution which would be determined by an actuary pursuant lo an actuarial valuation or the
bencftls actually earned by employees. Furthermore, the Multiplier does not adjust for changes in the
economy affecting returns on pension fund investments, changes in demographics, inflation, or changes in
benefits. As a result, the Multiplier for each Retirement Fund has been significantly lower than the
Multiplier which would have been necessary to fully fund the Retirement Funds on an actuarial basis in
recent years.

48

 The f o l l o w i n g lable compares the City's stalulory conlnbutions pursuant to the Pension Code lo
the amounis calculated by the Retirement Funds' actuaries lo be needed to fully fund the Retirement
Funds for the years 2005 through 2014.
Retirement Funds
C i t y C o n t r i b u t i o n Requirements 2005-2014"'
(S 111 thousands)

Fiscal
Year
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014

Actuarially
Required
Conlribulion
$698,185
785,111
865,776
886,215
990,381
1,112,626
1,321,823
1,470,905
1.695,278
1,740.972

Actual City
Contribution'^'
$423,515
394,899
395,483
416,130
423,929
425,552
416.693
440,120
442,970
447,399

Percentage of
Aetuariallv
Required
Contribution
Contributed
60.7%
50.3
45.7
47 0
42.8
38 2
31 5
29 9
26.1
25.7

Sources Actuarial Valuations ol'llie Retirement Funds as o f December 31 oflhe years 2010 through 2014
" ' Data is presented in the aggicgale I'or the Reliiemenl Funds and uses assumplions and methods employed by each o f ihc
Retirement Funds For ihe data presented as of December 31 for the years 2003 through 2006, contribution inl'ormation
includes aniounts related to other post-employment benefits Beginning in 2007, as a result o f a change in (3ASB standards,
eimiribulion information is presented e.Ncliisivc of amounis related to other po.sl-employineni beneHls The City began lo
report other post-employment benelits separately in the City CAFR beginning in 2006
'"' Includes Ihe portion ofthe personal property replacement ta.x contributed lo ihc Rciircmenl Funds in each year

Changes i n Benefits. Over lime, additional benefits have accrued under or been wrillen into the
Pension Code. Most notably, A A I s written into the Pension Code significantly increased the cost o f
benefits A A I s provide annual increases in pension payments regardless o f l h e then prevailing inflation
rates
Legislation passed by the State in 2010 reduced the A A I s and instituted olher cost saving
provisions for all four pension funds for employees hired on or alter .lanuar)' 1, 2011 See A P P E N D I X
E — " R E ' l ' I R E M E N T FUNDS—Legislative Changes—/'./I. 96-0S8') "
Legislative changes lo the Pension Code also increased the lolal cost o f benefits owed, though to
a lesser degree than the automatic A A I s . A m o n g other changes, ceilain benefit niinimums were raised
and the definition o f pensionable pay was expanded
Workforce a n d Retiree Demographics. In addition lo invcslmeni losses and benefit increases,
the makeup o f l h e C i t y ' s workforce and retirees has added to the unfunded liability o f t h e Retirement
Funds fhe slalulonly-scl employee and employer conlribulion percentages did not change to account for
shifts in basic demographic factors such as the longer lifespans o f rctiiees and the projected future benefit
cosls In addition, the C i l y ' s prior early retiremenl incentive plans increased the number o f retirees
drawing benefits and decreased the number o f employees conlribuiing to the Retirement Funds

40

 Changes to PABF and FABF
Public Act 096-1495 ("P.A. 96-1495"), enacled in 2010, made changes to the Pension Code wilh
respect lo PABF and FABF In addition to making some changes lo benefits for PABF and FABF
employees beginning employmenl on or after January I , 2011, P A. 96-1495 alters the manner in which
the City contributes to PABF and FABF beginning in 2016. P.A. 96-1495 removes the Multiplier from
the funding calculalion, instead requiring the City lo conlribute lo PABF and FABF the amount
acliiarially required to achieve a funded ratio of 90 percent by fiscal year 2040. PA. 96-1495 will
significantly increase the City's contributions lo PABF and FABF in 2016 and will impose a significant
financial burden on the City. See APPENDIX E—"RE'l'IREMENT FUNDS—Legislative Changes—
P.A. 96-1495 "
The following table sets forth a projection ofthe funded ratios of and City conlributions to PABF
and FABF in future fiscal years.
Projected Funded Ratios and Contributions
PABF AND FABF<"
($ in millions)
PABF
Fiscal
Year
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040

Funded
Ratio
28.7%
30 3
32 0
33 6
35 3
36 9
45 5
.55.9
70 4
90.0

FABF

Employer
Contribution'"'
$ 187.815
592.863
675.826
695,124
713,810
732.200
834,435
951.072
1,073,628
1,146,889

Funded
Ratio
25 0%
266
28 2
29.8
31.5
33.2
42 6
54 9
70 4
90.0

Employer
Contribution
$109,813
246,1.32
184,086
292,439
301.752
311,205
363.224
414.140
442,417
463,527

Source I he Actuarial Valuations of PABF' and FAHF as of December 31, 2014
' ' Proieelions ate calculaled on an accrual basis
''' Represents contributions cNpected lo be made by the City during the I'l.scal year

Based on the amounis budgeted by the Cily for the 2015 conlribulion and the 2014 actuarial
reports with respect to the projected 2016 contribution, the Cily's required conlribution lo PABF and
FABF will increase by approximately $549 million for 2016
Senate Bill 777 ("SB 777") passed bolh houses oflhe Illinois General Assembly as of May 31.
2015 SB 777 would extend the period by which the unfunded liabilities of PABF and FABF are
amorlized lo a 90 percent Funded Ratio from 2040 lo 2055 (the "Revised Amorlizalion Period") and
instilute u phasc-in period during 2016-2020 to reduce the City s required payment in the initial years lo
allow for ;i more gradual phase-in oflhe requirements of PA 96-1495 (the "Phase-in Period") fhe
RevLscd Amortization Period would reduce the annual funding obligation required lo reach a 90 percent
l-'undcd Ratio, bul extend the number of years over which such payments would need lo be made. A
motion to reconsider Ihc vote on SB 777 was filed in the Illinois Senate on May 31, 2015, and, as such,
SB 777 has not been sent lo the Governor for consideration The llhnois General Assembly may consider
Olher legislation lhat could affect the City paymenl obligations for PABK and FABF and/or funding

50

 sources for those obligations, including a City-owned casino The Cily makes no represenlalion as lo
whether or when SB 777 or any such olher legislation would be enacted
fhe City expects lhat the City Council will consider options for addressing its pension funding
requirement for PABF and FABF, including improvements m operaling efficiencies and incremental
revenues, afier the Illinois General Assembly concludes its 2015 regular session. If an increase in
property laxes were the sole .source of incremental City contributions to PABF and FABF, and those
contributions were not reduced by a Revised Amortization Period or Phase-in Period, the projected
amount oflhe increase for payment in 2016 would be $549 million on a total estimated 2015 aggregate
lax levy of $4.2 billion, including the City and overlapping laxing jurisdictions. The Cily is required to
file its levy requirement with Cook County by no later than the last Tuesday of December 2015, and the
property laxes from the levy would be collected in two installments in the spring and fall of 2016.
Changes to MEABF and LABF
Public Act 098-0641 ("P A 98-641"), enacted in June 2014, makes changes to the Pension Code
with respect to MEABF and LABF. The law was supported by the City and developed with input from
labor organizations. PA. 98-641 is designed to address the underfunding, and projected insolvency, of
MEABF and LABF through a combination of increases in the City's contributions, increases in employee
contributions, and decreases in ihe AAI adjustments. Among olher changes, PA 98-641 increases
employee contribution rales, makes changes to AAIs and provides for AAIs to be skipped in 2017, 2019
and 2025. Furthermore, P.A. 98-641 modifies the manner in which the City contributes to MEABF and
FABF. P.A 98-641 retains the Multiplier, wilh stepped increases in the applicable Multipliers, as the
method of calculating the Cily's conlribulion Ihrough 2020 Beginning in 2021, the Cily will be required
to contribute to MEABF and TABF the amount necessary, as delermined by an actuary, to achieve a
funded ralio of 90 percent by 2055. See APPENDIX E—"RETIREMENT FUNDS —Legislative
Changes—P./l. 98-641."

 'fhe following table sets forth a projection of the Funded Ratios of and Ctty contributions to
MEABF and LABF in futurefiscalyears.
Projected Funded Ratios and Contributions
MEABF AND LABI^"
($ in millions)

Fiscal ^'ear

2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040

MEABF
Employer
Contribution
Funded
(2)
Ratio
40 4%
38 9
38 3
38 3
38 8
39 4
41 7
43 3

44 8
48.4

$ 156 1
242.7
275.2
381 4
464.6
542.6
596.9
645 2
701 8
778 3

LABF
Funded
Ralio
63 5%
61.7
60 0
58.9
57 7
57 0
55 8
54.9
54.9
57 3

Employer
Contribution'"'
$ 14.5
24.0
28.5
37.8
46.3
56 I
76 4
86 9

97 6
106 8

Source The Actuarial Valiialions ofMEABF and LABF as of December 31,2014.
"' Proieelions calculaled on a cash basis
'"' Represents conlnbutions expected to be made by Ihe Cuy during the fiscal year

C7/V and Slate Pension Litigation
City Pension Litigation. P.A 98-641 is currenlly subjecl lo challenge m a lawsuit alleging its
unconstitutionality. See "LITIGATION—City Pension Litigation" below and APPENDIX E—
"RE TIREMENT FUNDS—Effect on MEABF and LABF if P.A 98-641 Found Uncon.slitutional."
State Pension Litigation. On May 8, 2015, the Illinois Supreme Court affirmed the decision of
the Sangamon County Circuit Court lhat Public Acl 98-0599 (the "State Pension Reform Act") is
unconstitutional The State Pension Reform Act would have provided for certain cost-saving and olher
reforms to the State's four largest pension plans. The Slate Pension Reform Act was challenged on behalf
of various classes of annuitants, current and former workers, and labor organizations alleging, among
other things, that the legislation violates Section 5 of Article XIII of the Illinois Constitution
See
APPENDIX E—"RETIR'EMENT FUNDS—Background Information Regarding the Retirement Funds—
Overlapping Taxing Bodies—Stale Pension Reform Acl and Litigation "
Allocation of Pension Cosls Among Cily Funds
'fhe City allocales to the Special Revenue Funds and Enterprise Funds their share oflhe City's
annual contribution to the Retiremenl Funds
For further information, see APPENDIX
E—"RE'flREMEN'f FUNDS—Special Revenue and Enterprise Fund Allocation of Retirement Fund
Cosls '

 Overlajjping Taxing Dislncis
'fhe overlapping laxing dislricis within ihe City maintain five pension funds for their respective
employees lhal are supported by local property- taxes. Slalislical dala for the four City pension funds and
the five overlapping taxing district's pension funds is set forth in the table below.
City and Overlapping Taxing Districts
Pension Funds Supported by Local Property Taxes 2013'"
Unfunded
Actuarial
.Accrued
Liability
(S in inillions)

Unfunded
Liability
Per "
Capita'-'

Funded
Ratio

Overlapping Taxing Districts

MWRD
Cook County
Forest Preserve
CBOE'-''
Park District ..
Subtotal
City Pension Funds

TOTAL

$ 1,006 4
5,255.1
95 0
9,458 4
483 7
$16,298.6

$

192
1,003
18
3,479
178
$ 4,870

54.1%
61.5
65.8
51 5
45 5

$19,748 4
$36,047.0

S 7,263
S12.133'-"

.34.4%

....

Source Most recenl audited linancial statements or CAl'R ofthe oveilapping ta.\ing districts
" ' E.>ccliidcs City Colleges, the employees of which are members of ihc Slate Universities Retirement .System which is funded by
the State, excludes the Chicago Transit Authority pension fund which is supponed by local sales taxes, real estate transfer
taxes, subsidies from the Regional Transportation Aulhorily and fares
'^' Per capita amounts arc based on the IJ S Census Bureau's 2013 population estimate ofthe City (2,718,782) and of Cook
Couniy (5.240,780) as described in APPENDIX [J—"ECONOMIC AND ObMOGRAPHlC INFORMATION—Population "
The City's population was u.sed lo calculate the per capita numbers for the City and for Ihe CBOE and Ihe Park Di.slrict, each
of which has boundaries coterminous with the City Cook County 's population was used to calculate the per capita numbers
I'or Cook Couniy, the Forest Preserve, which has boundaries coterminous willi Cook County, and MWRD which, though nol
cotcrininous with Cook County, has boundaries which oveilap in excess of 98% with Ibe boundaries of Cook County,
measured by EAV
''' CBOE makes contributions to the Chicago "Teachers' Fund
''" Represents ihc average burden on a resident ofthe City as a resull ofthe unfunded pension liabilities oflhe City and the
overlapping taxing districts.

'fhe information sel forth in the preceding lable may nol incorporate the various reforms that have
been adopted for certain of these pension funds, and should nol be relied upon for thefinancialcondition
ofthe funds currenlly The information is presented only lo provide an indication oflhe magnitude ofthe
unfunded pension liabilities ofthe overlapping taxing districts when combined vvith the unfunded pension
liabilities ofthe City
Long-Term Leases, Concessions of City Facilities
The City is a party lo long-lerm lease or concession agreements with respect to certain Cilyovvncd facihties. as described below

53

 In 2005, the Cily enlered into a 99-year lease of the Chicago Skyway (the "Skyway Lease"),
under vvhich Sk>'\vay Concession Company, LLC, was granted the right to collect and retain toll revenue
from the Skyway In return, the City received an upfront payment of $ I 83 billion
In 2006, the Cily entered into the Chicago Downtown Public Parking System Concession and
Lease Agreement (Ihe "Parking Garages Lease Agreement ') with Chicago Loop Parking, LLC ("CLP"),
by which CLP was granted a 99-year concession lo operate the public parking garages commonly referred
to as Millennium Park, Grant Park North, Grant Park South and East Monroe (collectively the "Parking
Garages"). Under the Parking Garages Lease Agreenient, CLP was granted the right to operate and
collect revenue from the Parking Garages in return for an upfront payment of $563 million lo Ihe Cily
The Parking Garages Lease transaction is in litigation, plaintiffs have challenged the validity ofthe lease.
Sec 'LITIGATION-Parking Garages Litigaiion."
In 2008, the Cily entered inlo the Chicago Melered Parking System Concession Agreement (the
"Parking Meiers Concession Agreement") with Chicago Parking Meters, LLC ("CPM"), by which CPM
was granted a 75-year concession to operate the City's on-street metered parking system (the "Metered
Parking System"), including the right to collect revenues derived from the metered parking spaces. In
return, the City received an upfront payment of $1.15 billion.
The City established long-term reserves with portions of the upfront paymenis from the Skyway
Lease and the Melered Parking System. See "—Service Concession and Reserve Fund" above
Under each oflhe Skyway Lease, the Melered Parking Concession Agreement and the Parking
Garages Lease, the lessee/concessionaire has the righl lo lerminalc the transaction and receive payment
from the City for the fair market value of the respective City facilities in the event that the City, Cook
County or the State were to take certain actions which malerially adversely atTected the value of the
respective City facilities.
fhe Parking Garages Lease Agreemenl includes a provision by which certain events can require
the Cily lo compensate the lessee. One of those events is the granting of a license for the operation of a
public garage that was nol in existence as ofthe date oflhe Parking Garages Lease Agreemenl within a
certain distance from the Parking Garages. The City recently paid the lessee a judgment of approximately
$62 million as compensation for granting a public garage license for a new parking garage wilhin the
specified distance from the Parking Garages.
The Parking Meters Concession Agreement includes a provision by which the Cily can be
required to compensate CPM if usage of the Metered Parking System by vehicles displaying disabled
parking placards (which are exempt from paying for on-slreet metered parking) exceeds a certain
threshold Pursuant lo this provision, Ihe City paid CPM $18 5 million for such usage by vehicles
displaying a disabled parking placard during 2013
I'hc amounis paid by the City under the Parking Garages Lease Agreement and the Parking
Meters Concession Agreement vvere borrowed under the Short ferm Borrowing Program Bond proceeds
will be used to pay down the Short Term Borrowing Program by these amounts See "Pl.-AN OF
FINANCING—Repayment of Short Term Borrowing Program."
Illinois Sports Facilities .Aiifliority
fhe Illinois Sports Facilities Authority ("ISFA") is a state agency authorized to construct and
operate sports facililies and provide financial assistance for governmental owners of spoils lacililies or
iheir icnanls Beginning in 1980, the ISFA issued various .series of bonds (and refunding bonds) for the

54

 developmenl of U.S. Cellular Field and a portion ofthe Chicago lakefront including Soldier Field The
ISFA bonds are payable from Stale and City annual subsidy payments of $5 million each, with the City's
subsidy taken from the City's share of the local governmenl di.stributive fund, and a 2 percent hotel tax
imposed by the ISFA (the "ISFA Hotel Tax") 'fhe State advances to the ISFA certified annual operating
expenses less the amount of the subsidies The Slale withholds collections from the ISFA Hotel Tax lo
repay advanced aniounts. If the ISFA Hotel Tax is nol sufficient to repay the Slale advance, the
deficiency is automatically withdrawn from the City's share ofthe local government distributive fund.
During 2011, the ISFA hotel tax was inadequate to fully repay the Stale advance, and the deficiency of
$185,009 was deducted from the City's share ofthe local governmenl distributive fund. This is the only
payment the Cily has made lo dale Future City payments are dependent on hotel occupancy rates.
City Investment Policy
'I'he investment of City funds is governed by the Municipal Code of Chicago (the "Municipal
Code"). Pursuant to the Municipal Code, the City Treasurer has adopted a Statement of Investment
Policy and Guidelines for the purpose of eslabli.shing written cash management and investment guidelines
to be followed by the City Treasurer's office in the inve.stiiient of City funds See APPENDIX C—
"Cl'l Y OF CHICAGO BASIC FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS FOR JHE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER
31,2014—Noles (1) and (4)."
GENERAL OBLIGATION DEBT
Recent Developments
On April 29, 2015, Mayor Emanuel announced a series of fiscal reforms to be implemented over
the next four years lo strengthen the City's financial practices 'fhe reforms included (i) converting to
fixed rale all ofthe City's outstanding general obligation variable rale bonds; (ii) lermiiialing the interest
rate swaps associated with the City's general obligation variable rale bonds; (tit) ending by 2019 the
practice of paying near-term debt wilh long-lerm bonds; (iv) increasing operating budget funding for legal
selllements and judgments, and (v) increasing the Cily's reserve funds
The Cily has implemented the firsl two components of the Mayor's fiscal reform agenda, the
variable bond conversions and the iniercst rate swap terminations, as more fully described below.
Variable Rale Bond Conversions
As of April 1, 2015, the City had four series of general obligation variable rale demand bonds
outstanding in the aggregate principal amount of $805,640,000 Ihe general obligation variable rate
bonds paid daily or weekly rates of interest and were convertible at the option of the City lo fixed rale
bonds While in the weekly or daily mode, the general obligation variable rale bonds were payable from
bank letters of credit issued under reimbursement agreements between the Cily and the banks. The Cily
was obligated to reimburse the banks for all Icller of credit draws under the l eimbursemenl agreemenls
Pursuant to nolice from the Cit}', on April 29 and .May 8, 2015, the respective bond trustees
provided nolice to bondholders lhal the general obligation variable rale bonds were to be converted to
fixed rale bonds or redeemed
On May 12, 2015, Moody's Investors Service ("Moods's ') downgraded ils rating on the Cily's
outstanding general obligation bonds
See "INVESTMENT CONSIDERATION.S—Credit Rating
Downgrades " I he downgrade resulted in events of default tinder the variable rale bond reimbursement
agreemenls The City entered into foibearance agreements pursuant to which the letter of credit banks

55

 agreed lo forbear from exercising iheir respective rights resulting from the dovs-ngrade, which included the
right lo require the City to make accelerated reimbursement paymenis
As of June 8, 2015. the City redeemed or converted to fixed rate all ofthe City's outslanding
general obligation variable rate bonds. The City used $151 6 million from the Short Term Borrowing
Program to (i) redeem $131.6 million of general obligation variable rate bonds in order that the remaining
converted bonds would be within the original property tax levy for the bonds, and (ii) fund $20 0 million
of bond lender prices (resulting from the reoffering of converted bonds at a discount and costs of
issuance) and transaction costs The City will use proceeds of the Bonds to pay down the amount
borrowed under the Short Term Borrowing Program. See "PLAN OF FINANCING—Repayment of
Short 'ferm Borrowing Program."
Inlerest Rate Swap Terminations
The City entered into a number of inlerest rale swaps with respect to its general obligation
variable rale bonds, 'fhe inleresi rate swaps provided the City with synthetic fixed rates on its general
obligation variable rate bonds or altered the index used lo calculate the variable rate aniount being paid lo
the City by the swap counterparty under the swap. As of June 8, 2015, the City terminated all ofthe
interest rate swaps associated with its general obligation variable rate bonds The total amount of the
termination paynients paid by the Cily in connection wilh swap terminations was $192.1 million, all of
which was funded from borrowings under the Short Term Borrowing Program.
•fhe City also previously terminated a swaplion relating to general obligation fixed rate bonds for
$4.9 million, which was paid from borrowings under the Short 'ferm Borrowing Program. Of that
amount, $2.8 million remains outstanding.
On June 2, 2015, the City terminated the interest rate swap associated with the City's sales tax
variable rate revenue bonds. 'The City funded the swap termination payment of $24.5 million from sales
lax revenues lhal had been deposited in the General Fund pursuant to the trusl indenture governing Ihc
sales tax revenue bonds and bond premium received by the City upon the reoffering ofthe sales tax
variable rate revenue bonds as fixed rale bonds.
The City will use proceeds of the Bonds lo pay down amounis borrowed under the Short 'ferm
Borrowing Program lo fund the swap and swaption termination paynients and lo reimburse the (jcneral
Fund for the sales lax revenues used lo make the swap termination paynient in conneclion with the
conversion of the sales tax variable rate revenue bonds to fixed rates. See "PLAN OF FINANCING—
Repayment of Short 1 erm Borrowing Program."
Long- Term General Obligation Bonds
A significant portion oflhe Cily's long-lerm general obligation bonds, including the Bonds, arc
backed b\' the full failh and credit ofthe City, and all taxable properly wilhin the City is subject lo the
levy of laxes lo pay the principal of and interesl on general obligation bonds withoul regard lo rale or
amounl As described below, certain general obligation bonds oflhe Cily do not have a specific revenue
source, such as a property tax levy, pledged for their repayment
Ihe Cily has three lypes of long-term general obligation bonds outstanding For a significant
portion ofthe City's long-lerm general obligation bonds (mcluding the Bonds), an annual property lax
levy has been established and pledged to the paynient of debl service on such bonds ( "Tax L.evy Bond.s")
For ccrlain other long-term general obligation bonds issued by Ihc City (which make up n small subset of
the City's general obligation bonds), eilhcr (i) an annual properly tax levy has been established but is

56

 annually abated if certain olher specified revenues are available lhal year for paymenl of debl service
("Allernalive Revenue Bonds"), or (ii) no annual property lax levy has been established for debt service
and payments of debl service are appropriated from sources of revenue other than property laxes ("Pledge
Bonds"). Alternative Revenue Bonds include the City's General Obligation Bonds (Modern Schools
Acro.ss Chicago Program), Series 2007 A-K, Series 201 OA and Series 201 OB, and General Obligation
Bonds (Emergency 'fclephone System). Series 1999 and Series 2004 Pledge Bonds include the City's
General Obligalion Building Acquisition Certificates (Limited 'Tax), Series 1997, and the general
obligation note issued by the City in conneclion v\'ilh the acquisition by the City oflhe former Michael
Reese Hospital campus (the "MRL Note") All other long-term general obligation bonds oflhe Cily are
Tax Levy Bonds.
Long-term general obligation bonds are generally issued annually by the City to pay for capital
projects, general obligalion refundings for savings, general obligation debt restructuring, legal setllements
and judgments, and, from time to lime, the retroactive employment wage and salary increases (including
related pension costs).
Over the last five years, the Cily has issued approximately $350 million of long-term general
obligalion bonds per year lo fund capilal improvements, equipment and legal judgments and settlements
For information on the use of long-term general obligation bonds for capital projects, see "FINANCIAL
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS—Capital Improvements '" The City currently intends to curtail the use
of long-term general obligation bonds lo fund settlements and judgments in future budgets
Since 2007, proceeds from long-term general obligation bonds in the range of $90 million to $170
million per year have been used lo restructure the Cily's general obligation annual debt .service. The City
will use approximately $170 million of Bond proceeds to repay amounts borrowed under the Short Term
Borrowing Program used to fund payment ofthe debt service on certain City general obligation bonds on
July I , 2015 and January I , 2016 'The Cily expects lo use approximately $220 million of proceeds from
Its next issuance of general obligation bonds lo pay the debt service on the City's general obligation
bonds on July 1, 2016 and January I , 2017. The Cily currently plans lo eliminate the use of general
obligation bonds for debl reslructuring by 2019 See "INVESTMENT CONSIDERATIONS—Structural
Deficit and Debl Restructuring "
Following arc selecled debl statistics regarding the Cily's long-term general obligation bonds
from 2005 through 2014.

57

 Long-'Ferni General Obligation Bonds
Selected Debt Statistics 2005-2014

Year
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014

Aggregate Debt
(S in lhou.sauds)"'
$5,123,729
5,422,232
5,805,921
6.126,295
6.866,270
7.328.452
7.628,222
7.939.682
7,670,298
8,339.626

Total Est. Fair Cash
Value'-'
(S iu thousands)
.$283,137,884
329,770,733
320,503,503
310,888.609
280,288,730
231,986,396
222,856,064
206.915,723

—

Ratio of Debt tn
Fair Ca.sh Value'"'
1 81%
1 64
1 81
1 97
2 45
3 16
3 42
3 84
3 71
4.03

Per Capita
$1,769 23
1,872 31
2,004 80
2.115.42
2,370 94
2,718 67
2.829 88
2,945 43
2,845.49
3,093.79

' Source Cily of Chicago, Department of Finance
'•' Source The Civic Federation Excludes railroad property, pollution control facilities and portion of City in DuPage County.
2013 and 2014 information is not available at time of publication 'The ratios of debl to fair cash value for 2013 and 2014 are
based on 2012 estimated fair cash value
' '' Population source U S Census Bureau From 2005 ihrough 2009, per capita calculation is ba.sed on ihe 2000 population of
2,896,016 From 2010 Ihrough 2014, per capila calculation is ba.sed on ihc 2010 population of 2,695,598

The City's long-term general obligalion debt service schedule for 2015 lo 2043 is sel forth tn the
following table.

58

 r ^

— C^ \— r

•~ — ^J
'

r--

~

^

•r, CT- r\

r^' ^

1 CT

<r.

"

^ O

>: I-)

! O

^'

•:
.
:'
-.

— T
OvC

r-- r- T f~- — «-i m r~- 'J— 'i-c: — C^OC^^l^^>:

i
-rr

r-

O

sO c

C

r^,

'>3 —

>J-1 /--i

^

r'-i
..o ^
—.

f^* f^'
•— - r rn m — - r
ij-i — \ c •3" vo ' n
CN — c
~ ^\
f"",

-1-

ri

-J*

r-

.C

T

'1

''J

-r

-r

-t

-r

-T -r

-r

-T -T

C

Ml

o
o

r-l

oo

— CN o f .

3

w

r->

i5

r-_
-r o•o

r-

^

cv

eo

'rt

T,

O

— O
— —
O f-l
r-' C3
ri

-f* -r

I g — _e

:

T
3 v C
ri —
It
o ' c:' - r
— :^

r ~ - C C - T " ^ t ^ O '
— •/•ir--c
oo t
C C C -3 r- O
O
:
;
i-i

•<". I

o

2J 5
oc
rl

• -r
•.'?• .T j-j rr. T>
-T — - r t-- - r
-J-

o

:^

-

rt^. rr- r-r^ r

c

r 1
r-

f': I

•• ~^ PI^.? "^..
'
o

•-

^ -+ — c* o ;

O

O

r-

T

—
(_
r-l

vO

r~-

.£

1^

00

o

1^

r-l

r-i i

o

oc

r t

C

s

c

5^

r i
1—'

o

•o
r 1

o

B

i° •

1/1

CCTPCCTc r O O v
1^
3C o •'^ ^ 'O c> 'O
r>i r-_
r - r-_ «£>
-r
r l T T u-i o o '.
I*-' r i
c'
SO <r,
NC- <?

^
r l

r
vO C

i l
o
r-^
r*-'

1-

n

c O

C O ^
r l _Z
• c s t>

3N

O
m

r l "/-I vo 'J^ >i-i £
r*-,
r i r- f j

sC
CO
O
f-C

rl
r'-i
O
-T

vC,

r-; ~

o

r-J
—•
r»_
—'

CT- i

O
o

"T

ri

C o
r— r j -T r
JO — !/•, •

r-, — -T, —

oo'
rr-',
—
rj
— r>i^ f*^, ^ r—_
<7v' <r
(7," >£>

""'
—
oc
r'l

I

*-»

U"

— c

("-* - T ' —'
r
o '-& — r I ;
ON LO ly-i —
r-T

.5 E

^ '^
•e a •
O
—
'./>2 .
* «, J ; .

—

?

Ol

t5 o .
p c , p o_ o , w_ o_ p p p . p
o
'<-!* c ;
'ri
O
' A ' - ^ o " Wj' >r, -r^
O
— r l N C ' O — - r (C33~iO-Tvcrr-~''^

C

./I

« .Si 5

t- O

C/ > •
k j . u
r l

-T

c{ r-

X

P

?

CO CO OS
•O
U3
<?.'

rt

r-i
c:

p

E

NC

r',

p
r~'
-f p
cr>C

r-_
vc' -r
-c

p
X
C

vC
NO

Ip-

5 -r —
-£?

C3

r-l

.044

rJ

r l
O

v C CN t o

-r

rp

r 1

T

r-' r—

p

OO

1'

y

o <

C

ooc

-r
o

r l

NO
CO

^

3

NS

< i

I/*

a. —
o H)
o o
• - r O r »

— ri

ri n

r i — r-. c ; ^c •
— ^^•£^^c:-

^ r i
r i

- r r-o O
'CN —
CO
ri*
.o

. -J-

M

OC >rt 'Z^:
-3^' o>' <y t--

3C — r j r— r-

f
;

-r -c ; »

1 O

rt

c : c= o o
r-- o
C c ' 3 '.^p 'A
. tfj c

CO r-

(?

t'- r~- -

o
O
O

^

'"•J

-J

-

1

^

I

CI

^ i

ri

O

p

rl

I

•7'

—

'J

•-»

'J

< SH
o r i
.
r" r' ^y;
f
r~ c .
I
1 -T - r -T
" ri . - c' c c
r-'
1 t— 1^ r- r- r- r~- r.0 vC C

V
3

C

T

O

-'J "

r

^1) - a

c_ _ O './^

—

'

c

 Short Term Borrowing Program
The City issues commercial paper notes and maintains revolving lines of credit (the "Short ferm
Borrowing Program"'). Borrowings under the Shorl 'l erm Borrowing Program are general obligations of
the City bul do not have a specific revenue source, such as a properly ta.x levy, pledged for their
repayment
The Short 'ferm Borrowing Program is used by the Cily for working capilal in anticipation of
receipt of other revenue, and to fund capital projects, debl refinancing or restructuring and the paynient of
non-capilal expenditures, such as .settlements and judgments or retroactive payment of employment
salaries and wages, which arc typically repaid from proceeds of later issuances of general obligation
bonds
The City has increased its borrowing capacity under the Short 'ferm Borrowing Program over
time. By ordinance, the current maximum aggregate principal amount of debt that can be outstanding
under the Shorl Term Borrowing Program is $1 0 billion. The City has sized ils borrowing capacity for
interim funding in anticipation of receiving revenues or issuing long-term general obligalion bonds and to
cover General 1-und operaling expenses.
The following lable shows the City's lowest and highest outstanding balances and the total
amount available for borrowing under the current commitments in place for the Short ferm Borrowing
Program for the years 2010 through 2014 and for the period January 1, 2015 through June 30, 2015.
Short-Term Borrowings 2010-2014
($ in thousands)
•year
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015'"

Lowest Outstanding
Principal Aniount
$27,448
30,092
32,676
72,517
77,294
263,174

MIghcst Outstanding
Principal Amount
$198,101
198.112
166,513
415,256
415,294
835,042

Total Avalliible
Principal Amount
$ 200,000
200,000
300,000
500.0(10
900,1)00
1,000,000

.Source Cily of Chicago, Departmeni of finance
for the period .lanuary I, 2015 ihrough June 30, 2015
Moody's May 12. 2015 downgrade ofthe Cily's general obligation credit rating triggered an
event of default under the credit agreements in place under the Shorl 'ferm Borrowing Program as ofthe
date of the downgrade. The affeclcd banks parlicipating in the Shorl 'ferm Borrowing Program have
agreed to forbear from exercising their respective rights for a period ending September 30. 2015, to allow
the City suftlcient time to complete the planned conversion ofthe general obligation variable rale bonds
to fixed rale bonds, to refinance the Short 'ferm Borrowing Program with general obligation bonds and to
restructure the Shorl Term Borrowing Program going forward.
Set forth in Ihe following table is informtition about the credit components of tbe Short Term
Borrowing Program as of June 30, 2015

60

 Short l erm Borrowing Program
($ in thousands)

Tacility
Conimcrcial Paper
Line of Credit
Line of Credil
Line of Credit
Line of Credit
Line of Credit'"
Total

Scries or
Year
2002C/D
2013
2014
2014
2014
2015

Borrowing
Authority
5100,000
348.413
100,000
100,000
200,000
151,587
$1,000,000

Amount
Expiration
or
Outsta ndin»
(July K), 2015) Termination
$95,105
9/30/2015
172,540
11/30/2015
6/30/2016
100.000
98.865
9/30/2015
200,000
4/2.S/2016
151,587
9/30/2015
$818,097

Bank
HMO Harris
Bank of America
Morgan Stanley
Barclays Bank
JPMorgan
DN'f y\sset 'frust'^'

Source City of Chicago, Department of l-inanco
"' fhe line of credit was available only to pay the redemption pnces and other costs oflhe conversions of the general
obligation variable rate bonds
DN T Asset 'I'rusI is a subsidiary of JPMorgan.

The City is currently prohibited from borrowing under the Short Term Borrowing Program
without the approval or consent of the related banks notwithstanding the repayment of amounis
outstanding under the Short Term Borrowing Program with proceeds of the Bonds The Cily is
negotiating with currenl and potential new credit providers for amended or new credit facilities lhal would
permil new borrowing under the Short Term Borrowing Program at the City's discretion. The City
expects lo have amended or new credit facilities in place for the Short 'l erm Borrowing Program shortly
after the issuance of the Bonds that provides for an aggregate borrowing capacity of $500 million to $750
million, fhe Cily has received expressions of interesl from current and potential credit providers in
excess of the anticipated size of the program. See "INVESTMENT CONSIDEl^VflONS—Loss of
Liquidity "
Proceeds oflhe Bonds will be used to repay all bul approximately $140 million oflhe aniounts
currently out.standing under the Shorl Term Borrowing Program. The approximate amounis, uses and
anticipated source of repayment oflhe outstanding borrowings under the Short Term Borrowing Program
after the application oflhe proceeds oflhe Bonds are as follows'
$45 million in lieu oflhe issuance of tax anlicipalion noles by the City to be repaid with
property taxes expected to be collected shortly after the date of issuance ofthe Bonds
$58 million for retroactive employment compensation under the t-OP collective
bargaining agreemenl to be repaid with general City revenues over two years.
$23 million for Millennium Park operations lo be repaid wiih general City revenues over
several years.
•

$10 million for City Hall renovations to be repaid with building rent savings over .several
years
$3 million for repayment of Lincoln-Belmonl-Ashland fH'' bonds lo be repaid with 111revenues

61

 iVlRL Kinanciiig LLC Promissory iNotc
In 2009, the City purchased the former Michael Reese Hospital campus in connection with the
Cily's bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics, 'fhe purchase was implemented by the MRL Note issued by
the City lo the seller, which is currently outslanding in the amounl of $81 9 million The MRL Note is a
general obligation oflhe City not supported by a properly tax levy. Interest payments for the first five
years were not required to be paid until June 30, 2014, at which lime the City was required lo either pay
the accrued interesl or add it lo the outstanding principal amounl. At lhal lime, the Cily was also required
lo begin making quarterly interest payments and annual principal payments The City used the Short Term
Borrowing Program lo make the accrued interest payment of $19 9 million on June 30, 2014. the firsl
regularly .scheduled interest paynient of $1.4 million in September 2014. and the scheduled principal and
inleresi paymenl of approximaicly $11 million on June 30, 2015 The quarterly interest amounts of $1.4
million for December 2014, and $1.3 million for March 2015, were paid from funds available m the
General Fund. The City anticipates using the amounts available from the General Fund and/or the Short
Term Borrowing Program lo make continued debl service paymenis due under the MRL Nole until such
lime as the property is sold, given that the funding cosls of the Shorl Term Borrowing Program are less
than having interest capitalized at the interest rale on the MRL Nole (5.95 percenl). When the property is
sold, in whole or in part, the City currently expects to use such sale proceeds lo pay the MRL Note
Ihe City intends to use proceeds of the Bonds to repay borrowings under the Short Term
Borrowing Program u.sed lo make debt service paymenis on the MRL Note. See "PLAN OF
FINANCING—Repayment of Short Term Borrowing Program "
Capital Lease
The City received grant funding from the federal government in the 1980s to build a train line
(the "Grant-Funded Track") connecting Midway Airport wiih the rapid transit rail system operated by the
Chicago Transit Authority ("CTA"). The Grant-Funded Track is owned by the City and is operated and
maintained by the CTA as part of its Orange Line In 2005, the Cily entered into a sale/leaseback
agreement with a trust (the "Trust") pertaining lo the Grant-Funded Track, with the lease term ending in
2031 (the "Orange Line Lease"). In conneclion with the Orange Line Lease, Ihe Cily posted as collateral
a letter of credit (which varies in amounl up lo a maximum $180.7 million) issued by PNC Bank.
National Association ("PNC Bank") expiring on February 13, 2018 The letter of credil provides
collateral for repayment ofthe invcslmeni by the Trust's equity investor in the Orange Line Lease An
evenl of default is Iriggered under the letter of credit reimbursement agreemenl with PNC Bank ifthe
City's general obligation rating falls below BBB- by Fitch, Baa3 by Moody's or BBB- by S&P Also, a
covenant to use reasonable efforts to replace the letter of credil within 30 days is triggered if the rating is
below Baal or BBB+ by Moody's or S&P, respectively Due to a credil rating downgrade by Moody's
on February 27. 2015, the Cily was required under the agreement with PNC Bank lo use reasonable
efforts to replace the PNC Bank letter of credit wilh other collateral by March 29, 2015 On March 23,
2015, the letter of credit reimbursement agreeinent with PNC Bank was amended to change the applicable
rating threshold for the 30-day covenant to below I3aa2 or BBB+ by Moody's or S&P, respectively On
May 12, 2015. Moody's downgraded its rating on the Cily's outstanding general obligation bonds, vvhich
triggered a default under the letter of credit reimbursement agreemenl In response, the City entered into
a forbearance agreement with PNC Bank thai extends through September 30. 2015, unless earlier
terminated under the terms oflhe agreement.
The City intends to use a portion of the proceeds of the Bonds to lerinmnie ilie Orange Line
Lease, reacquire title lo the Grant-Funded frack and terminate the PNC Bank letter of credit See 'PLAN
OF FINANCING— Other Application of Bond Proceeds "

62

 IISX South Works
The City enlered into a tax-increment tinancing redevelopment agreement daled December 23,
2010 (Ihe "Lakeside I'lF Agreemenl") in conneclion wilh the redevelopment of ihe currenlly vacant
former U S Steel plant along the shore of Lake Michigan on the southeast side ofthe City The terms of
the Lakeside TIF Agreenient require the City, upon the fulfillment by the developer of certain specified
leasing, sale, financing and other condilions, to issue a series of general obligation bonds secured by or
olherwise payable from citywide property taxes and a series of special assessment bonds .secured by or
otherwise payable from a special assessmenl levy on the redevelopment project site. Pursuant to the
Lakeside TIF Agreement, the proceeds of such general obligation and special a.ssessment bonds may be
used lo pay for certain cosls oflhe redevelopment project, located in the Chicago Lakeside DevelopmenlPha.se 1 TIF Redevelopment Project Area (the "TIF Area"), including public infrastructure. If and when
the general obligation and special assessment bonds arc issued, the Lakeside TIF Agreement provides lhat
such bonds will be paid from the incremental taxes collected in the TIF Area to the extent available rather
than from citywide property laxes. 'I'he debl service on the general obligation bonds will be based on the
llrsl 50 percenl of the incremental laxes projected al Ihe lime of issuance and have a first lien on the
incremental laxes; the debt service on the special assessmenl bonds will be based on the second 50
percent of the incremental taxes projected al the time of issuance and have a second lien on the
incremenial laxes If the incremental laxes are insufficient to pay the debl service on the general
obligation and special assessments bonds. (1) debt service on the general obligation bonds will be paid
first by a letter of credit posted by the developer in an amount equal to 100 percent of maximum annual
debt service on the general obligation bonds and then if necessary by cilywide property taxes; and (2)
debt service on the special assessmenl bonds will be paid by the special assessment levy The Lakeside
TIF Agreement eslimalcd that there will be approximately $96,000,000 of redevelopment project costs
eligible lo be paid with the proceeds oflhe general obligation and special assessment bonds but did not
olherv\'ise estimate the principal aniounts oflhe general obligation and special as.sessment bonds.
INVESTMENT CONSIDERA ITONS
The follmving discussion of investment considerations should be reviewed by prospective
investors prior lo purchasing the Bonds. .Any one or more of the investment considerations discussed
herein could lead lo a decrease m the market value and the liquidity of the Bonds or. ultimately, a
payment default on the Bonds. There can be no assurance lhal olher factors nol di.scit.s.sed herein will not
become material m the future.
Credit Rating Downgrades
The interest rale the City pays on new issuances of general obligation debl is highly dependent on
the City's credit ratings, and downward changes in the Cily's ratings have resulted and may continue lo
result in significantly higher interest rates payable by the City on bond issuances and other borrowings.
On May 12, 2015, Moody's downgraded lo Bal from Baa2 its rating on the City's outslanding
general obligation bonds and the outlook remained negalive On July 3, 2015, Fitch affirmed its BBB+
rating on the City's outstanding general obligation bonds with a negative outlook and removed the rating
from negative rating watch On July 7, 2015, Kroll affirmed its long-term rating of A- with a stable
outlook on the City's general obligation bonds On July 8, 2015, S&P lowered its rating to BBB+ from
A- on the City's outstanding long-lerm fixed rate general obligation bonds with a negative outlook and
removed the ruling from negative credit watch
The rating agencies have indicated that further downgrades to the Cil\ "s credil rating could result
from the courts declaring P A. 98-641, the Slnlc law which changed the Pension Code I'or Ml-ABf and

 LABF, unconstitutional, the failure to implement a pension funding solution in 2015, growth in the debl
and unfunded pension liabilities oflhe City or overlapping governmenis, widening budget gaps, loss of
liquidity, or draws on City reserve funds. The Cily cannot predict if or when, or on what basis, the rating
agencies may take further action with respect to the Cily's credit ralings, and no assurances can be
provided lhat the City's credit rating will nol be subject lo further downgrades as a result oflhe factors
sialed above or other factors.
I'nfunded Pensions
The Retirement Funds have significant unfunded liabilities and low funding ratios Under currenl
law, the Cily's required contributions to PABF and FABF will significantly increase beginning in 2016.
fhe Cuy has not identified the sources of funds to meet the City's pension obligations for PABF and
FABF in 2016 or thereafter, and it is likely that, withoul further changes to the Pension Code, the City
will have to .seek increases in taxes or implement cutbacks in Cily services or .some combination thereof
to meet its obligations lo such pension funds. Ifthe City were to raise laxes substantially or reduce and/or
eliminate essential city services, residents or businesses may choose to relocate to states or municipalities
with a lower tax burden or belter services. A drop in population or business activity could have an
adverse impact on the Cily's economy.
Pension Reform Litigation
On May 8, 2015, the Illinois Supreme Court determined lhal the State Pension Reform Act is
unconstitutional See "FINANCIAL DISCUSSION—Pensions—C;/v and State Pension Litigation—
State Pension Litigation." P.A. 98-641, the law which modified required contribution and benefit
amounis for MEABF and LABF, remains subject to litigation which may be affected by the decision of
the Supreme Court regarding the Slate Pension Reform Act. See "LITIGATION-Pension Litigation."
The City believes P.A 98-641 is distinguishable from the Slale Pension Reform Act. As a threshold
matter, the City's position is that P.A. 98-641 does not violate the Pension Clause of the Illinois
Constitution and protects benefits being paid from MEABF and LABF that are projected (in the ab.sence
of P A 98-641) to be insolvent in approximately I I and 14 years, respectively. PA. 98-641 was
developed in consultation wilh numerous affected collective bargaining units.
If the courls determine lhat P.A. 98-641 is consttlulional, the City would be required lo make
increased pension payments as .set forth m APPENDIX E—"RETIREMENT FIJNDS—Determination of
City's Contributions—City's Required Contributions to LABF and MEABF Pursuant lo P.A 98-641 " If
the courts determine lhat P.A. 98-641 is unconstitutional, the City's obligation to fund MEABF and
LABF may revert to the prior, lower levels of funding based on the multiplier formula set forth tn the
prior law In lhat instance, the unfunded liabilities ofMEABF and LABF would remain unresolved See
APPENDIX E—"RETIREMENT FUNDS—Effect on MEABF and LABF if PA 98-641 Found
Unconslilutional "
If a courl were lo determine lhal PA. 98-641 is unconstitutional, the City's ciedil ratings on its
general obligation bond.s, including the Bonds, could be downgraded
See "—Credit Rating
Downgrades" above
Overlapping Ta.xing Districts
A number of overlapping laxing districts whose jurisdiciional limits overlap with the City have
the power lo raise taxes, mcluding property laxes
See ''FINANCIAL DISCUSSION AND
ANALYSIS—Property 'faxes—Overlapping Taxing Dislncis ' The City does not control the amount or
timing of the taxes levied b) these overlapping taxing districts Depending on the amount of such

64

 increa.se(s). an increase in the amounl of taxes by Ihese overlapping taxing districts could potentially be
htirmful lo the City's economy and/or may make it more difficull for the Cily to increase laxes, including
property laxes, to pay for its unfunded pensions
Structural Deficit and Debt Restructuring
Over the past len year.s, the City has experienced an imbalance of lax revenues relative to
operating expenditures resulting in operaling budget gaps Since 2012, the City has reduced the General
Fund budget gap each year through targeted cuts, revenue enhancements, and improved operating
efficiencies However, the City projects large budget gaps in 2016 and 2017 due to operating budget
shortfalls and increased pension obligations See "FINANCIAL DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS—
General Fund—General Fund Financial Forecasts—2016-2017 General Fund Outlook."
Since al least 2007, the City has used proceeds from general obligation bonds with extended
maturities lo fund a portion oflhe City's general obligation annual debl .service The City expects to use
approximately $170 from proceeds of the Bonds and approximately $220 million from proceeds of ils
next issuance of general obligation bonds lo restruclurc annual debl service in this manner. Sec
"GENERAL OBLIGATION DEBT—Long-'ferm General Obligation Bonds." This practice has the
effect of extending and increasing the City's overall debt levels Unless the City is able lo pay its annual
general obligation debt service from recurring revenue sources, the City's inlerest cosls and outslanding
debt are likely to continue lo rise. The City currently plans lo eliminate the use of general obligalion
bonds to pay general obligation debt service by 2019.
Recurring operating budget gaps and increases in the City's debt burden could result in the need
for new or enhanced revenue sources, including tax increases, or reduction of essential ctty services.
Less of Liquidity
fhe City utilizes the Short Term Borrowing Program for working capilal and interim funding of
capital projects, debt refinancing or restructuring and the paynient of non-capital expenditures such as
settlements and judgments Moody's May 12, 2015, downgrade Iriggered an event of default under the
credit agreements in place under the Short Term Borrowing Program as of the date of the downgrade.
The Cily cannot borrow under the credit facilities while an event of default is continuing unless the credit
facility provider otherwise agrees even afler the City pays down amounis outstanding under the Short
ferm Borrowing Program with proceeds ofthe Bonds.
I he City is currently nejgotiatmg with current and potential new credit providers for amended or
new credit arrangements lhal would permit new borrowing under the Shorl Term Borrowing Program. If
the City IS unable lo negolialc amended or new credit arrangements, ihe City's liquidity position may be
adversely affected and, to meet its obligations, alternative funding arrangements or other measures may
be required. No assurance can be given as to whether the City will be successful in negotiating amended
or new credit anangemenls for the Shorl Term Borrowing Program, whal the actual lernis might be or
whether the amounts available will be sufficient for the City's liquidity needs
Following the event of default resulting from the Moody's May 12, 2015. rating downgrade, the
City executed forbearance agreements with each of the banks providing credit under Ihe Shorl l erm
Borrowing Program as of the date of the downgrade. A further downgiade by Moody's and/or a
downgrade below investment grade by S&P or Filch could result in Ihe lerminalion of Ihc I'orbcarance
agreements and/or a default under the credit agreemenl with DNT Asset Trusl A\lthoiigh the City will u.se
proceeds ofthe Bonds lo repay a significant portion oflhe outstanding borrowings under the Short Icrm
Borrowing Program, further rating downgrades may make it more difficult for the City to successfully

65

 negotiate revolving credit arrangements for its Shorl Term Borrowing Program
OBLIGA FION DEB I—Short I crm Borrowing Program "

See "GENERAL

Increased Debt Levels
Upon issuance of the Bonds, the City's long-term general obligation debt will increase. In
addition, the City expects to issue additional long-term general obligation debt later in 2015 or early in
2016. Sec "SECURI TY FOR THE BONDS—Additional General Obligation Debl." i'he City's annual
debl service on its long-term general obligation debt will increase accordingly. Further increases m the
City's long-term general obligation debl and annual debt service could crowd out spending for other City
services and/or require substantial increases in property taxes or other revenue sources. See "GENERAL
OBLIGA TION DEBT—Long-Term General Obligalion Bonds."
Financial Condition of Chicago Public Schools
CBOE, which is responsible for the governance, organizational and financial oversight of
Chicago Public Schools, has reported a substantial budget deficit for 2016 and increasing deficits in
subsequent years, due in large part to CBOE's pension funding obligations. See "FINANCIAL
DISCUSSION AND AhlALYSlS—Pensions—Overlapping Taxing Districts." While CBOE is a separate
governmental entity and the Cily has no legal obligation to conlribute financially to CBOE, any failure of
CBOE to resolve its current and future deficits or resolving them by budget cuts and/or increases in
property taxes, without Slate assistance, could have an adverse effect on the City's economy and/or
property tax base
Reductions and Delays in Receipt of State Revenues
Stale lax revenue received by the City includes the City's local share ofthe Slate's sales and use
taxes, income tax and personal properly replacement tax. 'fhe State is itself facing a substantial budget
deficit and Governor Rauner has made a number of proposals lo close the Stale's budget gap. Among
them IS a reduction in the local government distributive share of the Stale's income tax If such a
reduction were to become law, the City would Io.se significant income tax receipts. This proposal, or any
olher that reduces the State taxes received by the City, would have an immediate and adverse effect on the
City's budgcl.
fhere could also be significant delays in the receipt of slale lax revenue by ihe Cily. fhe Stale
has in the past delayed by months the distribution to local governmenis of their respective shares of stale
taxes due to the Stale's own budget problems. Although the delay in receipl of .state taxes would nol
affect the payment of principal or interest on the Bonds when due, in the evenl of significant delay in
receipl of slale tax revenue, the Cily may be forced to delay payments to vendors, service providers or
other recipients of Cily funds.
Cap on Property Taxes
I he Illinois Property fax Code limits, among other things, the amount of properly tax lhal can be
extended for non-home rule units of local governmenl located in Cook County and five adjacent Counties
(the "Stale Tax Cap"). As a home rule iinil of government, the City is not subject to the Slale Tax Cap. A
number of bills have been introduced in the Illinois General Assembly to limit or I'leeze properly laxes,
including those imposed by home rule units of local governmenl such as the Cily The application ofthe
State Tax Cap to the City or any olher measure that would limit or freeze property taxes would require
three-fifths vole of each house oflhe Illinois General Assembly If ilie City were to become .subject to a
State-imposed propeilv tax limitation rcstiiclion in the lulure similar to the Slate lax Cap or any olher

66

 restriction or freeze on property taxes, the City's ability lo levy property laxes in amounts needed for its
future funding needs may be adversely affected.
.Adverse Change in Laws
There are a variety of State and federal laws, regulations and constitutional provisions that apply
to the City's ability' to raise taxes, fund its pension obligations or to reorganize its debts There is no
assurance lhal there will not be any change in, inlerpretalion of or addition to such applicable laws,
regulations and provisions. Any such change, interpretation or addition may have a material adverse
effect, eilhcr directly or indirectly, on the City or the taxing authority of the City, which could materially
adversely affecl the City's operations orfinancialcondition.
Bankruptcy
Municipalities cannot file for protection under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code unless specifically
aulhorized lo be a debtor by state law or by a governmental officer or organization empowered by slale
law to authorize such entity to be a debtor in a bankruptcy proceeding Stale law does not currently
permit municipalities in Illinois to file for bankruptcy; however, legislation was recently introduced in the
General Assembly of the State which, if enacted, would permit Illinois municipalities lo file for
bankruptcy under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. No assurance can be provided as lo whether any such
legislation that would permit municipalities such as the Cily to file for bankruptcy will be enacled into
law
Uncertain Enforcement Remedies
The Bonds arc direct and general obligations oflhe City and all taxable properly in the City is
subject lo levy to pay the debt service on the Bonds. The Bonds are not secured by a statutory lien on the
Bond Interest and Redemption Fund, any real property in the Cily or any physical assels ofthe City. The
niaturity ofthe Bonds cannot be accelerated in the event lhal the City fails to pay any in.slallment of
interest on, or principal of, the Bonds when due
The remedies available lo bondholders upon nonpayment of principal of or interest on the Bonds
arc uncertain and in many respects dependent upon discretionary judicial actions 'fhere currently is no
established judicial precedent addressing the rights of bondholders lo compel the City lo levy laxes or to
enforce any olher bondholder remedy.
See APPENDIX A—"SUMMARY OF THE
INDENTURES—Default and Remedies "
Force iVIajeurc Events
There are certain unanlicipaled events beyond the Cily's control that could have a malcrial
adverse impact on the Cily's operations and financial conditions if they were to occur These events
include fire, flood, earthquake, epidemic, adverse heallh conditions or olher unavoidable casualties or acts
of God, freight embargo, labor strikes or work stoppages, civil commotion, new acts of war or escalation
of existing war conditions, sabotage, terrorism or enemy action, pollution, unknown subsurface or
concealed conditions affecting the environment, and any similar causes. No assurance can be provided
that such events will nol occur, and, if any such events were lo occur, no prediction can be provided as to
ihe actual impact or severity oflhe unpad on the City's operations andfinancialcondition

67

 Forward-Looking Statements
I'his Official Stateinent contains certain statements relating lo future results that are forwardlooking statements. When used in ihis Official Slalement, the words "eslimale," "intend," "expect" and
similar expressions identify forward-looking statements. Any forward-looking statement is subject to
uncerlamty and risks that could cause actual results lo differ, possibly materially, from those
contemplated in such forward-looking staiemenls. Inevitably, some assumptions used to develop
forward-looking statements will nol be realized or unanticipated events and circumstances may occur.
Therefore, bondholders and potential investors should be aware lhal there are likely to be differences
between forward-looking .statements and actual results; those differences could be material. The City
does not undertake any obligation to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as
a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
LITIGATION
There is no litigation pending in any court or, to the knowledge of the Cily, threatened,
questioning the corporate existence of the City, or which would restrain or enjoin the remarketing or
delivery of the Bonds, or which concerns the proceedings of the City laken in connection with the Bonds
or the Cily's pledge of its full failh, credil and resources lo the payment of the Bonds
The City is a defendant in various pending and threatened individual and class action litigation
relating principally lo claims arising from conlracts, personal injury, properly damage, police conduct,
discrimination, civil rights actions and other matters. The City believes that the ultimate resolution of
these matters will not have a material adverse effect on thefinancialposition ofthe City.
Property TILX Rate Objections: 2005 andfollowing. The City's property tax levies for 2005 and
following have varied between approximately $720 million and $835 million annually, excluding the
School Building and Improvement Fund levy. Objections have been filed in the Circuil Court of Cook
Couniy (the "Circuit Court") to these levies, which objections remain pending The Cily is unable to
predict ihe outcome ofthe proceedings concerning the objections.
E2 Nightclub Litigation. The City was a defendant in 57 wrongful death and personal injury
lawsuits arising out of a stampede of patrons at the E2 Nightclub on February 17, 2003. The sole
remaining claim against Ihc Cily in this litigaiion was that police officers blocked, locked, or jammed
access to the entiy-exil door, causing a stampede of patrons to pile up on the only stairway leading lo the
door. On April I I , 2012, the Circuit Court granted the Cily's motion I'or summary judgment and
dismissed the .sole remaining claim against the City with prejudice The Cily does not know whether the
plaintilfs will appeal the issuance of summary judgmeni. If the plaintiffs do appeal, the City will
vigorously defend the Circuit Court's judgment in the appellate court
.Automated Traffic Enforcement Ticketing Litigation. In July 2010, individual plaintiffs,
seeking lo maintain a class action, filed suit against the Cily and olher defendants to challenge the City's
use since 2003 of an automated red-light ticketing syslem. "fhe plaintiffs allege, aniong olher things, lhat
the 2006 statute authorizing eight Illinois counties to enact red-light camera ordinances is unconslilutional
local legislation and that the City lacks home-rule authority to enact a red-light camera ordinance and
adjudieale violations administratively The plaintiffs sought an injunclion against the operation oflhe
City's rcd-lighl iickcling system and reslituiion offinespaid fhe Circuit Court granted the Cily's motion
to dismiss the case; the Illinois Appellate Courl affirmed in an unpublished decision The Illinois
Supreme Court look the case, but twojusliccs recused themselves and a majority ofthe remaining justices
did not reach a consensus This had the effect of affirming the Appellate Courl decision While the
appeal was pending, the same attorney filed another ptitalivc class action ca.sc in the Circuit Court, with

68

 different named plaintiffs raising similar claims about the automated red-light ticketing syslem The City
has filed a motion lo dismiss that case, which is pending in the Circuit Court fhe City will continue lo
defend this matter vigorously On March 23, 2015, individual plaintiffs, seeking lo niamlam a class
action, filed a separate law.suit alleging lhat the City has exceeded its home rule authorily and has violated
Illinois slate law and City ordinances by issuing notices of violation and determinations of liability for
automated speed enforcemenl violations and automated rcd-lighl violalions thai allegedly do nol comply
wilh state and local requiremenls They seek declaratory judgment, injunclive relief and, in an unjust
enrichment claim, .seek restitution of fines paid. The City filed a motion to disiiii.ss on May 6, and will
continue lo defend this case vigorously
Parking Garages Litigation. On February 13, 2013, Independent Voters of Illinois Independent
Precinct Organization and an individual plaintiff filed a complaint challenging the facial validity oflhe
Parking Garages Lease Agreemenl. The plaintiffs allege that certain compensation provisions in the
Parking Garages Lease Agreenient violate the legal prohibition against the delegation, by a governmental
entity, of Us police powers lo a private parly. On January 16, 2014, the Circuil Court dismissed the case,
on motions by both the City and CLP. Plaintiffs have appealed; the appeal is pending. The Cily will
continue to defend this case vigorously.
HUD Certifications Litigation. This is a False Claims Acl case m vvhich Albert C Hanna (the
"Relator") has sued the City in federal district court for the Northern District in Illinois (the "Di.slrict
Courl") .seeking to recover funds on behalf of the U S governmenl. The Relator alleges lhal the City has
an affirmative obligation to dismantle racial and ethnic segregation in housing under Titte VI ofthe Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and the Fair Housing Act and that the Cily has falsely claimed lo do so in
certifications made by the City to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Developnient ("HUD") as a
condition of receiving federal funding through certain HUD-funded grant programs. The Relator seeks
the return to the federal government of approximately $880 million in funds received by the City under
these programs and asks the court to treble that aniount, as allowed by statute. The City moved to dismiss
the complaint and the District Court dismissed it with leave to amend The plaintiff filed an amended
complaint and the City has moved to dismiss lhal complaint. The City will continue to vigorously defend
this case.
Pension Litigadon. P.A. 98-0641, which became law on June 9. 2014, reforms MEABF and
LABF Ihrough a combination of increased employer contributions and changes to employee conlributions
and retiree benefits. In December 2014, shortly before P A 98-0641 was lo go inlo cl'l'ccl, two lawsuits
were filed by plaintiffs, who are individual participants in the two afl'ecled pension funds and (in one of
the lawsuits) unions representing participants, in the Circuit Court challenging the conslilulionalily of
P A 98-0641 Plaintiffs argue that P A 98-0641 violates the Pension Clau.se ofthe Illinois Constitution
and .seek a preliminary and permanent injunclion prohibiting its enforcement. The City was allowed to
intervene lo defend the conslilutionality of P A. 98-0641 On February 19, 2015, the Circuit Court
entered an order slaying the preliminary injunction proceedings pending further courl order and pending
the outcome ofthe Illinois Supreme Court's review oflhe Stale Pension Reform Acl. On July 9, 2015, a
hearing was held in the Circuit Court on the parlies' cross motions for summary judgment At the
conclusion ofthe hearing, the Circuil Courl staled lhal its judgment on the motions would be' delivered on
July 24, 2015 fhe City has been defending and will continue to defend this mailer vigorously The Cily
expects that whatever decision is entered by the Circuit Court m this lawsuil. the decision will be
appealed, and the constitutionality of P A 98-641 will ultimately be decided on appeal
Retiree Healthcare Litigadon. In Undenvood v. Cuy of Chicago, retired employees oflhe City
filed suit in Slate courl to challenge planned changes to the healthcare benefits of retirees fhe complaint
advanced state law claims, including alleged violation of tlie Pension Clause of tlie Illinois Conslilution.
and federal law claims I'he City removed the case lo federal courl based on the federal law claims The

69

 federal dislrict court dismis.sed the case in ils entirety. As lo plaintiffs' claim lhal the planned changes
violate the Pension Clau,se, the dislrict courl predicted that the Illinois Supreme Court would rule in a
separate case then pending before the Illinois Supreme Court lhal the heallhcare benefits are not protected
by the Pension Clause. Thereafter, the Illinois Supreme Court ruled in lhal separate case that the
heallhcare benefits in question, which were promi.sed to State retirees, are protected under the Pension
Clause I he City argued on appeal to the federal appellate courl that il should affirm the district court
dismissal, including the stale law claims, on an alternative ground On February 25, 2015, ihe federal
appellate courl affirmed the disnii.s.sal of the federal law claims and declined lo rule on the state law
claims on the ground that the slate law claims involved a question of Illinois slate law, which il ordered
returned to the Illinois slate court for decision. The City and olher defendants filed a molion in the Circuil
Court lo dismiss the case Oral argument on the molion is scheduled for October 1, 2015. t he Cily has
been defending and will continue lo defend this matter vigorously.
INDEPENDENT ADDITOKS
The basic financial statements of the City as of and for the year ended December 31, 2014,
included in APPENDIX C to this Official Statement, have been audited by Deloitte & Touche LLP,
independent auditors, as stated in their report appearing in APPENDIX C.
RATINGS
The Bonds are rated "BBB-H" (negative outlook) by S&P, "BBB-i-" (negative outlook) by Fitch,
and "A-" (stable outlook) by Kroll.
A rating reflects only the view of the rating agency giving such rating. A rating is not a
recommendation to buy, .sell or hold securilies, and may be subjecl to revision or withdrawal al any time.
An explanation of the significance ofsuch rating may be obtained from such organization. There is no
assurance that any rating will continue for any given period of time or that any rating will nol be revised
downward or withdrawn entirely if, in the judgmeni of the rating agency, circumstances so warrant. Any
such downward revision or withdrawal of a rating may have adverse consequences for the City or an
adverse effect on the price at which the Bonds may be resold
See "INVES'l'MENT
CONSIDERATIONS—Credit Rating Downgrades."
FINANCIAL ADVISOR AND INDEPENDENT REGIS l ERED .MUNICIPAL ADVISOR
The City has retained Acacia Financial Group, Inc. to act as financial advisor (the "Financial
Advisor") in connection with the offering of ihe Bonds. The Financial Advisor is nol obligated to
undertake, and has nol undertaken to make, an independent verification of, or to assume responsibility for
the accuracy, completeness or fairness of the information contained in this Official Statement. The
Financial Advisor is a "municipal advi.sor" as defined in Rule l5Bal-l oflhe Commission
fhe Cily has retained Martin J Luby LLC as Us mdependeni regislercd municipal advisor (the
"IRMA') pursuant lo Rule 15Ba I - l-(d)(3)(vi) oflhe Commission lo evaluate financing proposals and
recommendations in conneclion with the Cir>''s various bond issuance progranis and olhei financing ideas
being considered by the City; however, the IICMA will nol advise on the invcslmeni of Cily funds held by
the Office of llie Cily Treasurer fhe IRMA's compensalion is nol dependenl on ihe offering oflhe
Bonds
UiNDERWRITING
Morgan Stanley & Co LLC, as representative on behalf of iLself and the other underwriters listed
on the cover of this Official Statemeni (the "Underwriters"), has agreed, subject to certain conditions, to

70

 purchase the Series 20I5A Bonds at a price equal to $338,783,430 15 (which represents the aggregate
principal amount ofthe Series 2015A Bonds less an Underwriters' di.scount of $2,176,525.60 and less a net
original issue discount of $4,570,044.25), and the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds at a price equal lo
$726,784,205 13 (which represents the aggregate principal amount oflhe Taxable Series 2015B Bonds less
an Underwriters' discount of $4,678,862.02 and less an original i.s.sue di.scount of$l 1.396,932 85 ).
The obligation ofthe Underwriters lo accept delivery oflhe Series 20I5A Bonds is subjecl to
various conditions sel forth in a Bond Purchase Agreemenl dated July 16, 2015, between the Underwriters
and the City The obligation oflhe Underwriters lo accept deliver^' ofthe Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds is
subjecl to various conditions set forth in a Bond Purchase Agreement daled July 15, 2015, between the
Underwriters and the City. The Underwriters are obligated lo purchase all of the Bonds if any of the
Bonds are purchased
Morgan Stanley, parent company of Morgan Stanley & Co LLC, an underwriter of the Bonds,
has entered inlo a retail distribution arrangement wilh Morgan Stanley Smith Barney LLC As part of the
distribution arrangement, Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC may distribute municipal securities to retail
investors through the financial advisor network of Morgan Stanley Smith Barney LLC. As part of this
arrangement, Morgan Stanley & Co LLC may compensate Morgan Stanley Smith Barney LLC for its
selling efforts with respect to the Bonds.
Academy Securities has entered inlo distribution agreements ("Distribution Agt'cemenls") with
e*Trade Securities LLC, TD Ameritrade Inc , BNY Mellon Capilal Markets LLC, Ladenburg 'fhalniann
& Co Inc., R Scelaus & Co, Maxim Group LLC, Newbridge Independent Services, National Alliance
Capital Markets, JHS Capital Advisors Inc., World First Financial Services Inc , Bonwick Capital
Partners LLC, Commonwealth Equity Services, Winslow Evans & Crocker, Sccurcvest Financial Group,
Moors & Cabot Inc , Crews & Associates Inc., Hennion & Walsh Inc., Celadon Financial Group, Douglas
& Co. Municipals, Inc., National Securilies Corp, Ross Sinclaire & Associales LLC, E K. Riley
Invcstmenls LLC, First Integrity Capital Partners, SWBC Investmcnl Services LLC, Dclwiler Fcnton &
Co, Intercoaslal Capilal Markets, Inc., WH Mell & Co., and Fulcrum Securities LLC for the retail
distribution of certain municipal securities such as the Bonds at the original issue prices. Pursuant to the
Distribution Agreemenls (if applicable lo the Bonds), Academy Securilies may share a portion of its
underwriting compensalion wilh these firnis.
BMO Capital Markets is the trade name for cerlam capital markets and investment banking
services of Bank of Montreal and its subsidiaries, including BMO Capital Markets GKS T Inc , which is a
direct, wholly-owned subsidiary' of BMO Financial Corp , which is itself a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Bank of Montreal North South Capital LLC has entered into an agreeinent with BMO Capital Markets
GKST Inc whereby BMO Capital Markets is compensated for the a.ssumplion oflhe underwriting and
releiilion risk ofthe Bonds in the form of a percentage ofthe overall commission (takedown) paid lo
North South Capital
Citigroup Global Markets Inc , an underwriter oflhe Bonds, has entered iiilo a retail distribution
agreemenl with each of TMC Bonds L L C {'"IMC") and UBS Financial Services Inc ("UBSFS")
Under these distribution agreements, Citigroup Global Markets Inc may distribute municipal securities to
retail investors ihrough the financial advisor network of UBSFS and the electronic primary offering
platform ol'TMC As part of this arrangement. C'ltigioup Global Markets Inc. may compen.sale TMC
(and TMC may compensate Us eleclronic platform member firms) and UBSFS I'or ihcir selling efforts
with respect to the Bonds
George K Baum & Company and Pershing LLC, a subsidiary of The Bank of New Yoik Mellon
Corporation, have a dislribiition agreement enabling Pershing Ll.C; lo obtain and distribute certain
municipal .secunties underwritten by or allocated to George K Baum & Company Under the distribution

71

 (jcorge K. Baum & Company will allocate a portion of received takedowns, fees or
commissions lo Pershing for bonds sold under the agreemenl.
PAX MATTERS
The Scries 2015A Bonds
Federal lax law contains a number of requirements and restrictions which apply to the Series
20I5A Bonds, mcluding investment restrictions, periodic paymenis of arbitrage profits lo the United
Stales, requirements regarding the proper use of bond proceeds and the facilitiesfinancedtherewith, and
certain other matters. The City has covenanted to comply wilh all requirements thai must be satisfied in
order for the inleresi on the Series 20I5A Bonds lo be excludable from gro.ss income for federal income
tax purposes Failure lo coniply with certain of such covenants could cause interest on the Series 20I5A
Bonds lo become includible in gross income for federal income lax purposes retroactively lo the dale of
issuance ofthe Series 20 ISA Bonds
Subject lo the City's compliance wilh the above-referenced covenants, under present law, in the
opinion of Co-Bond Counsel, interest on the Series 20 ISA Bonds is excludable from the gross income of
the owners Ihereof for federal income tax purposes and is not included as an item of tax preference in
computing the federal alternative minimum lax for individuals and corporations, bul inlerest on the Series
20ISA Bonds is taken into account, however, in computing an adjuslment used in determining the federal
allernalive minimum tax for certain corporations.
In rendering Us opinion, Co-Bond Counsel will rely upon certifications of the City wilh respect to
certain material facts within the City's knowledge. Co-Bond Counsel's opinion represents ils legal
judgment based upon ils review ofthe law and the facts that it deems relevant to render such opinion and
is not a guarantee of a result.
The Code includes provisions for an alternative minimum lax ("AM'T") for corporations in
addition to the corporate regular tax in certain cases. The AM'f, if any, depends upon the corporalion's
alternative minimum taxable income ("AMTI"), which is the corporation's taxable income with certain
adjustments One of the adjustment items used in computing the AMTI of a corporation (with certain
e.xccplions) is an amount equal to 75 percenl of the excess of such corporalion's "adjusted cunent
earnings" over an amounl equal to its AMTI (before such adjustmenl item and the alternative tax nel
operaling loss deduction) "Adjusted currenl earnings" would include certain tax-exempt interesl.
including interesl on the Series 2015A Bonds.
Ownership oflhe Series 2015A Bonds may resull in collateral federal income lax con.sequences
lo certain laxpayers. including, without limitation, corporations subject to the branch profits lax, financial
institutions, certain insurance companies, certain S corporations, individual recipients of Social Security
or Railrc)ad Retirement benefits and taxpayers who may be deemed lo have incurred (or continued)
indebledncss lo purchase or carry lax-exempt obligations. Prospeclive purchasers oflhe Scries 20 ISA
Bonds should consult their lax advisors as lo applicability of any such collateral consequences
The issue price (the "I.ssue Price") for each maturity ofthe Series 20 ISA Bonds is ihe price al
which a substantial amount ofsuch maturity oflhe Scries 20 ISA Bonds is firsl sold to the public Ihc
Issue Price of a maturity ofthe Seiies 20 ISA Bonds may be different from the price set forth, or the price
corresponding to the yield set forth, on the inside cover page hereof
Ifthe Issue Price of a maturity ofthe Scries 20ISA Bonds is less than the principal amounl
payable at maturity, the difference between the Issue Price of each such maturity, if any, oflhe Senes
20 ISA Bonds (the "OID Bonds") and the principal amounl payable at maturity is original issue diseouni

 For an investor who purchases an OID Borni in the initial public offering at the Issue Price for
such malurily and who holds such OID Bond to its slated malurily, subjecl lo the condition lhal the Cily
complies with the covenants discussed above, (a) the full amount of original issue discount with respect lo
such OID Bond constitutes interest which is excludable from gross income of the owner Ihereof for
federal income tax purposes; (b) such owner will nol realize taxable capilal gam or markel discount upon
payment ofsuch OID Bond al ils slalcd malurily, (c) such original issue discount is nol included as an
Item of tax preference in computing the alternative minimum lax for individuals and corporations under
the Code, bul is taken into account in computing an adjustmenl used in determining the alternative
minimum lax for ccrlain corporations under the Code, as described above, and (d) the accretion of
original issue discount in each year may resull in an alternative minimum tax liability I'or corporations or
certain other collateral federal income lax consequences in each year even though a corresponding cash
payment may not be received until a later year. Ba.sed upon the stated position of the Illinois Department
of Revenue under Illinois income tax law, accreted original issue discount on such OID Bonds is subject
to taxation as it accretes, even though there may not be a corresponding cash payment until a later year.
Owners of OID Bonds should consult their own tax advisors with respect to the stale and local tax
consequences of original issue discount on such OID Bonds.
Owners of Series 20ISA Bonds who dispose of Series 20ISA Bonds prior to the stated maturity
(whether by sale, redemplion or olherwise), purchase Scries 20ISA Bonds in the initial public offering,
bul al a price different from the Issue Price or purchase Series 20ISA Bonds siib.sequent lo the initial
public offering should consult their own tax advisors.
If a Series 2015A Bond is purchased at any time for a price lhal is less than the Series 2015A
Bond's stated redemption price at maturity or, in the case of an OID Bond, ils Issue Price plus accreted
original issue discount (the "Revised Issue Price"), the purchaser will be treated as having purclia.sed a
Series 20ISA Bond with market discount subject to the market discount rules ofthe Code (unless a
statutory de minimis rule applies). Accrued market discount is treated as taxable ordinary income and is
recognized when a Series 20ISA Bond is disposed of (lo the extent such accrued discount does not
exceed gam realized) or, at the purchaser's election, as it accrues. Such treatment would apply to any
purchaser who purchases an OID Bond for a price lhat is less than its Revised Issue Price. The
applicability oflhe market discount rules may adversely affect the liquidity or secondary market price of
such Series 20ISA Bond Purchasers should consult Iheir own lax advisors regarding the potenlial
implications of market di.scount with respect lo the Series 201 SA Bonds
An investor may purchase a Series 20 ISA Bond at a price in excess of its slated principal amount.
Such excess IS characterized for federal income tax purposes as "bond premium" and must be amortized
by an investor on a constant yield basis over the remaining term ofthe Series 20 ISA Bond in a manner
lhat lakes into account potential call dales and call prices An investor cannot deduct amortized bond
premium relating lo a la.x-exenipl bond The amorti-zed bond premium is treated as a reduction in Ihc taxexempt interesl received. As bond premium is amortized, il reduces the investor's basis in the Series
20ISA Bond Investors who purchase a Series 2015A Bond at a premium should coiisiili their own lax
advi.sors regarding the amortization of bond premium and Us effecl on the Series 20 ISA Bond's basis for
purposes of computing gain or loss in conneclion wilh the sale, exchange, redemption or early reliiemenl
oflhe Senes 20 ISA Bond.
Ihere are or may be pending in the Congress ofthe United States legislative proposals, including
some lhat cany retroactive effective dates, lhal. if enacted, could alter or amend the federal tax mailers
referred lo above or affecl the market value oflhe Series 20 ISA Bonds It cannot be predicted whether or
in what form any such i)roposal might be enacted or whether, if enacted, it would njiply to bonds issued
prior to enaclmeiil Prospective purchasers of the Series 20ISA Bonds should consult their own tax
advisors regarding any pending or proposed federal tax legislation Co-Bond Counsel expiess no opinion
regaidmg any pending or proposed federal lax legislation

73

 'The Internal Revenue Service (the "Service") has an ongoing program of auditing tax-exempt
obligations to delerminc whether, in the view oflhe Service, interesl on such lax-exempl obligations is
includible in the gross income of the owners thereof for federal income tax purposes. Il cannot be
predicted whether or nol the Service will commence an audit oflhe Series 201 SA Bonds. If an audit is
commenced, under current procedures the Service may treat the City as a taxpayer and the Senes 20ISA
Bondholders may have no righl lo participale in such procedure 'fhe commencemenl of an audit could
adversely affect the market value and liquidity of the Series 201 SA Bonds until the audit is concluded,
regardless ofthe ultimate outcome
Payments of interest on, and proceeds of the sale, redemption or maturity of, lax-exempt
obligations, including the Series 20ISA Bonds, are in certain cases required lo be reported to the Service
Additionally, backup withholding may apply lo any such payments to any Series 20ISA Bond owner who
fails to provide an accurate Form W-9 Request for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification, or a
substantially identical form, or to any Series 20ISA Bond owner who is notified by the Service of a
failure to report any interesl or dividends required to be shown on federal income lax returns. The
reporting and backup withholding requiremenls do not affecl the excludability ofsuch inleresi from gross
income for federal tax purposes.
The Ta.xable Scries 2015B Bonds
Interest on the 'Taxable Scries 201 SB Bonds is includible in gross income for federal income
purposes. Ownership of the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds may result in other federal income tax
consequences lo certain laxpayers Taxable Series 20I5B Bondholders should consult their lax advisors
wilh respect to the inclusion of interest on the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds in gross income for federal
income tax purposes and any collateral lax consequences
'fhe City may deposit moneys or securities wilh a Defeasance Escrow Agent pursuant to Ihe
lernis oflhe Bond Ordinance in such amount and manner as to cause the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds to
be deemed to be no longer secured by the Bond Ordinance and the Indenlure under which Ihey are issued
(a "defeasance"). See APPENDIX A—"SUMMARY OF THE INDENTURES—Defeasance " A
defeasance of the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds may be treated as an exchange of the Taxable Series
201 SB Bonds by the holders Ihereof and may therefore result in gain or loss to the holders. Bondholders
should consult their own lax advisors about the consequences (if any) ofsuch a defeasance.
The Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds maturing on January 1, 2033 and January I , 2042 were sold lo
the public al a price below par. The amount ofthe discount was less than the amount that would be
treated under federal income tax law as creating original issue discount Bondholders should consult their
tax advisors concerning the accrual of income in each tax year.
State and Local ('onsiderations
Inlerest on ihe Bonds is nol exempt from present Stale of Illinois income laxes. Ownership ofthe
Bonds may resull in other stale and local lax consequences lo certain laxpayers Co-Bond Counsel
express no opinion regarding any such collateral consequences arising wilh respect lo ihc Bonds.
Prospective purcha.sers ofthe Bonds should consult their lax advisors regarding the applicability of any
such slaie and local taxes.
APPROVAL OF LEGAL MA T TERS
Certain legal mailers incident lo ihe auihonzalion, issuance and sale oflhe Bonds arc subject lo
the approving legal opinions of Co-Bond Counsel, who have been retained by, and act as. Bond Coun.sel
10 the City f.xccpt as noted below. Co-Bond Counsel have not been retained or consulted on disclosure

74

 matters and have not undertaken lo review or verify the accuracy, completeness or sufficiency of this
Official Slalcmcnl or olher offering malcrial relating lo the Bonds and assume no responsibility for the
staiemenls or information contained in or incorporated by reference in this Official Statemeni, except lhat
Co-Bond Counsel have, at the request and for the benefit oflhe City, reviewed only those portions oflhe
Official Siatemcnt involving the description ofthe Bonds, the security for the Bonds (excluding forecasts,
projections, estimates or any olher financial or economic information in connection therewith) and the
description ofthe federal tax status of interest on the Bonds. This review was undertaken solely at the
request oflhe City and did not include any obligation to establish or confirm factual matters sel forth
herein
Certain legal matters will be passed on for Ihe City by (i) its Corporation Counsel, (ii) in
conneclion with the preparation of this Official Statement, Duane Morris LLP, Chicago, Illinois, and
Shanahan & Shanahan LLP, Chicago, Illinois, Co-Disclosure Counsel lo the City, and (in) in conneclion
with certain pension matters described in this Official Statement, Chapman and Cutler LLP, Chicago,
Illinois, Special Disclosure Counsel. Certain legal matters will be passed on for ihe Underwriters by
Mayer Brown LLP, Chicago, Illinois, Underwriters' Counsel
SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE
The City will enter into a Conlinuing Disclosure Undertaking (the "Undertaking") for the benefit
oflhe beneficial owners oflhe Bonds lo send certain information annually and lo provide notice of certain
events to the Municipal Sccurilies Rulemaking Board (the "MSRB"') pursuant to the requirements of
Section (b)(S) of Rule 15c2-12 (the "Rule") adopted by the Commission under the E.xchangc Acl. The
MSRB has designated Us Eleclronic Municipal Market Access syslem, known as EMMA, as the system
to be u.sed for continuing disclosures to investors. The information to be provided on an annual basis, the
events that will be noticed on an occurrence basis and a summary of other terms ofthe Undertaking,
including termination, amendment and remedies, are set forth below
A failure by the City to coniply with the Undertaking will not constitute a default under the
Bonds, cither Indenture or the Bond Ordinance and beneficial owners of the Bonds are limited lo the
remedies described in the Undertaking. See "—Consequences of Failure of the City to Provide
Information" below. A failure by ihe Cily to comply wilh the Undertaking musl be reported in
accordance with the Rule and must be considered by any broker, dealer or municipal securities dealer
before recommending the purchase or sale ofthe Bonds in the .secondary' market Con.sequenlly, such a
failure may adversely affect the transferability and liquidity oflhe Bonds and their market price
The following is a brief summary of certain provisions of the Undertaking oflhe Cily and does
nol purport to be complete. The staiemenls made under this caption are subjecl lo the detailed provisions
ofthe Undertaking, a copy of which is available upon request from the CityAnnual Financial Information Disclosure
The Cuy covenants lhat it will disseminate its Annual Financial Information and its .Audited
Financial Staiemenls (as described below) lo the MSRB fhe Cily is rcc]uircd lo deliver such mformalion
so lhal the MSRB receives the infonnation by the dates .specified m the Undertaking.
"Annual Financial Information"' means mformalion generally consisleni with lhal contained in (i)
the financial table "General Fund " under the caption "FINANCIAL DISCUSSION AND ANALYSTSGeneral Fund—Selecled Financial Informauon^ (ii) the financial tables included under the caption
"FINANCIAL DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS—Properly 'faxes—i'/H-' and Property Ta.xesr and
"'—Use of Cuy Properly Tax levy." (in) the financial tables included under the caption "GENERAL

75

 OBLIGATION DEBT" (except for the table "Short Term Borrowing 2010-2014"), and (iv) tables 1-10
included in APPENDIX E—"RE'T1RJ.TMENT FUNDS'" (said tables collectively referred lo as (he " fhirdParty Sourced Retirement Fund Tables"). The information contained in the Third-Party Sourced
Retirement Fund Tables is sourced from documents published by MEABF, PABF, FABF and LABF, and
the City takes no responsibility for the accuracy and completeness ofsuch information Ifthe information
contained in the Ihird-Parly Sourced Rctircmcnl Fund 'fables is no longer publicly available or is nol
publicly available in the form, manner or time lhal the Annual Financial Information is required to be
disseminated by the City, the City shall, as part of its Annual Financial Information for the year in which
such a lack of availability arises, include a slalement lo lhat effecl and lo the effect lhat it will promptly
file such information as it becomes available
"Audited Financial Statements" means the audited basic financial statements ofthe City prepared
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to governmental units as in effect
from lime lo time
Annual Financial Information exclusive of Audited Financial Statements will be provided to the
MSRB not more than 210 days after the last day oflhe City's fiscal year, which currenlly is December 31.
If Audited Financial Statements are nol available when the Annual Financial Information is filed,
unaudited finaneial sialements will be included, and Audited Financial Statements will be filed within 30
days of availability lo the City.
Reportable Events Disclosure
The City covenants that it will disseminate in a timely manner, not in excess often business days,
to the MSRB the disclosure of the occurrence of a Reportable Event (defined below) Certain Reportable
Events are required to be disclosed only to the extent lhat such Reportable Event is material, as
materiality is interpreted under ihe Exchange Acl. The "Reportable Events," certain of which may not be
applicable lo the Bonds, arc:
(a) principal and interest payment delinquencies;
(b) non-payment related defaults, if material;
(c) unscheduled draws on debt service reserves reflecting financial difficulties,
(d) unscheduled draws on credit enhancements refiecting financial difficulties;
(e) substitution of credit or liquidity providers, or Iheir failure to perform,
(f) adverse tax opinions, the issuance by the Internal Revenue Service of proposed or final
delerminalions of taxability, notices of proposed issue (IRS Form 5701-TEB) or other material notices or
delernimalioiis with respect to the lax status ofthe Bonds, or olher material events affecting the tax status
oflhe Bonds.
(g) modifications to rights of security' holders, if material,
(h) bond calls, if material, and tender offers,
(I) defeasances,
(j) release, subslilulion or sale olproperty securing repayment ofthe securities, if material.

76

 (k) rating changes,
(I) bankruptcy, insolvency, receivership or similar evenl ofthe City (considered to have occurred
in the following instances' the appointment of a receiver, fiscal agent or similar officer for the City in a
proceeding under the U S Bankruptcy Code or in any olher proceeding under slate or federal law in
which a court or governmental authorir>' has assumed jurisdiction over subslanlially all of the assets or
business ofthe City, or if ihe jurisdiction oflhe City has been assumed by leaving the City Council and
the City's officials or officers in possession bul subject to ihe supervision and orders of a courl or
governmental authority, or the entry of an order confirming a plan of reorganization, arrangement or
liquidation by a court or governmental authority having supervision or jurisdiction over substantially all
ofthe assels or business oflhe City):
(ni)the consummation of a merger, consolidation, or acquisition involving the City or the sale of
all or substantially all oflhe assets of the Cily, other than in the ordinary course of business, the entry into
a definitive agreenient to undertake such an action or the tennination of a definitive agreement relating to
any such actions, other than pursuant lo its terms, if material; and
(n) appointment of a successor or additional truslee or the change of name of a truslee, if
material.
Consequences of Failure of ihe City to Provide Information
The City shall give notice in a timely manner to the MSRB of any failure to provide disclosure of
Annual Financial Information and Audited Financial Statements when the same are due under the
Undertaking
In the evenl of a failure of the City lo comply with any provision of the Undertaking, the
Beneficial Owner of any Bond may seek mandamus or specific performance by court order to cause the
City to coniply with ils obligations under the Undertaking The Undertaking provides lhat any court
aclion must be initialed in the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois A default under the Undertaking
shall nol be deemed a default under the Bonds, the Bond Ordinance or ihe applicable Indenlure, and the
sole remedy under Ihe Undertaking in the event of any failure of the City lo comply with the Undertaking
shall be an aclion to compel performance
Amendment; Waiver
Notwithstanding any other provision ofthe Undertaking, the City may amend the Undertaking,
and any provision oflhe Undertaking may be waived, i f
(a) (i) the amendment or the waiver is made in connection with a change in circumstances lhal
arises from a change in legal requiremenls, change in law, or change in the identity, nature or slams oflhe
Cily or lype of business conducted; (ii) the Undertaking, as amended, or the provision, as waived, would
have complied with the requirements oflhe Rule al the time oflhe offering ofthe Bonds, afier taking into
accounl any amendments or mterprclalioiis oflhe Rule, as well as any change in circumslaiices, and (in)
the amendment or waivei docs nol materially impair the interests ofthe Beneficial Owners oflhe Bonds,
as delermined by a party unaffiliated with the Cily (such as the Tmstee or Co-Bond Counsel), or by
apjirovmg vote oflhe Beneficial Owners ofthe Bonds pursuant to the terms oflhe Indcniures at the time
oflhe amendment, or
(b) the amendment or waiver is otherwise permitted by the Rule

77

 EMMA
All documents submitted lo the MSRB through EMMA pursuant to the Undertaking shall be in
eleclronic formal and accompanied by identifying information as prescribed by the MSRB, in accordance
with the Rule. All documents submitted lo the MSRB ihrough EMMA will be word-searchable PDFs,
configured to permit documents to be saved, viewed, printed and electronically retransniilted.
Termination of Undertaking
Ihc Undertaking shall be lerminaled ifthe Cily shall no longer have any legal liability I'or any
obligation on or relating lo repayment oflhe Bonds under the Bond Ordinance or the Indentures.
Additional Information
Nothing in the Undertaking will be deemed to prevent the City from disseminating any other
information, using the means of disseminalion set forth in the Undertaking or any olher means of
communication, or including any olher information in any Annual Financial Information or Audited
Financial Statements or nolice of occurrence of a Reportable Event, in addifion to that which is required
by the Undertaking If the City chooses to include any information in any Annual Financial Information
or Audited Financial Statements or nolice of occurrence of a Reportable Event in addition to lhal which is
specifically required by the Undertaking, the City shall have no obligation under the Lhidertaking lo
update such information or include it in any future Annual Financial Information or Audited Financial
Statements or notice of occurrence of a Reportable Event.
Corrective Action Related to Certain Bond Disclosure Requirements
'fhe City is in compliance in all material respects with undertakings previously entered into by it
pursuant lo the Rule, except insofar as any oflhe following paragraphs describe material non-compliance
During the period from 1996 through 2007, the City issued multiple series of Collateralized
Single Family Mortgage Revenue Bonds (the "Single Family Bonds"), 'fhe trustees for the respective
series of the Single Family Bonds are responsible for continuing disclosure filings as the City's
disseminalion agent under the applicable conlinuing disclosure undertakings A malcrial evenl notice was
not filed wilh respect to a tender offer occurring on June 29, 2011 with respect to the following series
2006C, 20061, 2007A, 2007G, 2007-2A, 2007-2C and 2007-2E
No annual report was filed by the Cily in 2010 wilh respect lo one subseries oflhe City's General
Obligation Direct Access Bonds. Annual reports were not filed by the Cily in 2010 with respect lo one
.series ofthe City's Chicago O'Hare Inlernalional Airport General Airport Revenue Bonds and one series
of Its Chicago O'Hare Internalional Airport Passenger Facility Charge Revenue Bonds. Annual reports
were not filed by ihe Cily in 2011 and 2012 with respect lo two series ofsuch bonds.
Willi respect lo the Cily's Collateralized Single Family Mortgage Revenue Bonds, Series 2006A
(the "Series 2006A Bonds''), S&P lowered its rating on the Series 2006A Bonds from "AA-i" lo "AA"
and placed the Series 2006A Bonds on "Credit Watch with negative implications" effective rjeceinber 16.
2011 'fhe Cily did nol cause the truslee as dissemination agent to file a notice of a reportable event with
EMMA at that lime Subsequently, S&P upgraded the raling on the Series 2006A Bonds from ".AA" to
"AA-i" effective March 12. 2012. On March 18, 2012, S&P removed the "Credit Watch with negalive
miplicalions" characterization from the Series 2006A Bonds
'fhe City caused the trustee, as
dissemination agenf for the Series 2()06A Bonds lo file a nolice of a reportable event with EMMA on
March 26, 2012 disclosing the downgrade and subsequent upgrade oflhe Series 2006A Bonds by S&P

78

 With respect lo the City's Chicago O'Hare Internalional Airport General Airport Third Lien
Revenue Bonds, Series 2011, American Airlines is an "obligated per.son" with respect lo such bonds On
November 29, 2011, AMR Corporation (the parent company of American Airlines and American Eagle)
and certain of Us United States-based subsidiaries (including American Airlines and American Eagle)
filed voluntary petitions for Chapter 11 reorganization in the United Stales Bankruptcy Court for the
Southern Dislricl of New York 'The City filed a notice with EMMA wilh rcspccl lo this event on March
30, 2012 (not wilhin the ten business-day deadline imposed by the Rule). On December 9, 2013,
American Airlines merged with US Airways The City filed a notice with EMMA with respect lo this
event on August 25, 2014
With respect lo the City's Outstanding Motor Fuel Tax Revenue Bonds, the City's pledge of
Additional City Revenues lo the paymenl of such bonds (in addition to the pledge of Motor Fuel Tax
Revenues) became effective as of March 19, 2013. The City filed a notice with EMMA describing the
pledge of this additional source of revenue on May 16, 2013.
With respect to the City's Outstanding O'Hare International Airport Customer Facility Charge
Senior Lien Revenue Bonds, Series 2013, Simply Wheelz, LLC d/b/a Advantage Rent A Car
("Advantage") is an "obligated person" with respect to such bonds Advantage filed a voluntary
bankruptcy petition in the Southern District of Mississippi on November 5, 2013. The Cily filed a notice
wilh EMMA wilh respect lo this event on December 5, 2013.
The Rating Agencies look certain raling actions with respect to the ratings of Ambac Assurance
Corporation and Financial Security Assurance Inc (collectively, the "Bond Insurers"). The Bond Insurers
provided municipal bond insurance policies relating lo certain series of the City's Chicago Midway
Airport revenue bonds Event notices wilh respect to such raling changes were nol filed wilh EMMA.
The City made such filings on May 22, 2014.
Ambac provided a municipal bond insurance policy relating to the Cily's Motor Fuel Tax
Revenue Bonds, Series 2003A and Assured Guaranty Corp. provided municipal bond insurance policies
relating to the City's Motor Fuel Tax Revenue Bonds, Series 2008. Event notices wilh respect lo the
raling changes taken by the Raling Agencies with respect lo Ihese insurers were nol filed The City made
filings \vith EMMA on June 3, 2014 and August 22, 2014 with respect lo these raling changes.
•fhe City failed lo file material evenl notices with respect to certain raling changes affecting the
City's bonds subject to ihe Rule and for which the City is an "obligated person" under the Rule
(colieclively, the "Prior Bonds") or affecting bond insurance companies which insured any Pnor Bonds
(collectively, the "Bond Insurers") The City filed with EMMA on August 29, 2014 a notice with respect
to all rating changes known lo the City and affecting the Prior Bonds (including ccrlain Senior Lien
Bonds and Second Lien Bonds) occurring over the prior ten years. The City filed with EMMA on August
27, 2014 a notice with respect lo all rating changes known to the City and affecting the Bond Insurers
occurring during the prior seven years

79

 MISCELLANEOUS
The summaries or descriptions conlained herein of provisions of the Indentures and ihe
Undertaking and all references lo other materials not purporting to be quoted in full, are qualified in their
entirety by reference lo the complete provisions of the documenls and olher materials summarized or
described Copies of these documents may be obtained from the office oflhe Chief Financial Officer
The Bonds are aulhorized and are being issued pursuant lo the City Counci 's approval under the
powers ofthe City as a home rule unit under Article VII oflhe Illinois Constitution.
CTTY OF CHICAGO
By: /s/ Carole L. Brown
Carole L. Brown
Chief Financial Officer

80

  

APPENDIX A

SUMMARY OF THE 

 

 PAGE INTENTIONAI.I.Y LEFT 

SUMMARY OFTHE

INDENTURES

The following IS a siimmaiy of certain provisions oflhe Indentures lo which reference is made for
a complete .slalement oflhe provisions and contents ihereof. The provisions ofthe Indentures summarized
in this Appendix .A are suhstaniially similar in each oflhe Indentures. References to "ihe Bonds " /// this
Appendix A shall refer lo the Bonds of a Series issued pursuant to a particular Indenlure. References lo
"the Trustee"' in ihis Appendix A shall refer lo the Truslee.for the Bonds of a Series issued pursuant to a
particular Indenture. Copies of the Indentures are available for review prior lo the sate and dehveiy of
Ihe Bonds al the office of Ihe City's Chief Financial Officer and thereafter al the office of tlie applicable
Truslee.
Glossary of Terms
The following are definitions of certain terms used in the Indenture and this Official Statement.
This glossaiy is provided for the convenience of the reader and does not purport to be comprehensive or
definitive. All references herein to lernis defined in the Indenture are qualified in their entirety by the
definitions set forth in the Indenlure.
"Authorized Denomination" means (a) with respect to Series 20ISA Bonds, $5,000 and any
integral mulliple thereof, and (b) wilh respect to Taxable Series 201 SB Bond.s, $1,000 and any integral
multiple thereof
"Aulhorized Officer" means (a) the Mayor, Ihe Chief Financial Officer, the Cily Comptroller or
any other ofiicial of the Cily so designaled by a Certificate signed by the Mayor or Chief Financial
Officer and filed with the Trustee for so long as such designation shall be in effect, and (b) the City Clerk
with respect lo the certification of any ordinance or resolution oflhe City Council or any olher document
filed in his or her office
"Beneficial Owner" means the owner of a beneficial inlerest in the Bonds registered in the name
of Cede & Co., as nominee of DTC (or a successor securities depository or nominee for either of them)
"Bond Counsel" means one or more firms of nationally recognized bond counsel designated by
the Corporation Counsel ofthe Cily
"Bond Fund" means the fund of lhal name established and described in the Indenture.
"Bondholder," "holder," or "owner of the Bonds" means the Registered Owner or Beneficial
Owner of any Bond, as the case may be.
"Bond Ordinance" means the ordinance duly adopted by the City Council oflhe City on June 17,
2015 authorizing the issuance oflhe Bonds
" Bond Register"' means Ihe registration books of the Cily kept by Ihe frustee to evidence the
registration and transfer of Bonds
"Bond Year"' means a 12-monlh period commencing on January 2 of each calendar year and
ending on lanuary I of the nexl succeeding calendar year
"Business DaN " means any day olher than (a) a Saturday or Sunday, (ii) a day on which banks
located m the city where the Designated Corporate 'frust Office oflhe Trustee is located are autlioir/ed or
required by law to close, and (in) a day on which The New York Slock Exchange, Inc , is closed

A-l

 "Certificate" means an instrument of the Cily in writing signed by an Authorized Officer Any
such instrument in \vrUing and supporting opinions or representations, if any, may, but need not, be
combined in a single instrument with any olher instrument, opinion or representation, and the two or more
so combined shall be read and construed so as to form a single instrument Any such instrument may be
based, insofar as il relates lo legal, accounting or engineering matters, upon the opinion or representation
of counsel, accounlanls, or engineers, respectively, unless the officer signing such instrument knows lhat
the opinion or representation with respect lo the matters upon which such instrument may be based, as
aforesaid, is erroneous, fhe same Authorized Officer, or the same counsel or accountant or olher persons,
as the case may be, need nol certify lo all ofthe matters required to be certified under any provision oflhe
Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture, bul different officers, counsel, accountants or other persons
may certify to different facts, respectively.
"Chief Financial Officer" means the Chief Financial Officer appointed by the Mayor, or the City
Comptroller of the City at any time a vacancy exi.sts in the office ofthe Chief Financial Officer.
"City" means the City of Chicago, a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local
government, organized and existing under the Constitution and laws ofthe State.
"City Clerk" means the duly qualified and acting City Clerk of the City or any Deputy City Clerk
or other person that may lawfully take a specific action or perform a specific duty prescribed for the City
Clerk pursuant lo the Bond Ordinance
"Cilv Comptroller" means ihe City Comptroller ofthe City.
"Cilv Council" means the City Council ofthe City.
"Code" means the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986. References to the Code and to
Sections of the Code shall include relevant final, temporary or proposed regulations thereunder as in
ellcct from time to time and as applicable to obligations issued on the Date of Issuance.
"Dale of Issuance" means the dale of issuance and delivery oflhe Bonds lo the initial purchasers
ihereof
"Debl Management Proiect" when used with respect lo an Indenlure means (i) the payment of
costs oflhe Debt Management Purposes identified in and being paid wilh proceeds ofthe Bonds issued
pursuanl lo such Indenlure and (ii) any olher expenditure of proceeds of the Bonds issued pursuant lo
such Indenture authorized afier the date of execution and delivery ofsuch Indenlure by the City Council,
which expenditure, in the case of proceeds oflhe Series 20 ISA Bonds, must be in accordance with the
provisions oflhe 'fax Agreement.
"Debt Management Purposes" has llie meaning assigned lo such term in the Bond Ordinance and
generally refers to the purpose I'or which the Bonds of each Series are authorized to be issued
"Defeasance Obligations" means (I) money, or (2) (A) direct obligations oflhe United Stales of
America, (B) obligations of agencies oflhe United Slates of America, the timely paymenl of principal of
and interest on which are guaranteed by the Umled States of America, (C) obligations oflhe following
government-sponsored agencies that are not backed by the full faith and credit oflhe U S. Goveinment
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp (FHLMC) debl obligafions. Farm Credit System (formerly. Federal
Land Banks. Tederal Iniermediaie Credit Banks, and Banks for Cooperatives) debl obligations. Federal
Home Loan Banks (FHL Banks) debl obligations, Fannie Mae debl obligations, Financing Corp (FICO)
debt obligations. Resolution Funding Corp (REFCORP) debt obligations, and U S Agency for

A-

 International Development (US A I D ) Guaranteed notes, (D) pre-refunded municipal obligations
defined as follows, any bonds or other obligations of any slale ofthe United Stales of America or of any
agency, instrumenlality or local governmental unit of any such state which are not callable al the option of
the obligor prior to maturity or as to vvhich irrevocable instructions have been given by the obligor lo call
on the dale specified in the nolice, or (E) inslrumeiils evidencing an ownership interest in obligations
described in the preceding clauses (A), (B) and (C), or (3) a combination ofthe inveslments described in
clau.ses (I) and (2) above
"Designated Corporate Trusl Office"' means the corporate trust oftlce ofthe Truslee located al the
address of the Trustee set forth for nolices lo the Truslee in the Indenlure, as such address may be
changed from lime to time by the frustee
"DTC" means The Depository Trusl Company, New York, New York, or Us nominee, and its
successors and assigns, or any olher depository performing similar functions
"Federal Obligation" means any direct obligation of, or any obligation the full and timely
payment of principal of and inleresi on which is guaranteed by, the United States of America.
"Fitch" means Filch Ratings Inc., a corporation organized and existing under ihe laws ofthe Slate
of Delaware, ils successors and assigns, and, if such corporation shall be dissolved or liquidated, or shall
no longer perform the functions of a securities rating agency, "Filch" shall be deemed to refer lo any other
nationally recognized securities rating agency designated by the Cily by nolice to the Trustee
"Indenlure" means the Trust Indenture dated as of July I , 2015, between the City and the Trustee
"Inlerest Payment Dale" means each January I and July 1, commencing January I, 2016
"Kroll" means Kroll Bond Raling Agency, ils successors and assigns, and, if such corporation
shall be dissolved or liquidated or shall no longer perform the functions of a securities rating agency,
"Kroll" shall be deemed to refer to any other nationally recognized securilies rating agency designated by
the Cily by notice to the Trustee
"Maturity Dale" means, for the Bonds of each specified maturity, the applicable malurily date sel
forth on the inside front cover
"Mayor" means the Mayor of the City
"Municipal Code" means the Municipal Code of Chicago, as from lime lo lime amended
"Opinion of Bond Counsel" means a written opinion of Bond Counsel in form and substance
acceptable to llie Cily.
"Outstanding." means, when used with reference lo any Bonds, all of such obligations issued
under the Indenture lhat are unpaid, provided that such term does not include
(a) Bonds canceled al or prior to such dale or delivered to or acquired by the Trustee or
Paying Agent at or prior to such date for cancellation;
(b) matured or redeemed Bonds which have not been presented for paymenl in
accordance with the provisions of the Indenture and for ihc payment of which Ihc City has
deposited funds wiih the fruslcc or the Paying Agent,

A-3

 (c) Bonds for which the Cily has provided for payment by depositing in an irrevocable
trust or escrow, cash or Defeasance Obligations, in each case, the maturing principal of and
interest on which will be sufficient to pay at maturity, or if called for redemption on the
applicable redemption date, ihe principal of, redemplion premium, if any, and interest on such
Bonds,
(d) Bonds in lieu of or in exchange or substitution for which other Bonds shall have been
aulhenlicaled and delivered pursuanl to the Indenlure; and
(c) Bonds owned by the City and tendered to the Trustee for cancellation.
"Paying Agent" means the 'Trustee and any successor thereto.
"Permuted Inveslments" means any ofthe following obligations or securities permitted under the
laws of the Slate and the Municipal Code.
(a) interest-bearing general obligations ofthe United States of America, the State or the
City,
(b) Uniled Slates treasury bills and olher non-interest bearing general obligations ofthe
United Stales of America when offered for sale in the open market at a price below the face value
of same, so as to afford the Cily a return on such invcslincnt in lieu of interest;
(c) short-term discount obligations of the United States Government or United Stales
Government agencies;
(d) certificates of deposit of national banks or banks located within the City which are
either (i) fully collateralized al least 110 percent by marketable United Stales Government
securities marked lo markel al least monthly or (ii) secured by a corporate surety bond issued by
an insurance company licensed lo do business in the State and having a claim.s-paying raling in
the top raling category as rated by a nationally recognized statistical raling organization and
maintaining such rating during the term ofsuch investment;
(e) banker's acceptances of banks and commercial paper of banks whose senior
obligations are rated in the top two short-term raling categories by al least two national rating
agencies and maintaining such rating during the term ofsuch invesimenl,
(0 lax-exempt securilies exempt from federal arbitrage provisions applicable lo
investments of proceeds oflhe City's tax-exempt debt obligations;
(g) domestic money market mutual funds regulated by and in good standing with the
Securilies and Exchange Commission, including any such fund for which the Trustee or any of its
al/lliatcs provides any scnncc including any service for vvhich a fee may be paid; and
(h) an\' Olher suitable investment instrument pcimitlcd by State laws and Ihc Municipal
Code governing municipal inveslments generally, subjecl lo the reasonable exercise of prudence
in making investments of public funds.
"Principal and Interesl Account" means the Account ofthal name established within the Bond
-und

A-4

 "Principal and Inicrest Accounl Rcquiremcnl" means an amounl, equal to the lolal principal
installment and interesl due on such Bonds as of each January 1 and July 1 (including any mandatory
redemption ofthe Bonds), which aniount shall be deposited in the Principal and Interesl Accounl not later
than the Business Day prior lo such January I and July 1.
" Qualified Collateral" means.
(a) Federal Obligations;
(b) direct and general obligations of any stale of the United States of America or any
political subdivision ofthe Stale which are rated nol less than "AA" or "Aa2" or their equivalents
by any Rating Agency, and
(c) public housing bonds issued by public housing authorities and fully secured as to the
payment of both principal and interest by a pledge of annual contributions under an annual
contributions contract or contracts with the Uniled States of America, or project notes issued by
public housing authorities, or project noles issued by local public agencies, in each case fully
secured as to the payment of both principal and inlerest by a requisition or paymenl agreemenl
wilh the Uniled States of America.
"Raling Agency" means any of Fitch, S&P and Kroll, or another rating agency that has a credit
raling assigned lo the Bonds al the request of the City.
"Record Dale" means each June 15 and December 15 (whether or not a Business Day)
"Redemption Price" means (i) in the ca.se of an optional redemption of Ta.xable Series 20I5B
Bonds due on or before January I, 2033, the Make-Whole Redemption Price, and (ii) in the case of an
opiional rcdempuon oflhe Series 20 ISA Bonds or the 'Taxable Scries 201 SB Bonds due January I , 2042,
or a mandatory redemption of the Bonds, the principal amount thereof plus accrued interesl on such
Bonds to be redeemed to the date fixed for redemption.
"Registered Owner" or "Owner" means the person or persons in whose name or names a Bond
shall be registered in the Bond Register.
"Securilies Depository" means DTC and any other securities depository registered as a clearing
agency wilh the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to Section I7A of the Securities
Exchange Acl of 1934, as amended, and appointed as Ihc securities depository for the Bonds.
"S&P" means Standard & Poor's Financial Services LLC, a division of McGraw Hill Financial,
Inc , lis successors and assigns, and, if S&P shall be dissolved or liquidated or shall no longer perl'orm the
functions of a securities rating agency. "S&P" shall be deemed lo refer to any other nationally recognized
securities raling agency designated by the Cit>' by notice lo the Trustee.
"Slate" means the Stale of Illinois
"Supplemental IndeiUuie" means any indenture modifying, altering, amending, supplementing or
confirming the Indenlure duly entered into in accordance with the terms Ihereof
""Tax Agreemenl'" means the Tax Exemption Certificate and Agreemenl of the C'lly, daled ihe
date of issuance of the Series 20 ISA Bonds

A-S

 "'frust Estate" means the property conveyed lo the 'fruslcc pursuanl to the Granting Clauses of
the Indenlure.
"Trustee" means Zions First National Bank, a national banking association with trusl powers, and
Its successors and any enlily resulting from or surviving any consolidation or merger to which it or its
successors may be a party, and any successor Trustee at the time serving as successor trustee under the
Indenlure.
Source of Payment of Bonds
Pursuant to the Bond Ordinance, the Bonds constitute direct and general obligations of the Cily
for the paymenl of which the City pledges its full failh and credit. See "SECURITY FOR 'THE BONDS."
Funds and Accounts
Bond Fund
Pursuanl to each Indenture, the City has established with the Trustee a trust fund designated "City
of Chicago General Obligalion Bonds, Series 2015 Bond Fund" (the "Bond Fund"). At each such time
as required under the Indenlure, the City shall deposit into the Bond Fund, from funds of the City legally
available therefor, an amounl sufficient lo satisfy the Principal and Inlerest Account Requirement
applicable to the Bonds issued under such Indenture. Money on deposit in the Bond Fund shall be
applied by the Trustee to pay the principal of (whether due at maturity or by mandatory redemption) and
interest on such Bonds as the same become due Pending the use of moneys held in the Bond Fund, the
Trustee shall invest such moneys in Permitted Investments upon the direction of an Authorized Officer or
any person designated by an Authorized Officer. Income from such investments shall be credited to such
Bond Fund Each Indenture also provides that an accounl wilhin the Bond Fund be established with the
'Trustee, designaled as Ihe "Series 2015 Principal and Inlerest Account" (the "Principal and Interest
Account").
Not later than the Business Day prior to each Interest Payment Date, commencing January I .
2016 (each such dale referred to herein as the "Deposit Date") there shall be on deposit in the Bond Fund
(which deposit may include amounts from the Capitalized Interest Account described below) an aniount
equal to the Principal and Inleresi Account Requirement applicable to the Bonds issued under such
Indenture (such amounl with respect lo any Deposit Date being referred lo herein as the "'Deposit
Requirement").
In addition lo the Deposit Requirement, there shall be deposited into each Bond Fund any olher
moneys received by the Trustee under and pursuant to the Indenlure, when accompanied by directions
from the person depositing such moneys that such moneys are to be paid into such Bond Fund.
Upon calculation by the Truslee of each Deposit Requirement, the Trustee shall notify the City of
the Deposit Requirement and the Deposit Dale lo winch it relates, and shall provide the City vvith such
supporting documentation and calculations as the City may reasonably request
Capitalized Interest Account
Puisuanl to each Indenture, the City has established with the frustee a trust accounl as part ofthe
respective Bond Fund for each Series designated "Cily of Chicago General Obligalion Bonds, Series
20I5_ Capitalized Inlerest .^ccounl" (the "Capitalized Inlerest .-iccouiil") lo hold certain proceeds of sale
ot the Bonds oflhe Series issued pursuant to such Indenture Moneys on deposit in the Capitalized

A-6

 Interest Account shall be withdrawn by the frustee on the Business Day prior lo each of the Inleresi
Paynient Dales occurring on and before January I , 2018 and deposited into the Bond Fund established
under such Indenture for application to the payment ofthe interest due on the Bonds issued under such
Indenlure on those Inleresi Payment Dates Pending the use of moneys held in the Capitalized Inlerest
Accounl, the Trustee shall invest such moneys in Permitted Investments upon the direction of an
Aulhorized Officer or any person designated by an Authorized Officer. Income from such investments
shall be transferred lo the Project Account established under such Indenture. Any amount remaining in
the Capitalized Interest Accounl on January 2, 2018, shall be withdrawn therefrom and deposited into the
Bond Fund established under such Indenture and applied to the payment ofthe nexl interest to become
due on the Bonds ofsuch Series.
Project Account
Pursuanl lo each Indenture, the City has eslablished wilh the 'i'rustee a irusl account designated
"City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Series 20I5_ Project Account" (the "Project Accounl") to
hold certain proceeds of sale of the Bonds of the Series issued pursuant to such Indenture. Moneys
deposited in the Project Accounl established under such Indenture shall be used (i) to pay cosls of the
Debl Managemenl Project identified in such Indenture, and/or (ii) to pay costs of issuance ofthe Bonds
issued pursuant to such Indenture Moneys on deposit in the Project Accounl shall be disbursed by the
Trustee upon receipt of a written request therel'or executed by an Authorized Officer, specifying the
purpose for which such disbursement is being made. Pending the use of moneys held in the Project
Account, the Truslee shall invest such moneys in Permilled Jnveslments upon the direction of an
Authorized Officer or any person designated by an Authorized Officer. Income from such investments
shall be retained in such Project Accounl Completion of the Debt Management Project identified in such
Indenture shall be evidenced by a written notification lo the 'Trustee executed by an Authorized Officer
directing ihe Trustee to transfer any remaining balance in such Project Account to the Bond Fund
established under such Indenture and applied lo the payment of the next inlerest lo become due on the
Bonds ofsuch Series.
Supplemental Indentures
A Supplemental Indenture may be aulhorized at any time by ordinance ofthe City Council and
shall be fully effective in accordance wilh ils terms and nol subjecl to consent by the Owners oflhe Bonds
for the following purposes, (a) to add to the covenants and agreements ofthe City in the Indenture other
covenanls and agreements lo be observed by the Cily which arc not contrary to or inconsislenl with the
Indenture as theretofore in effecl, (b) to add to the limitations and reslriclioiis m the Indenlure olher
limitations and restrictions lo be observed by the City which are nol contrary to or inconsistent with the
Indenture as iherelofore in effect, (c) to surrender any right, power or privilege reserved lo or conferred
upon the City by the terms oflhe Indenture, bul only if the surrender ofsuch right, power or privilege is
not contraiy lo or inconsistent with the covenants and agreemenls oflhe City contained in the Indenture,
(d) lo confirm, as further assurance, the pledge under the Indenlure, and the subjection of, additional
properties, laxes or other collateral lo any lien, claim or pledge created or lo be created by, the Indenture,
(e) lo cure an)- ambiguit\', supply any omission, or cure or correct any defect or inconsistent provision in
the Indenture. (Q lo insert such provisions clarifying mailers or questions arising under the Indenture as
are necessary or desirable and are not contrary lo or inconsistent with the Indenlure as theretofore in
effect, or (g) to provide additional duties oflhe I rusiee under the Indenture
The Indenture shall nol be modified or amended in any respect cxeepl us provided therein
Nothing m the Indenture shall affecl or limil the right or obligation of the Cily to adopt, make, do.
execute, acknowledge or deliver any ordinance, resolution, act or other mstrumenl pursuanl to the

A-7

 provisions oflhe Indenture or the right or obligation oflhe Cily lo execute and deliver to the 'Trustee any
instrument which is required to be delivered to the Truslee pursuant to the Indenture.
Every Supplemental Indenture delivered lo ihe Truslee for execution shall be accompanied by an
opinion of counsel staling that such Supplemental Indenture has been duly and lawfully authorized by the
City Council and executed by Ihe City in accordance with the provisions ofthe Indenture, is authorized or
permitted by the Indenture, and will, when executed and delivered by the Truslee, be valid and binding
upon the City and enforceable in accordance with us terms.
The Trustee is aulhorized lo enter into, cxeculc and deliver a Supplemental Indenture and lo make
all further agreemenls and stipulations which may be therein conlained, and the Trustee in taking such
aclion shall be fully protected in relying on an opinion of counsel that such Supplemental Indenture is
authorized or permitted by the provisions oflhe Indenture.
No Supplemental Indenture shall change or modify any of the rights or obligations ofthe Trustee
without ils written assent Ihereto.
No Supplemental Indenlure supplementing the Indenture authorizing the Series 20I5A Bonds
shall lake effect unless and until there has been delivered to the Trustee an Opinion of Bond Counsel to
the effect that such Supplemental Indenture does not adversely affect the exclusion from gross income for
federal income tax purposes to which inleresi on the Series 20ISA Bonds would otherwise be entitled.
Supplemental Indentures Requiring Bondholder Consent
At any lime or from lime lo time, a Supplemental Indenture may be aulhorized by an ordinance
adopted by the City Council, subjecl to consent by the owners of Bonds in accordance with and subject to
the provisions ofthe Indenlure, which Supplemental Indenture, upon the filing with the Trustee of a copy
ofsuch ordinance certified by the City Clerk, upon compliance wilh the provisions oflhe Indenture, and
upon execution and delivery of such Supplemental Indenture by the City and the Trustee, shall become
fully effective in accordance with its terms.
Any modification or amendmenl of the Indenture or ofthe rights and obligations oflhe Cily and
of the owners of Bonds, in particular, which requires the consent ofthe Bondholders, may be made by a
Supplemental Indenture, with the wrillen consent given as provided in the Indenture (a) ofthe Owners of
a majority in principal amounl oflhe Bonds Outstanding al the time such consent is given; or (b) in case
less than all oflhe then outstanding Bonds are affected by the modification or amendment, ofthe Owners
of a majority in principal amount of the then Outstanding Bonds so affeclcd. No such modification or
amendmenl shall permil a change in the terms of redemption or malurily of the principal of any
outslanding Bonds or of any installment of inicrest thereon or a reduction in the principal amount or the
applicable Redemption Price thereof or in the rale of interesl thereon, withoul the consent oflhe Owner of
such Bonds, or shall reduce the percentages or otherwise affect the classes of Bonds the consent ofthe
Owners of which is required lo effecl any such modification or amendment, or shall change or niodily any
oflhe rights or obligations ofthe Truslee without Us writlen assent Ihereto. A Bond shall be deemed to be
affected by a modification or amendment ofthe Indenture if the same adversely affects or diminishes the
righls ofthe Owners ofsuch Bond
Default and Remedies
Each ofthe following evcnls is an "Event of Default" under the Indenture

A-8

 (a) paymenl oflhe principal or Redemplion Price, if any, of any Bonds shall nol be made when
and as the same shall become due, whether al maturily or upon call for redemption or olherwise;
(b) paymenl of any installment of interesl on any Bonds shall not be made when and as the same
shall become due; or
(c) the Cily shall fail or refuse lo comply with the provisions ofthe Indenture, or shall default in
the performance or observance of any oflhe covenanls, agreenients or conditions on its part contained in
the Indenlure or in the Bond.s, which materially affects the rights oflhe owners oflhe Bonds and such
failure, refusal or default shall continue for a period of 45 days afier written notice thereofby the Truslee
or the owners of not less than 25 percent in principal amount of the Outstanding Bonds; provided,
however, that in the case of any such default which can be cured by due diligence but which cannot be
cured within the 4S-day period, the lime lo cure shall be extended for such period as may be necessary to
remedy the default with all diligence
Upon the happening and continuance of any Event of Default specified in paragraph (a) or (b)
above, the Trustee shall proceed, or upon the happening and conlinuancc of any Event of Default (beyond
the time periods specified therein) specified in paragraph (c) above, the Trustee may proceed, and upon
the written request of the owners of not less than 25 percent in principal amount of the Outstanding
Bonds, shall proceed, in its own name, to protect and enforce its righls and the righls oflhe owners oflhe
Bonds by such of the following remedies as the Trustee, being advised by counsel, shall deem most
effectual to protect and enforce such rights
(i) by mandamus or other suit, action or proceeding at law or in equity, lo enforce all
rights ofthe owners ofthe Bonds including the righl lo require the City to receive and collect
taxes adequate to cany out the covenants and agreements as to such taxes and to require the City
lo carry out any other covenant or agreement with the owners of the Bonds and to perfonn its
duties under the Indenture,
(II) by bringing suit upon the Bonds;
(ill) by action or suit in equity, require the City to account as if it were the truslee of an
express trusl for the owners oflhe Bonds, and/or
(iv)by aclion or suit in equity, enjoin any acts or things which may be unlawful or in
violation oflhe righls oflhe owners oflhe Bonds
In the enforcemenl of any righls and remedies under the Indenlure, the Truslee shall be entitled lo
sue for, enforce payment of and receive any and all amounis then or during any default becoming, and at
any lime remaining, due from the City hut only out of moneys pledged as security for the Bonds for
principal. Redemplion Price, inleresi or otherwise, under any provision oflhe Indenture or oflhe Bonds,
and unpaid, with interest on overdue paymenis at the rale or rales of interest specified in such Bonds,
together with any and all cosls and expenses of collection and of all proceedings hereunder and under
such Bonds without prejudice to any olher right or remedy ofthe 'frustee or oflhe owners ofthe Bonds,
and lo recover and enforce a judgment or decree against the Cily for any portion of such amounts
remaining unpaid, with inicrest, costs and expenses, and to collect from any moneys available under the
Indenlure for such purpose in any manner provided by law. the moneys adjudged or decreed to be
payable

A-9

 Under no circumstance may the Trustee declare Ihc principal of or interesl on the Bonds to be due
and payable prior to the Maturity Dale following the occurrence of an Event of Default under the
Indenture.
Resignation or Removal ofthe Trustee; Successors
The Trustee may al any lime resign and be discharged of ils duties and obligations created by the
Indenlure by giving not fewer than 60 days' written notice to the Cily and lo the owners of Bonds at their
addresses shown on the registration books kept by the Truslee within 20 days afler the giving of such
wntten notice. Such resignation shall take effect upon the appointment and acceptance of appointment of
a successor by the City or the Owners of Bonds as provided in the Indenture
The Trustee may be removed at any lime by the Owners of a majority in principal amount oflhe
Bonds then Outstanding, excluding any Bonds held by or for the account ofthe City, by an instrument or
concurrent instruments in wriiing signed and duly acknowledged by such Owners of Bonds or by their
allorneys duly aulhorized in wriiing and delivered lo the City. Copies of each such instrument shall be
delivered by the City to the Trustee and any successor The Cily may remove the Trustee al any time,
except during the existence of an Event of Default, tor such cause (or upon 30 days' notice for any
reason) as shall be determined in the sole discretion of the City by filing with the Trustee an instrument
signed by an Authorized Officer and by mailing notice Ihereof to the Owners of Bonds al their addresses
shown on the regislralion books kept by the Truslee. Any removal ofthe Truslee shall lake effect upon
the appointment and acceptance of appointment of a successor Tru.stee.
In case at any lime the Trustee shall resign or shall be removed or shall become incapable of
acting, or shall be adjudged a bankrupt or insolvent, or if a receiver, liquidator or conservator oflhe
Trustee or of its properly shall be appointed, or il" any public officer shall lake charge or control oflhe
Truslee or of its property or affairs, a successor may be appointed by the Ovvners of a majority in
principal amount of the Bonds then Outstanding, excluding any Bonds held by or for the account of the
Cily, by an inslrumeni or concurrent instruments in writing signed by such Owners or their attorneys duly
authorized in writing and delivered lo such successor Truslee, nolification Ihereof being given lo the Cily
and the predecessor Trustee. Pending such appointment, the City shall forthwith appoint a Trustee to fill
such vacancy until a successor Truslee (if any) shall be appointed by the Owners of Bonds as aulhorized
in the Indenlure. The City shall mail notice to Owners of Bonds of any such appointmenl wilhin 20 days
after such appointment. Any successor Trustee appointed hy the Cily shall, immediately and without
further acl, be superseded by a Irustcc appointed by ihc Owners of Bonds. If in a proper case no
appointment of a successor Truslee shall be made within 45 days after the Trustee shall have given lo the
Cily written notice of resignation or afier the occurrence of any olher event requiring or authorizing such
appointment, the Truslee, any Owner of Bonds may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction lo
appoint a successor Said court may thereupon, after such notice, if any, as said court may deem proper
and prescribe, appoint such successor Trustee Any Trustee appointed shall be a bank, trust company or
national banking association, in any such case having corporate trusl powers, doing business and having a
corporate trust office in the City
Any successor 'fruslcc appointed under the Indenture shall execute, acknowledge and deliver to
Us predecessor Trustee, and also lo ihe City, a wrillen instrument of acceptance respecting such
appointmenl, and thereupon such successor I'rustee, without any further acl, deed or conveyance, shall
bceome fully vested with all moneys, estates, jjroperties. rights, powers, duties and obligations ofsuch
predecessor 'fruslcc, with like effect as if originally named as 'Trustee, bul the Truslee ceasing lo acl shall
nevertheless, on the request oflhe City, or ofthe successor frustee, execute, acknowledge and deliver
such instruments of conveyance and further assurance and do such olher things as may reasonably be
required for more fullv and certainly vesting and confirming m such successor I rustcc all Ihc right, title

A-IO

 and interest ofthe predecessor Trustee in and lo any properly held by il under the Indenlure, and shall pay
over, assign and deliver to the successor frustee any money or olher property subject lo the trusts and
conditions sel forth in the Indenture Should any deed, conveyance or instrument in writing from the City
be required by such successor Trustee for more fully and certainly vesting in and confirming lo such
successor 'frusiee any such estates, righls, powers and duties, any and all such deeds, conveyances and
instruments in writing shall, on request, and so far as may be aulhorized by law, be executed,
acknowledged and delivered by the City.
Defeasance
Each Indenlure provides lhal ifthe City will pay lo the Registered Owners of the Bonds issued
under such Indenlure, or provide for the paymenl of, the principal, premium, if any, and inlerest to
become due on such Bonds, then Ihe Indenture and the Bond Ordinance will be fully discharged and
satisfied with respect to such Bonds. Upon the satisfaction and discharge of the Indenture, the 'Trustee
will, upon the request ofthe City, execute and deliver to the City all such instruments as may be desirable
to evidence such discharge and satisfaction, and allfiduciarieswill pay over or deliver to the City all
funds, accounts and other moneys or secunties held by them pursuanl to the Indenture which are nol
required for the payment or redemption oflhe Bonds If paymenl or provision for paymcni is made, to or
for the Registered Owners of all or a portion of the Bonds, of the principal of and interest due and to
become due on any Bond al the limes and in the manner stipulated therein, and there is paid or caused to
be paid to the 'Trustee, all sums of money due and to become due according to the provisions of the
Indenture, then these presents and the estate and rights thereby granted under the Indenture and the Bond
Ordinance shall cease, terminate and be void as lo those Bonds or portions thereof except for purposes of
regislralion, transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations.
Any Bond will be deemed lo be paid when payment of the principal of any such Bond, plus interest
thereon to the due date thereof (whether such due date be by reason of maturity or upon redemption as
provided in the Indenture or olherwise), either (a) will have been made or caused lo have been made in
accordance wilh the terms ihereof, or (b) will have been provided for by irrevocably depositing with the
'Trustee, in trust and exclusively for such payment, (I) moneys sufficient to make such payment or (2)
Defeasance Obligations, or (3) a combination oflhe investments described in clauses (1) and (2) above,
such amounis so deposited being available or maturing as to principal and inleresi in such amounts and al
such limes, withoul consideration of any reinvestinent thereof, as will insure the availability of sufficient
moneys to make such payment (all as confirmed by a nationally recognized firm of independent public
accountants) Ifthe City will pay and discharge a portion oflhe Bonds as aforesaid, such portion shall
cease to be enlitled lo any lien, benefit or security under the Indenlure and the Bond Ordinance. The
liabilily oflhe City with respect to such Bonds will continue, bul the Registered Owners thereof shall
thereafter be enlilled lo payment (lo the exclusion of all other Bondholders) only out ofthe Defea.sance
Obligations deposited with the frustee under the Indenlure.
No deposit pursuant to the paragraph above shall be made or accepted under the Indenture
authorizing the Series 20 ISA Bonds and no use made of any such deposit unless the frustee shall have
received an opinion of nationally recognized municipal bond counsel lo the effect lhat such deposit and
use would nol cause any ofsuch Series 20 ISA Bonds to be treated as "arbitrage bonds" within the
meaning ol" Section 148 ofthe Code or any successor provision iherelo
A defeasance deposit ol'escrow securities may be subjecl to a subscqueni sale ofsuch escrow
securities and reinvestment of all or a portion of the proceeds of lhal sale in escrow securities which,
together with money to remain so held in trust, shall be sufficieni to provide for paymenl of principal,
redemption premium, if any. and mlcrcst on any ofthe defeased Bonds Amounts held by the Trustee in
excess ol the amounts needed so lo provide for paymcni of the defeased Bonds may he subject to
withdrawal by ilie City

  PAGE 

 

APPENDIX 

ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION

 

 PAGE IN FENTIONALLY LEFT 

ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
Set forth below is certain economic and demographic information regarding the City. Sources of
information are sel forth m footnotes at the end of this Appendix. With respect to iion-City sources, the
City considers these sotirces to be reliable bul has made no independent verification of the infonnalion
provided and does not warrant its accuracy.
Economy
The Chicago metropolitan area has a population of 9.5 million people, with over 4.5 million
employees ' ^ Chicago's large and diverse economy contributed lo a gross regional product of more than
$590 billion in 2013.^
Chicago's transportation and distribution network offers access lo air, rail, and water, wilh two
ports capable of handling ocean-going ships and barges, and an airport system that moves I 5 million
tons of freight, mail, and goods annually.''
The Chicago metropolitan area's largest industry sectors by employmenl include trade,
transportation and utilities, professional and business services, education and health services, government,
leisure and hospitality and manufacturing.^
Population
Chicago is home to over 2 7 million people lhat live in more than one million households.'' 'The
City's population increased nearly 1.0 percent since the 2010 Census.^
The population oflhe United Stales, the Slale of Illinois, Cook County and the City for the census
years from 1980 to 2010 and the estimate for 2014 is set forth below.
Population''
1980—2014
Year
1980
1990
2000
2010
2014 Estimate

United States
226,545,805
248,709,873
281,421,906
308,745,538
318,857,056

Slale uT Illinois
11,427,409
11.430,602
12,419,293
12,830,632
12,880,580

Cook County
5,253,655
5,105,067
5,376,741
5,194,675
5,246,456

Cliicago
3,005,072
2,783,726
2,896.016
2,695,598
2,722,389

34.2 percent of Chicago's residents (age 25 or older) have bachelor's degrees, which is higher
than the national average of 28.8 percent."

B-1

 Per Capita Income and Wages
The per capila personal income (estimated annual earnings) for the United Slates, the State of
Illinois, Cook County and the Chicago MSA is sel forth below for the years 2005 through 2014
Per (Capita Income'"
2005—2014
Vear
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014

United Stales
$ 35,888
38.127
39,804
40,873
39,379
40,144
42,332
44.200
44,765
46,129

State of Illinois
$ 37,697
40,184
42,260
43,327
41,545
42,033
44,169
46,009
46,980
48,120

Cook Countv
$ 40,648
43,701
46,436
47,046
44,824
45,213
47,966
48,948
49,661
Unavailable

Chicaso MSA
$ 40,470
43,276
45,459
46,138
43,847
44,186
46,279
48,447
49,071
Unavailable

Chicago's 2013 median household income is $47,270, compared lo $56,797 in Illinois and
$53,046 in the U.S., and Chicago ranks 36th among other major metropolitan areas on the cost of living
index."''^
Employment
Total employment for the State of Illinois, the Chicago MSA, Cook Couniy and the City for the
years 2005 through 2014 is set forth below.
Employment (in thousands)'^
2005-2014
Year
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014

Chicaco
1,199
1,228
1,249
1,238
1,172
1,117
1,120
1,141
1,144
1,185

Cook Countv
2,393
2,453
2,491
2,461
2,327
2,301
2,316
2,359
2,365
2,450

Chicago MSA
4,461
4,519
4,557
4,528
4,291
4,246
4,305
4,375
4,443
4.502

State of Illinois
5,862
5,933
5,980
5,949
5.657
5,613
5.677
5,751
5,805
5,873

'fhe percenlage oftotal (nonfarm) employment by sector for Ihe Chicago MSA, Stale of Illinois
and the United States for April 2015 is shown in the following lable

B-2

 Percenlage of Total Non-Farm Employment by Major Industry Sector
April 2015" "
Chicago
MSA

Illinois

Trade, Transportation and Utilities ..

19 9%

19 9%

19 0%

Government

11 8%

14 2%

15 5%

15 9%

15 3%

15 5%

18 8%

15 8%

13 9%

9 5%

9 4%

10 6%
8 7%

Sector

... .

Education and Heallh Services
Professional and Business Services

. ..

Leisure and Hospitality

llnitcd States

Manufacturing.

7 7%

9 7%

Financial Activities

6.8%

6 2%

5 7%

Construction

3 2%

3.5%

4 5%

4 4%

4.3%

4.0%

2 0%

1.7%

0.0%

0 2%

2 0%
0 6%

100 0%

100 0%

....

Other Services
Information. .

.. .

Mining and Logging
Total

100 0%

The City of Chicago's average annual unemployment rale decreased from 11.2 percent m 2010 to
7.7 percent in 2014, while statewide, Illinois' unemployment rate dropped from 10 4 percent in 2010 lo
7.1 percent in 2014 In April 2015, the Chicago MSA's preliminary unemployment rate before seasonal
adjustment was 5 8 percent.'^
The annual unemployment rales (percenl of population, nol seasonally adjusted) for the United
Stales, the State of Illinois, Cook Couniy, the Chicago MSA and the City is sel forth below for the years
2005 through year-to-date for 2015.
Annual Unemployment Rates'"
2005—2015
Year

Chicago

2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015'

7.1%
54
58
7.0
1 I.I
1 1.2
10 8
10 0
10 0
77
65

Cook
County

Chicago
MSA

Stale uf
Illinois

6 4%
4.9
5 3
64
10 5
U) 9
104
9.6
96
74
62

5 9%
46
4 9
6 1
10 2
10 6
99
9 1
9.0
70
58

5.7%
45
5.0
6.3
10.2
104
97
90
9.1
7 1
55

April 20 .-i J;il;i

B-3

United
States
5 1%
4.6
4.6
S 8
93
96
8.9
8.1
74
62
54

 Employers
The companies employing the greatest number of workers in the Chicago MSA as ofthe end of
2014 are sel forth below.
Largest Employers in Chicago M S A ' '
' 2014

Number of
Employees
18,556
16,025
15,015
14,550
14,000
13,797
13,000
11,279
10,100
10,000

Employer
Advocate Health Care Bank, N A.
University of Chicago
J.P. Morgan Chase
Northwestern Memorial Heallhcare
Uniled Continental Holdings Inc.
Walgreens Co.
A'T&T
Presence Heallh
University of Illinois at Chicago
Abbott Laboratories

Percentage
of
Total
F.niployniciit
I 47%
1.27
1.19
1.15
1.11
1 09
1 03
0 89
0.80
0.79

Top Tax Payers
The top property tax payers in ihe City in 2013 based on 2013 EAV arc shown in the following
table.
Top Ten Property Tax Payers 2013^"
($ in thousands)
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Property
Willis 'Tower
AON Center
Blue Cross Blue Shield Tower
One Prudential Plaza
Water Tower Place
Chase 'Tower
A T & T Corp Center
Three Firsl National Plaza
Citadel Center
300 N LaSalle

•

Tolal

2013 EAV
$ 370,197
248,906
201,987
193,495
190.952
190.441
183,113
177,863
177,008
159,537
$2,093,499

% of Total
EAV
0.59%.
0 40
0.32
031
0.31
0 31
0.29
0 29
0 28
0.26
3.36%

As shown in the table, the lop ten taxpayers accounl for less than 4 percenl ofthe City's total lax
base
Transportation
According lo statistics compiled by Aiiporis Council International in 2013, O'llaic ranked tilth
worldwide and second m the United States in lerms oftotal passengers while Midway ranked 26''' in the
United States
According to ilie Chicago Department of Aviation, O'Hare and Midway had 70 1 and
B-4

 21 2 million in total passenger volume in 2014, respeclively. O'Flare supports substantial international
service wilh international passengers constituting approximately IS percent oftotal enplaned passengers
in 2014"
Thc Chicago fransil Authority operates the second largest public transportation syslem in Ihe
nation, wilh: 1,865 buses operating over 128 routes and 1.354 route miles, making 19.000 trips per day
and serving 11,104 bus slops; 1,356 rail cars operating over eight routes and 224 miles of track, making
2,250 trips each day and serving 146 stations; and 1.7 million rides on an average weekday and over 529
million rides a year (bus and train combined)
Schools

The Chicago Public School system is the third largest school district in the nation, serving
approximately 396,000 students''' CPS is comprised of 420 elementary schools, 96 high schools. 6
combination schools (schools thai serve both elementary and high school grade levels), 9 contract high
schools, and 131 charier school canipu.ses ''^ The Cily Colleges of Chicago operate seven colleges and
serve approximately 114,000 students.'*
Government
The number of full-time employees ofthe Cily for the years 2006 ihrough 2014 is included in the
following lable.
City Full-Time Employees'^
2006—2014

Veiir

Budgeted FullTinie Equivalent
Positions

2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014

40,297
40,207
39,921
37,419
36,889
36,448
33,708
33,563
34.045

13-5

 Housing .Market
The monthly home sales and the median home .sale prices for Chicago I'or the years 2009 through
April, 2015 are shown below.
Chicago Monthly Home Sales"'*
2009—April 2015

January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

2009
917
866
1,212
1407
1,557
1,981
1,975
1,927
1,918
2,012
1,859
1,767

2010
1,202
1,225
1,814
1,984
2,057
2,526
1,588
1,486
1,403
1,216
1,144
1,444

2012

2011
1,034
1,056
1,450
1,466
1,703
1,841
1,655
1,787
1,498
1,312
1,429

1,123
1.250
1,664
1,816
2.125
2,332
2,164
2,293
1,906
2,076
1,798
1,849

1,576

2013
1,485
1,378
1,894
2,331
2,762
2,623
2,838
2,797
2.352
2,231
1,800
2.080

2014
1,383
1,361
1,819
2,210
2,390
2,761
2,664
2,414
2,187
2,082
1,632
1,992

2015
1,295
1,448
2,118
2.386

Chicago Median Home Sale Prices''
2009—April 2015

January
February
March
April
May
June
July
Augu.st
September
October
November
December

2009
$205,000
218,625
219,000
218,000
225,000
242,050
245.000
229,900
225,000
215.000
215,000
210,000

2010
$195,000
176,500
209.000
225,000
230,000
234,250
196.500
200,000
180,000
183,000
182,500
166,250

2011
$150,000
150,000
163,200
169,000
190,000
207,000
210.000
192,500
190,000
162.000
157,000
155.000

2012

2013

$148,000
140.000
172,000
182,000
200,000
217,000
200.000
200.000
188,400
175,000
180,000
185,000

$159,000
158,000
187,500
222,000
234,000
254.900
250,000
245,000
231,000
218,500
200,000
210.000

2014
$200,750
175,000
237.000
250,000
270,000
275,000
270.000
270.000
250,000
237,500
230,000
229,250

2015
$222,000
212,000
235,000
275,000

U S Census, "Annual Estiniales ofthe Resident Population April 1. 20111 to July 2014,"
http //I'aclfindcr2 census gov/Face.s/nav/isl/paucs/index .xhtml
U S Bureau ofLabor Statistics. 'Employees on Nonfarm Payiolls by State and Mctro )oliian Area.'
http //www.bls.gov/ncws relcase/mclro t03 lUiii
U S Bureau o f Hconoiiiic Analysis. "Table I CuireiU-Dollar GIO.NS Uoiiiestic Product (CDP) by Metropolitan
Area," htlp //www bca gov/ncwsrelcasci/rcgional/gdn inclro/21") 14/pdr/mlp inciro0914.ridf

B-6

 '' Chicago Department of Aviation, "Monthly Operations, Passengers, Cargo Sumniar>' By Class, December 2014.'
www flvchicago com
^ U S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, " Chicago Area Economic Summary. June 3, 2015."
http //www bls.GOv/regions/niidwcst/summarv/bl.ssuiTimaiy Chicago pdf
U S Census Bureau, "State and County QuiekFacts—Chicago (city), Illinois.''
htlp.//ciuickfacts census aQv/qI'd/sialcs (accessed June 12, 2015)
^ U S Census Bureau, "State and County QuiekFacts—Chicago (city), Illinois,'"
http //quickfacts census gov/cifd/states (accessed June 12, 2015)
" U.S. Census Bureau, "State and County QuiekFacts—USA," htlp //quickfacts cen.sus gov/qfd/stales: "Slate and
Couniy QuiekFacts—Cook Couniy, Illinois.'' hltp //quickfacts census gov/qfd/slates. "Stale and County
QuiekFacts—Chicago (cily). Illinois." hUp //quickl'acis census gov/qfd/stales (accessed June 12, 2015)
' u s . Census Bureau, "Slate and Couniy QuiekFacts—Chicago (city). Illinois,"
http //quickfacts census gov/qfd/slates (acces.sed June 12, 2015)
U S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, "Interactive Data." htlp //www.bca eov/iTablc/index cfiii (accessed June 12,
2015).
" u s . Census Bureau, "State and County QuiekFacts—Chicago (cily), Illinois,"
http //quickl'acls.census.gov/qI'd/states (accessed June 12, 2015).
' ' U.S. Census Bureau, "Table 728 Cosl of Living Indcx-Sclccted Urban Areas Annual Average 2010"
http//'WWW census gov/conipendia/.slaiah/cats/priccs/consumer pricejndexes cost of living index html
(accessed June 12,2015).
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Stale and Metro Area Employment, lloui.s, & Earnings,"
http //w^ww hls.gov/sae/data lilm (accessed June 12, 2015)
' ' ' u s Bureau of Labor Statistics, http //www his gov/regions/midwest/il Chicago md htm (accessed June 12,
2015).
'"^ U S Bureau of Labor Statistics, "State and Metro Area Employment. Hours, & Earnings,"
hltp://w\vw bis gov/sae/data htm (accessed June 12,2015)
"' U S Bureau of Labor Statistics, "State and Metro Area Employment, Hours, & Earnings,"
http //www bis.eov/sac/data htm (accessed June 12, 2015).
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "State and Metro Area Employment. Hours, & Earnings,"
hltp //www bis gov/sac/dala htm (accessed June 12, 2015).
'* U S Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Stale and Metro Area Employment, Hours, & Earnings."'
http //www bis gov/sae/data.htm (accessed June 12, 2015)
Cram's Chicago Business, Crain Communications. Inc The data represents the largest employers m the sixcounty area (Cook Couniy, Will Couniy, Kane County, Lake Couniy, DuPage County, and McHcnry Couniy)
•'' Chicago Comprehensive Annual Financial Report for the year ended December 31, 2013,
blip //www cilvol'chicago ore/citv/cn/dcpis/fin/supp info/coinpichensivc annuallMiancialsialcmcnls/2013finjncial-slatements.html
^' Airports Council International "2013 North American (ACI-NA) Top 50 Airports,''
hltp //vvww.aci-na org/content/airport-lraflic-reports
Chicago Department of Aviation Airport Budget Stati.slics, "Air Traffic Dala," hllp //www nvchicago cQin
" Chicago Transit Authority, "CJ'A Facts at a Glance, Spring 2014,"
hltp //www transitchicago com/aboul/l'acts aspx (accessed June 12, 2015).
•'' Chicago Public Schools. "Stats and Fact.s," hltp //cps edu/Ahout CI'S/Al-a-alance/Pages/Siats and fads aspx
(accessed June 12, 2015)
Chicago Public Schools. "Slats and Facts." htlp //cps edu/Ahout CPS/Al-n-glance/Pugcs/Slals and facts aspx
(accessed June 12,2015)
Ciiy Colleges of Chicago, "Fiscal Year 2013 Slati.stical Digest," htlp //www ccc cdu/menu/pagcs/l'aclsslatistics aspx
Chicago Comprehensive Annual Financial Report for the year ended December 31, 2013,
htlp //www cilvol'chicago org/cily/cn/Jcpts/l'in/supp inro/cumprchcnsivc annualFinancial.statcmcnls/2013llnancial-slalcmenls himl
Illinois Associaiion ol'Rcallois, "Illinois Markel Suns Archives,"
hltp //www illinoisrealtor orii/inarkelslals/archivcs (accessed June 12.2015)
Illinois Association of Realtors, "Illinois Market Siais Archives,"
http //www illinoisrcahoi org/markelslals/arehivcs (accessed June 12. 2015)

B-7

  PAC-F. INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

 

APPENDIX 
CITY OF CHICAGO

BASIC FINANCIAL 
FOR YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2014

 

 PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

Deloitte

City of Chicago
Basic Financial Statements
for the Year Ended December 31, 2014

Rahm Emanuel, Mayor
Carole L. Brown, Chief Financial Officer
Daniel WiidawsJcy, City Cornptroller

 This Page Intentionally Left BIank

CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
T A B L E OF CONTENTS

INDEPENDENT AUDITORS' REPORT
MANAGEMENTS DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS

1-2
3-15

BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS:
Governmenl-wide Financial Statements:
Exhibit

1

Statement of Nel Position

Exhibit

2

Statement of Activities

17
18-19

Fund Financial Statements:
Exhibit

3

Balance Sheet - Governmental Funds

Exhibit

4

Exhibit

5

Exhibit

6

Exhibit
Exhibit

7
8

Exhibit
Exhibit
Exhibit

9
10
11

Statemeni of Revenues. Expenditures and Changes in Fund Balances Governmental Funds
Reconciliation of the Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes
in Fund Balances of Governmental Funds to the
Statement of Aclivities
Statement of Revenues and Expenditures - Budget and Actual General Fund (Budgetary Basis)
Statemeni of Net Position - Proprietary Funds
Statement of Revenues, Expenses and Changes in Net Position Proprietary Funds
Statement of Cash Flows - Proprietary Funds
Statement of Fiduciary Net Position - Fiduciary Funds
Statement of Changes in Plan Nel Position, Fiduciary Funds-

20-21
22-25

26
27
28-29
30
31-32
33

Pension Trust Funds

34

NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

35-83

REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION (UNAUDITED)
SCHEDULE OF OTHER POSTEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS FUNDING PROGRESS

84

 This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Deloitte

Deloitle & Touche LLP
11 I '^i Vv'^^cLpf Drive
C h c i g o . IL 60606-4301
USA
T?l T I 312 486 1000
FcK t l TI2 485 U 8 6
wv.v.'Cf^lo.tte co.Ti

INDEPENDENT AUDITORS' REPORT

To the Honorable Rahm Emanuel. Mayor
And Members o f t h e City Council
City of Chicago, Illinois

Report on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying financial statements ofthe governmental activities, the business-type
aclivities, each major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund infonnalion o f l h e City o f Chicago, Illinois
(the " C i t y " ) , as of and for the year ended December 3 1 , 2014, and the related notes to the tlnancial
statements, which collectively comprise the City's basic financial staiemenls as listed in the table o f
contents.
M a n a g e m e n t ' s R e s p o n s i b i l i t y for the F i n a n c i a l S t a t e m e n t s
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation o f these financial statements in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States o f America; this includes
the design, implementation, and maintenance o f internal conlrol relevant lo the preparation and fair
presentation o f financial statements lhat are free from nialerial misstatement, whether due to fraud or
error.
Auditor's R e s p o n s i b i l i t y
Our responsibility is lo express opinions on these financial slatenieiils based on our audit. We did nol
audit the financial statements o f l h e Cily's Pension Plans (the "Plans") which, in aggregate, represent
subslanlially all the assets and revenues of the fiduciaiy funds, included in the aggregate remaining fund
information. Those statements were audited by other auditors whose reports have been furnished to us,
and our opinion, insofar as it relates to the amounts included for the Plans, is based solely on the reports
ofthe other auditors. We conducted our audit in accordance wilh auditing standards generally accepted in
the United Slates o f America. Those standards require lhal we plan and perl'orm the audil lo obtain
reasonable as.surance about whether the financial statements arc free from material misstatement.
An audit involves pcrfonning procedures to obtain audit evidence nboul the amounts and disclosures in
ihe financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditor's judgment, including the
asscs.smenl o f t h e risks o f material misstalemcni ofthe Unaiicial statements, whether due lo fraud or error.
In making those risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant lo the entity's preparation
and fair presentation o f l h e financial statements in order lo design audit procedures lhal are appropriate in
Ihe circumstances, bul not for the purpose o f c.xpres.sing an opinion on the effecliveness o f l h e enlity".s
internal control. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit al.so includes evaluating the
appropriateness ofaccounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation o f l h e financial sialements.

 We believe that the audil evidence wc have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for
our audit opinions.
Opinions
In our opinion, based on our audit and the reports o f olher auditors, the financial statements referred to
above preseni fairly, in all material respecls. Ihe respective financial position o f l h e governmental
activilies, the business-type activities, each major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund information o f
Ihc City o f Chicago, Illinois, as o f December 3 1, 2014, and the respective changes in financial position
and, where applicable, cash flows Ihereof and the respective budgetary comparison for the General Fund
for the year then ended in accordance wilh accounting principles generally accepted in the Uniled Slates
o f America.
Other Matters
Required

Supplementary

Information

Accounting principles generally accepted in the United States o f America require that the Management's
Discussion and Analysis and Schedule o f Other Postemployment Benefits Funding Progress, as listed in
the tabic o f contents, be presented to supplement the basic finaneial statements. Such infonnation,
although not a part ofthe basic financial statements, is required by the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board who considers it to be an essential part of financial reporting for placing the basic
financial statements in an appropriate operational, economic, or historical context. We and other auditors
have applied certain limited procedures to the requiied supplementary infonnation in accordance w i l h
auditing standards generally accepted in the United States o f America, which consisted o f inquiries o f
management about the methods o f preparing the information and comparing the information for
consistency with management's responses to our inquiries, the basic financial statements, and other
knowledge wc obtained during our audit o f the basic financial statements. Wc do not express an opinion
or provide any assurance on the information because the limiled procedures do not provide us with
sufficient evidence to express an opinion or provide any assurance.

Chicago, Illinois
June 30. 2015

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Management's Discussion and Analysis
As managemenl of the City of Chicago, Illinois (City) we offer readers of the City's Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report (CAFR) this narrative overview and analysis of the financial activities of the City for the fiscal year ended
December 3 1 , 2014. We encourage the readers lo consider the information presenled here in conjunction with
information contained within this report.
2014 Financial Highlights
•

•

•

•

•

•

Liabilities and Deferred Inflows of the City, in the government-wide financial statements, exceeded its assets and
deferred outflows at the close of the most recent fiscal year by $6,536.3 million (nef deficit). The net deficit is
composed of $2,742.5 million in net investment in capital assets and $2,471.0 million in net position restricted for
specific purposes offset by an unrestricted deficit of $11,749.8 million. The net deficit increased in 2014 by
$1,165.2 million primarily as of result of increased pension cosls.
The City's total assets increased by $1,347.4 million. The increase primarily relates to a $897.8 million increase
in capital assets as a result of the Cily's capilal improvement program, and an increase in cash and cash
equivalents and investments of $548.0 million, primarily as a result of an increase in charges for services,
improved collection of receivables, and proceeds from financing to fund capital projects.
Revenues and Other Financing Sources, in the fund financial statements, available for general governmental
operations during 2014 were $6,769.4 million, an increase of $806.9 million (13.5 percent) from 2013, primarily
due to the issuance of General Obligation and Motor Fuel tax bonds.
The General Fund ended 2014 with a total Fund Balance of $141.3 million, of which $51.6 million was
Unassigned. Total Fund Balance decreased from 2013 primarily because Revenues and Olher Financing
Sources were less than Expenditures and Other Financing Uses by $25.5 million.
The City's general obligation bonds and notes outstanding increased by $605.3 million during the current fiscal
year. The proceeds from the issuance of General Obligation were used to finance the City's capital plan and
certain operating expenses.
The General Fund expenditures on a budgetary basis were $28.9 million less than budgeted as a result of
favorable variances in general government expenditures, offset by unfavorable variances in public safety primarily
as a result of higher than expected personnel related expenses.

Overview ofthe Basic Financial Statements
This discussion and analysis is intended to serve as an introduction lo the Cily's basic financial statements, which
include the following components: 1) governmenl-wide financial statements, 2) fund financial statements, and 3)
notes lo the basic financial statements. This report also contains required supplementary information and other
supplementary information in addition to the basic financial statements. These components are described below;
Government-wide financial statements. The government-wide financial statements are designed to provide
readers with a broad overview of the Cily's finances, using accounting methods similar to those used by privatesector companies. The statements provide bolh short-term and long-term information about the City's financial
position, which assists in assessing the City's economic condition al the end of the fiscal year. These financial
statements are prepared using the flow of economic resources measurement focus and the accrual basis of
accounting. This basically means such statements follow methods that are similar to those used by most businesses.
They take inlo account all revenues and expenses connected with the fiscal year even if cash involved has not been
received or paid.
The government-wide financial statements include two statements:
The statement of net position presents information on all of the City's assels, deferred outflows, liabilities, and
deferred inflows wilh Ihe difference reported as net position. Over time, increases or decreases in nel position may
serve as a useful indicator of whether the financial position of the City is improving or deteriorating, respectively. To
assess the overall health of the Cily, the reader should consider additional non-financial factors such as changes in
the City's properly lax base and the condition of the City's roads.

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
The statement of activities presents information showing how Ihe government's net position changed during each
fiscal year. All changes in net position are reported as soon as the underlying event giving rise to the change occurs,
regardless of the timing of the related cash flows. Thus, revenues and expenses are reported in this statement for
some items that will only result in cash flows in future periods (for example, uncollected taxes, and earned but unused
vacation). This statement also presents a comparison between direct expenses and program revenues for each
function of the City.
Both of the government-wide financial statements distinguish functions of the Cily that are principally supported by
taxes and intergovernmental revenues {governmental activities) from other functions that are intended to recover all
or a significant portion of their costs through user fees and charges (.business-type activities). The governmental
activities of the City include general government, public safety, streets and sanitation, transportation, health, and
cultural and recreation. The business-type activities of the City include water, sewer, tollway and airport services.
The government-wide financial statements present information about the Cily as a primary government, which
includes the Chicago Public Library. The government-wide financial statements can be found immediately following
this management's discussion and analysis.
Fund financial statements. A fund is a grouping of related accounts that is used to maintain control over resources
that have been segregated for specific activities or objectives. The City, like other state and local governments, uses
fund accounting to ensure and demonstrate compliance with finance-related legal requirements. All of the funds of
the City can be divided into three categories: governmental funds, proprietary funds, and fiduciary funds.
Governmental funds. Governmental funds are used lo account for essentially the same functions reported as
governmental activities in the government-wide financial statements. However, unlike the government-wide financial
statements, governmental fund financial statements focus on near-term inflows and outflows of spendable resources,
as well as on balances of spendable resources available at the end of a fiscal year. Such information may be useful
in evaluating a governments near-term financing requiremenls.
Because the focus of governmental funds is narrower than that of the government-wide financial statements, it is
useful lo compare the information presented for governmental funds with similar information presented for
governmental activities in the government-wide financial statements. By doing so, readers may better understand the
long-term impact of the government's near-term financing decisions. Both the governmental fund balance sheet and
the governmental fund statement of revenues, expenditures, and changes in fund balances provide a reconciliation to
facilitate the comparison between governmental funds and governmental activities.
The Cily maintains 19 individual governmental funds. Information for the six funds that qualify as major is presented
separately in the governmental fund balance sheet and in the governmental fund statement of revenues,
expenditures, and changes in fund balances. The six major governmental funds are as follows: the General Fund,
the Federal, Slate and Local Grants Fund, the Special Taxing Areas Fund, Service Concession and Reserve Fund,
the Bond, Nole Redemplion and Interest Fund, and the Communily Development and Improvement Projects Fund.
Data from the other governmental funds are combined into a single, aggregated presentation.
The City adopts an annual approprialion budget for its general and certain special revenue funds on a non-GAAP
budgetary basis. A budgetary comparison statement has been provided for the General Fund, the only major fund
with an appropriation budget, lo demonstrate compliance with this budget. The basic governmental fund financial
statements can be found immediately following the government-wide statements.
Proprietary funds. These funds are used lo show activities that operate more like those of commercial enterprises.
Because these funds charge user fees for services provided to outside customers including local governments, they
are known as enterprise funds. Proprietary funds, like government-wide statements, use the accrual basis of
accounting and provide both long- and short-term financial information. There is no reconciliation needed between
the government-wide financial sialements for business-type aclivities and the proprietary fund financial statements.
The City uses five enterprise funds to accounl for ils water, sewer, Skyway, and two airports operations.

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2014
Proprietary funds provide the same type of information as the government-wide financial staiemenls, bul provide
more detail. The proprietary fund financial statements provide separate information for the Water Fund, Sewer Fund,
Chicago Skyway Fund, Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Fund and the Chicago Midway International Airport
Fund. All the proprietary funds are considered lo be major funds of the City. The basic proprietary fund financial
statements can be found immediately following the governmental fund financial statements.
Fiduciary funds. Fiduciary funds are used primarily lo account for resources held for the benefit of parties outside
the primary government. The City is the trustee, or fiduciary, for its employees' pension plans. II is also responsible
for other assets lhat, because of a trust arrangement can be used only for the trust beneficiaries. The City also uses
fiduciary funds to account for transactions for assets held by the City as agent for various entities. The City is
responsible for ensuring that the assets reported in these funds are used for their intended purposes. Fiduciary funds
are nof reflected in the government-wide financial statements because the resources of those funds are not available
to support the City's own programs. All of the City's fiduciary activities are reported in a separate statement of
fiduciary net position and a statement of changes in fiduciary net position. The accounting used for fiduciary funds is
much like that used for proprietary funds. The fiduciary fund basic financial statements can be found immediately
following the proprietary fund financial statements.
Nofes fo the basic financial statements. The notes provide additional information lhat is essential for a full
understanding of data provided in the government-wide and fund financial statements. The notes to the basic
financial statements can be found immediately following the fiduciary fund basic financial statements.
Financial Analysis of the City as a whole
Wef Position. As noted earlier, net position may serve over time as a useful indicator of a government's financial
position. In the case of the City, liabilities and deferred inflows exceeded assets by $6,536.3 million at December 31,
2014. Of this amount, $2,742.5 million represents the City's investment in capital assets (land, buildings, roads,
bridges, etc.) less any related debt used to acquire those assets lhal is still outstanding. The City uses these capital
assets to provide services to citizens; consequently, these assets are not available for future spending. Although the
City's investment in its capital assets is reported net of related debt, it should be noted that the resources needed lo
repay this debt musl be provided from olher sources, since the capilal assets themselves cannot be used to liquidate
these liabilities and deferred infiows.
An additional portion of the City's net position, $2,471.0 million, represents resources that are subject to external
restrictions on how they may be used.

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
City of Chicago, Illinois
Summary Statement of Net Position
(in millions of dollars)
Governmental
Activities
2014
2013
Currenl and olher assels
Capilal assels
Tolal Assets
Deferred ounows
Tolal
Long-term liabilities outstanding
Other liabililies
Tolal Liabililies
Deferred Inflows

$

5,254.5

$

5,311.5

Business-type
Activities
2014
2013
$

4.734.1

$

Total

4,227.5

2014

2013

9,988.6
22,1037
32,092.3
602.4

9,539.0
21.205.9
30.744.9
540.2

8,281.2

7,993.6

13,822.5

13.212.3

13,5357
281.5

13,305.1
266.1

18,556.6
320.9

17.439.8
274.1

13,817.2

13.571.2

18,877.5

17,713.9

32,694.7

31,285.1

13,094.8

31,164.4
2.230.9

19,516.8

18,069.6

13,602.6

1,767.4

1,326.6

1,1227

904.3

33,119.4
2.890.1

21,284.2

19,396.2

14,725.3

13,999.1

36.009.5

33,395.3

1,576.3

1.597.3

1,645.2

1.663.6

3,221.5

3,260.9

28.7

(242.8)

2,713.8

2,446.2

2,742.5
2,471.0
(11,749.8)

2,203.4
2.8247
(10,399.2)

Nel Position;
Nel investmeni in capital assets
Restricted
Unreslricled
Tolal net (deficit) position

1,492.0

1.940.9

(10,564.0)

(9.120.4)

$ (9,043.3)

$ (7.422.3)

979.0

883.8

(1,165.8)
$

2,507.0

(1,278.8)
$

2,051.2

$

(6,536.3)

$

(5,371.1)

Governmental Activities. Net position ofthe City's governmental activifies decreased $1,621.0 million to a deficit of
$9,043.3 million, primarily as a result of increased pension costs. A significant portion of net position is either
restricted as to the purpose they can be used for or they are classified as net investment in capital assets (buildings,
roads, bridges, etc.). Consequently, unrestricted net position showed a $10,564.0 million deficit at the end of this
year. This deficit does not mean that the City does not have the resources available to pay its bills next year. Rather,
It is the result of having long-term commitments that are greater than currently available resources. Specifically, the
City did not include in past annual budgets the full amounts needed to finance future liabilities arising from personnel,
property, pollution and casualty claims ($900.6 million) and Municipal employees, Laborers', Policemen's and
Firemen's net pension obligation and olher post-employment benefits ($8,884.3 million). The Cily will include these
amounts in future years' budgets as they come due. In addition, the remaining deferred inflow of $1,576.3 million
from concession service agreements will be amortized into income over Ihe life of such agreements.
Revenues for all governmental activilies in 2014 were $5,729.1 million, an increase of $172.8 million from 2013. Over
half of the City's revenues derived from taxes which increased by $98.8 million (3.2 percent). Total tax revenue
includes an increase in property taxes received of $20.1 million (2.2 percent).
Expenses for governmental activities in 2014 were $7,350.1 million, an increase of $269.2 million (3.8 percent) over
2013. The amount that taxpayers paid for these governmental activities through City taxes was $3,191.6 million.
Some of the cost was paid by those who directly benefited from the programs ($819.2 million), or by olher
governments and organizations that subsidized certain programs wilh grants and contributions ($720.6 million).
The City paid $997.7 million for the "public benefit" portion wilh olher revenues such as stale aid, interesl and
miscellaneous income.
Although lolal net position of business-types activities was $2,507.0 million, these resources cannot be used lo make
up for the deficit in net position in governmental activities. The City generally can only use this nel position to finance
the continuing operations of the water, sewer. Skyway, and airports activities.

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2014

City of Chicago, Illinois
Changes in Net Position
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions of dollars)
Governmental
Activities

2014

Business-type
Activities

2013

2014

Total

2013

2014

2013

Revenues
Program Revenues
Licenses, Pennits, Fines and
Charges for Services

$

819.2

$

773.4

Operaling Grants and Conlributions

470.7

634.4

Capital Grants and Contributions

249.9

184.4

S 2,244.1

S

95.6

2,021.3
213.0

$

3,063.3

$

2,794.7

470.7

634.4

345.5

397.4

General Revenues:
Property Taxes
Olher Taxes

926.8

908.7

926.8

9067

2,264.8

2,186.1

2,264.8

2,186.1

740.9

754.7

Grants and Contnbutions not
Reslricted to Specific Programs
Other
Total Revenues

740.9

754.7

256.8

116.6

85.3

34.1

342.1

1507

5,729.1

5,556.3

2,425.0

2,268.4

8,154.1

7,824 7

Expenses.
General Government

2,857.7

2.667.2

2,857.7

2,667.2

Public Safety

2.913.5

3,044.8

2,913.5

3,044.8

Streets and Sanitation

275.8

242.5

275.8

242.5

Transportation

475.8

400.5

475.8

400.5

Health

125.1

119.7

125.1

1197

Cultural and Recreational

121.5

128.3

121.5

128.3

Interesl on Long-lerm Debt

580.7

477.9

580.7

477.9

Waler

-

-

455.4

442.5

455.4

442.5

Sewer

-

-

225.6

216.6

225.6

216.6

Midway Inlernalional Airport

-

-

248.2

241.1

248 2

241.1

Chicago-O'Hare International Airport
Chicago Skyway

-

-

1,029 7
10 3

920.8
10.6

1,0297
10.3

920.8
10.6

Total Expenses
Cnange in Net Position
Net (Deficit) Position, Beginning of Year
Nel(DGricil)Posilion, EndofYear

7,350.1

7,080.9

1,969.2

1,831.6

9,319.3

8,912.5

(1,621 0)

(1,524.6)

4558

436.8

(1,165.2)

(1,087.8)

(7.422.3)

(5,897 7)

2.051.2

1.614.4

(5,371.1)

(4,283.3)

$ (9.043.3)

$ ( 7 , 4 2 2 3)

2,051.2

S (6.536.3)

$ (5,371.1)

J

2,507.0

$

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Expenses and Program Revenues - Governmental Activities
(in millions of dollars)

200

400

J

t

600
. .1

800
t

1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600 1,800 2,000 2,200 2,400 2,600 2,800 3,000 3,200
I

1

I

1

:

.—

.-..I

:

General Government
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Heallh

^

Cultural and Recreational

p-I
• Expenses

aProgram Revenues

Interest on Long-term Debt

Revenues by Source - Governmental Activities

Operating Grants and
Contribulions
8%

Capital Grants and
Conlributions
4%

Licenses, Permits, Fines
and Charges for Services
14%
Properly Tax
16%
Other
5%

Grants and Contributions
not restncled to specific
programs
13%

1

1

I

1

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Business-type Activities. Total Revenues of the City's business-type aclivities increased by $156.6 million in 2014
mostly from an increase in the charges for services and rental income, offset by a decrease in capilal grant funding.
•

The Water Fund's operaling revenues increased by $80.9 million (13.2%) from 2013 due to a 15% increase in
water rales, offset by the conversion of 20,256 accounts from nonmetered lo metered. Operaling expenses
before depreciation and amortization for the year ended 2014 increased by $23.5 million (8.6%) from the year
ended 2013 mainly due to increases in transmission and distribution expenses of $14.2 million and central
services of $10.5 million; offset by a decrease in punfication costs of $2.3 million.

•

The Sewer Fund's operating revenues increased in 2014 by $42.5 million (15.2%) primarily due to an increase in
sewer rates. Operating expenses before depreciation and amorfization for 2014 increased $9.9 million (9.1%)
from the year ended 2013 due to an increase in repairs, general fund reimbursements, mainlenance and
administrative and general.

•

Chicago Midway International Airport's operating revenues for 2014 decreased by $4.9 million (2.8%) from 2013
primarily due to lower landing fees, and terminal area use charges. Concessions were by $1.7 million higher than
last year due to an increase in auto parking. Total operating expenses before depreciation and amortization were
$8.5 million (7.0%) higher than last year, due to increases in repairs and maintenance, professional and
engineering fees, and salaries and wages of $4.6 million, $4.1 million, and $3.8 million, respectively. These
increases are offset by a decrease of $4.0 million in olher operating expenses.

•

Chicago O'Hare International Airport's operating revenues for 2014 increased by $126.8 million (17.7%)
compared to 2013 primarily due to increased landing fees and terminal area use charges. Operafing expenses
before depreciation, amortizafion and capital asset impairment costs increased by $68.9 million (16.2%)
compared to 2013 primarily due to increases in repairs and maintenance, salaries and wages, olher operating
expenses and professional and engineering fees of $25.4 million, $20.8 million, and $15.7 million, and $7.0
million, respectively.

•

The Chicago Skyway was leased for 99 years to a private company. The agreement granted the company the
right to operate the Skyway and to collect loll revenue during the term of the agreement. The City received an
upfront payment of $1.83 billion of which $446.3 million was used to advance refund all of the outstanding
Skyway bonds. The upfront payment is being amortized into nonoperating revenue over the period of the lease
($18.5 million annually).

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014

Expenses and Program Revenues - Business-type Activities
(in millions of dollars)

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1.000

Water

Sewer

Chicago Midway Inlernalional Airport

Chicago-O'Hare Inlernalional Airport

Chicago Skyway

• Expenses

BProgram Revenues

1

R e v e n u e s by S o u r c e - B u s i n e s s - t y p e Activities

other
3%
Capilal Grants ani
Contnbutions
4%

Licenses, Permits,
ines and Charges for
Services
93%

10

1.100

1.200

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Financial Analysis of the City's Funds
As noted earlier, the City uses fund accounting lo ensure and demonstrate compliance with finance-related legal
requiremenls.
Governmental funds. The focus of the City's governmental funds is to provide information on near-term inflows,
outflows, and balances of spendable resources. Such information is useful in assessing the Cily's financing
requirements. In particular, unassigned fund balance may serve as a useful measure of a government's net
resources available for spending at the end of the fiscal year.
At December 31, 2014, the City's governmental funds reported combined ending fund balances of $823.3 million, a
decrease of $403.3 million in comparison with the prior year. Of this total amount $696.1 million was committed to
specific expenditures, $65.2 million was assigned to anticipated uses, a deficit of $1,791.9 million was unassigned,
$1,829.4 million was restricted in use by legislation, and $24.5 million was nonspendable.
The General Fund is the chief operafing fund of the City. At the end of the current fiscal year, the unassigned fund
balance of the General Fund was $51.6 million wilh a total fund balance of $141.3 million. As a measure of the
General Fund's liquidity, it may be helpful to compare both unassigned fund balance and total fund balance to total
fund expenditures. Tolal General Fund balance represents 4.4 percent of total General Fund expenditures. The fund
balance of the Cily's General Fund decreased by approximately $25.8 million during the current fiscal year mainly due
to an increase in personnel expenditures in public safety. The General Fund also provided $5.0 million to the Service
Concession and Reserve Fund as appropriated for in the 2014 Budget.
The Federal, State and Local Grants Fund has a total deficit fund balance of $225.0 million. The deficit is $61.4
million lower than 2013 primarily due to more timely reimbursement of expenditures.
The Special Taxing Areas Fund has a total fund balance of $1,327.0 million, which is all reslricted to specific
expenditures.
The Service Concession and Reserve Fund accounts for deferred inflows from nonbusiness type long-term
concession and lease transacfions and has $620.9 million committed lo specific expenditures. The unassigned deficit
of $1,576.3 million results from the deferred inflows from long-term asset leases.
The Bond, Note Redemption and Interest Fund has a total fund balance of S26.9 million. This is $223.9 million lower
than 2013 due to reclassification of long-term debt to short term debt during 2014. For more information, please refer
lo Note 9 to the basic financial statements.
The Community Development and Improvement Projects Fund has a total fund balance of $347.7 million. This is
$15.9 million lower than 2013 due to increased capital improvement efforts.
Changes in f u n d balance. The fund balance for the City's governmental funds decreased by $403.3 million in 2014.
This includes a decrease in inventory of $0.3 million.
Proprietary funds. The City's proprietary funds provide the same type of information found in the government-wide
financial statements, but in more detail.
Unrestricted nel position of the Water, Sewer, Chicago Skyway, Chicago-O'Hare International Airport, and Chicago
IVlidway International Airport Funds at the end of the year amounted to a deficit of $1,185.8 million. The unrestricted
net position deficit decreased by $93.0 million due lo an increase in the unrestricted assels in the Water Fund and
Sewer Fund. Other factors concerning the finances of these five funds have already been addressed in the
discussion of the City's business-type activities.

11

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
General Fund Budgetary Highlights
The City's 2014 Original General Fund Budget was $3,290.2 million. This budget reflects an increase of $131.2
million (4.2 percenl) over the 2013 Budget. On November 26, 2013 the City's 2014 General Fund Budget was
approved by the City Council. The General Fund revenues on a budgetary basis were $28.9 million less than the final
budget as a result of lower collection of fines, slate income tax, internal service, and licenses and permits revenue
offset by higher than expected taxes. Expendiiures were $28.9 million less than budgeted as a resull of favorable
variances in general government expenditures, offset by unfavorable variances in public safety primarily as a result of
higher than expected personnel related expenses. Additional information on the Cily's budget can be found in Note 3
under Stewardship, Compliance and Accountability within this report.
Capital Asset and Debt Administration
Capital Assets. The City's capital assets for its governmental and business-type activities as of December 3 1 , 2014
amount lo $22,103.7 million (net of accumulated depreciation). These capital assets include land, buildings and
system improvements, machinery and equipment, roads, highways and bridges, and properly, plant and equipment.
Major capital asset events during the current fiscal year included the following:
•

The Cily continues ils commitment to sustainable design in new construction projects ufilizing the Leadership in
Energy & Environmental Design (LEED) strategy. Completed construction in 2014 totaled $28.5 million including;
Albany Park Branch Library totaling $11.9 million and Harold Washington Library totaling $7.7 million.

•

During 2014, $14.5 million of Architectural Plans and Landscape Drawings (Manuscripts) were donated to the
City of Chicago. This was recorded as a donated capital asset addition in Works of Art and Historical Collecfions.

•

During 2014, the City completed $271.4 million in infrastructure projects including $141.0 million in street
construction and resurfacing projects, $96.7 million in bridge and viaduct reconstruction projects, and $33.7
million in street lighting and transit projects. At year end, Infrastructure projects still in process had expenses
totaling nearly $511.2 million.

•

At the end of 2014, the Water Fund had $3,482.2 million invested in utility plant, net of accumulated depreciation.
During 2014, the Water Fund expended $364.8 million on capilal aclivities. This included $16.4 million for
structures and improvemenls, $62.0 million for distribution plant, $4.0 million for equipment, and $282.4 million for
construction in progress.

•

During 2014, net completed projects totaling $137.6 million were transferred from construction in progress to
applicable capital accounts. The major completed projects relate to installation and replacements of water mains
($109.4 million), and Jardine Waler Purification plant's east building filter roof replacement and structural repair
($26.3 million).

•

Al Ihe end of 2014, the Sewer Fund had $2,025.2 million invested in utility plant, net of accumulated
depreciation. During 2014, the Sewer Fund had capital additions being depreciated of $210.4 million, and
completed projects totaling $16.3 million were transferred from construction in progress to applicable facilities and
structures capital accounts. The 2014 Sewer Main Replacement Program completed 21.1 miles of sewer mains
and 59.0 miles of relining of exisling sewer mains at a cost of $210.4 million.

•

At the end of 2014, Chicago-Midway Internalional Airport totaled $1,172 3 million, invested in net capilal assets.
During 2014, Ihe Airport had additions of $48.4 million related to capital activities. This included S1.0 million for
land acquisition and the balance of $47.4 million for construcfion projects relating lo terminal improvements,
runway rehabilitation and parking improvements.

•

Al ttie end of 2014, Chicago-O'Hare International Airport totaled $6.9 billion, invested in net capital
assets. During 2014, the Airport had additions of $346.7 million related lo capilal activities. This included
$1.0 million for land acquisition and the balance of $345.6 million for terminal improvements, road and sidewalk
12

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
enhancements, runway and taxiway improvemenls. During 2014, completed projects totaling $438.8 million were
transferred from construction in progress lo applicable buildings and other facilities capital accounts. These major
completed projects were related to runway and taxiway improvements, road and sidewalk enhancements and
terminal improvemenls.
City of Chicago, Illinois
Capital Assets (net of depreciation)
(in millions of dollars)
Governmental
Activities
2014
2013
Land
Works of Art and
Historical Collections

Business-type
Activities

$ 1,392.8

$ 1,392.6

45.2

30.8

Total

2014

2013

2014

2013

$ 1,018.7

$ 1,016.6

$ 2,411.5

$ 2,409.2

45.2

30.8

-

-

Construction in Progress
Buildings and Olher Improvements ....

545.5

260.2

1,256.3

1,207.8

1,801.8

1,468.0

1,630.2

1,668.0

11,227.0

10,651.6

12,857.2

12,319.6

Machinery and Equipment
Infrastructure

235.3
4,432.2

225.8
4,416.2

320.5

336.3

-

-

555.8
4,432.2

562.1
4,416.2

.. $ 8,281.2

$ 7,993.6

$ 13,822.5

$ 22,103.7

$21,205.9

Tolal

$ 13,212.3

Informafion on the City's capital assets can be found in Note 7 Capital Assets in this report.
Debf. At the end of the current fiscal year, the City had $7,860.4 million in General Obligalion Bonds and $475.1
million in General Obligation Certificates and Other Obligations outstanding. Other outstanding long-term debt is as
follows: $189.7 million in Motor Fuel Tax Revenue Bonds; $554.1 million of Sales Tax Revenue Bonds; $74.4 million
in Tax Increment Financing Bonds; and $13,071.6 million in Enterprise Fund Bonds and long-lerm obligations. For
more detail, refer to Note 10 Long-term Obligations in the Basic Financial Statements.
City of Chicago, Illinois
General Obligation and Revenue Bonds
(in millions of dollars)
Governmental
Activities
2014
2013
General Obligation
Tax Increment
Revenue Bonds
Total

$ 8,335.5
74.4

.

$ 7,730.2
88.4

Business-type
Activities
2014
2013

Total
2014

743.8

753.2

13,071.6

12,526.5

8,335.5
74.4
13,815.4

$9,153.7

$ 8,571.8

$ 13,071.6

$ 12,526.5

$ 22,225.3

$

$

$

13

2013
$

7,730.2
88.4
13,279.7

$ 21,098.3

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2014
During 2014, the City issued the following:
General Obligation Bonds:
•
•
•

General Obligalion Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2014A and Taxable Project and Refunding Series
2014B ($883.4 million).
Motor Fuel Tax Revenue Refunding Bonds Series 2013 ($105.9 million - issue of 2014).
Tax Increment Allocation Revenue Refunding Bonds (Pilsen Redevelopment Project) Series 2014A and 2014B
Series Taxable ($33.4 million).

Enterprise Fund Revenue Bonds and Notes:
•
•
•
•

Chicago-O'Hare Internalional Airport General Commercial Paper Notes ($51.0 million)
Chicago Midway International Airport Second Lien Revenue and Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2014A
(AMT), Series 2014B (Non-AMT), and Series 2014C (AMT) ($896.5 million).
Second Lien Waler Revenue Bonds, Series 2014 ($367.9 million).
Second Lien Wastewater Transmission Revenue Bonds. Series 2014 ($292.4 million).

At December 31. 2014 the City had credit ratings with each of the three major rating agencies as follows:

Rating Agency

Moody's

General Obligation;
City

Standard &
Poors

Fitch

Kroll

Baal

A+

A-

NR

O'Hare Airport:
Senior Lien General Airport Revenue Bonds
Senior Lien Passenger Facility Charge (PFC)
Customer Facility Charge (CFC)

A2
A2
Baal

AABBB

AA
NR

NR
NR
NR

Midway Airport:
First Lien
Second Lien

A2
A3

A
A-

A
A-

NR
NR

Water:
First Lien
Second Lien

A2
A3

AA
AA-

AA+
AA

NR
AA

Wastewater:
First Lien
Second Lien

A2

AA

NR

A3

AA-

NR
AA

AA-

Sales Tax

Baal

AAA

A-

NR

Motor Fuel Tax

Baal

AA+

BBB+

NR

Revenue Bonds:

See Subsequent Events in the footnotes for ratings changes in 2015.
14

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Economic Factors and Next Year's Budgets and Rates
Local, national, and global economies play a major role in the City's finances and economic growlh. In 2014, local
and national economies experienced moderate growfth and recovery from the economic downturn. Although rising
home prices and shrinking inventory slowed the housing market in 2014 and home sales were down 7 percent
compared to 2013, median home prices were up 14 percenl over 2013. In 2014, nationwide, retail sales grew 4
percenl over 2013, with consumer confidence showing consistent improvement. The average national unemployment
rate decreased from 7.3 percent in 2013 lo 6.2 percent in 2014, and Chicago's unemployment rate was down
consistently throughout 2014. Tourism, business, and convenfion travel to Chicago remained strong in 2014, wilh
amusement tax collections up about 17 percent and hotel tax revenues up about 12 percent from 2013. Additionally,
in July 2014, Chicago had over one million occupied hotel rooms; this was the first time this benchmark has ever
been reached in a single month.
The Cily's 2015 General Fund budget, totaling $3,534 million, was approved by a 46 to 4 vote of City Council on
November 19, 2014. The 2015 budget balanced a preliminary budget shortfall of $297 million by reforming and
culling spending, and improving revenue grovi^th. The 2015 budget balances the Cily's finances without raising
property, sales or gas taxes. At the same time, it makes significant investments in youth, infrastructure, and
businesses, as well as in City services, and it continues to build the City's reserves in order to enhance long-term
financial stability. The 2015 budget also commits an additional $5 million to the City's long-term reserves, following
provisions of $20 million in 2012, $15 million in 2013 and $5 million in 2014.
Requests for Information
This financial report is designed to provide a general overview of the City's finances for all of those with an interest in
the government's finances. Questions concerning any of the information provided in this report or requests for
additional financial information should be addressed to the City of Chicago Department of Finance

15

 This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Exhibit 1
CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
S T A T E M E N T O F NET POSITION
December 31, 2014
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Primary Government
Business-type
Acfivities

Governmental
Activities

Total

ASSETS AND DEFERRED OUTFLOWS

$
Investments
Cash and Investments with Escrow Agent
Receivables (Nel of Allowances):
Property Tax
Accounts
Internal Balances
Inventories
Reslricted Assels:
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investments
Other Assets
Capital Assets:
Land, Art, and Construction in Progress
Other Capital Assets, Net of Accumulated Depreciafion
Total Capital Assets

537,665
1.563,515
411,085

$

Total Assets

Tolal Assets and Deferred Outflows

$

_

1,150,682
977,873
(50,892)
24,498

Deferred Outflows

105,422
271,858

643,087
1,835,373
411,085
1,150,682
1,318,709

340,836
50,892
21,808

46,306

28,689
593,643
17,778

1,121,163
2,730,771
91,354

1,149,852
3,324,414
109,132

1,983,594
6,297,580
8.281.174
13,535,710

2,274,965
11.547.521
13.822.486
18,556.590

4,258,559
17,845,101
22.103.660
32,092,300

281,487

320,939

602,426

S
s

13,817,197

S

18,877,529

S

32,694,726

$

579,901
297,981
225,459
401,318
113,862
148,923

$

340,810

$

273,287
164,317
144,227
200,095

920,711
297,981
498.746
565,635
258,089
349,018

314,682
19,202,103
21,284,229
1,576,293

307,813
13,294,786
14,725,335
1,645,152

622,495
32,496,889
36,009,564
3,221,445

22,860,522

16,370.487

39,231,009

28.744

2.713,825

2,742,569

193,782
35,298

193,782
200,235
1,327.058
142.765
158.165
300.101
113,661
35,200
(11,749,819)
(6.536,283)

LIABILITIES AND DEFERRED INFLOWS
Short-term Debl
Accrued Interest
Accrued and Other Liabilities
Unearned Revenue
Derivative Instrument Liability
Long-term Liabilities:
Due Within One Year
Due in More Than One Year
Total Liabilities
Deferred Inflows
Total Liabilities and Deferred Inflows
NET POSITION
Net Investmeni in Capital Assets
Restricted for;
Capital Projects
Debt Service
Special Taxing Areas
Passenger Facility Charges
Contractual Use Agreement
Airport Development Fund ..
Customer Facility Charges ..
Other Purposes
Unrestricted (Deficit)
Total Net Position

-

164,937
1.327.058

-

-

?

See noles to basic financial statements.

17

(10,564,064)
(9.043.325)

$

142,765
158.165
300.101
113,661
35.200
(1,185.755)
2,507,042

?

 Exhibit 2
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF ACTIVITIES
Year Ended December 31, 2014
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)

Functions/Programs

Expenses

Primary Government
Governmental Acfivifies:
General Governmenl
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportafion
Health
Cultural and Recreafional
Interest on Long-term Debt ..
Tolal Governmental Activifies

$

Business-type Acfivities:
Water
Sewer
Chicago Midway Internafional Airport
Chicago-O'Hare Inlernational Airport
Chicago Skyway
Total Business-type Activities

2,857,789
2,913,469
275,814
475,751
125,068
121,548
580,701
7,350,140

Licenses, Permits,
Fines and
Charges for Services

$

819,235

692,634
322,228
216,662
1,012,529

455,433
225,600
248,231
1,029,559
10,314
1,969,137

Total Primary Government

$

See notes to basic financial statements.

18

9,319,277

505,275
208,206
44,552
44,278
2,281
14,643

2,244,053
$

3,063,288

 Program Revenues

Nel (Expense) Revenue and Changes in Net Assets
Primary Government

Operating
Grants and
Contnbutions

Capilal
Grants and
Contribulions

294,052
57,633
249,860

(2,058,462)
(2,647,630)
(231,262)
(181,613)
(18,340)
(92,378)
(580,701)
(5,810,386)

249,860

1,766

95,624

$

345,484

(5,810,386)

General Revenues
Taxes.
Property Tax
UfililyTax
Sales Tax
Transportation Tax
Transacfion Tax
Special Area Tax
Recreation Tax
Olher Taxes
Grants and Contributions nol Restricted to
Specific Programs
Unresfricted Investment Earnings
Miscellaneous
Tolal General Revenues
Change in Net Assets
Net Position - Beginning
Net Position - Ending

238,967
96,628
(26,743)
72,002
(10,314)
370,540

238,967
96,628
(26,743)
72,002
(10,314)
370,540

4,826
89,032

470,659

Total

(2,058,462)
(2,647,630)
(231,262)
(181,613)
(18,340)
(92,378)
(580,701)
(5,810,386)

104,447
14,527
470,659

Business-type
Acfivities

Governmental
Activifies

(5,439.846)

370,540

926,839
570,469
324,273
406,624
379.256
260,256
193,680
130,266

$

19

740,911
62,400
194,415
4,189,389
(1,620,997)
(7,422,328)
(9,043,325)

926,839
570,469
324,273
406,624
379,256
260,256
193,680
130.266

$

35,849
49,430
85,279
455,819
2,051,223
2,507,042

740,911
98,249
243,845
4,274,668
(1,165,178)
(5,371,105)
$

(6,536,283)

 Exhibit 3
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
BALANCE SHEET
GOVERNMENTAL FUNDS
December 3 1 , 2014
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)

General
ASSETS
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investments
Cash and Investments with Escrow Agent
Receivables (Net of Allowances):
Property Tax
Accounts
Due From Other Funds
Due From Other Governmenis
Inventories
Restricted Cash and Cash Equivalents
Restricted Investments
Other Assels
Total Assets

$

1.102
102.400

$

209,386
109,514
241,878
24,498
389

LIABILITIES, DEFERRED INFLOWS AND FUND BALANCE
Liabilities:
Voucher Warrants Payable
Bonds, Notes and Olher Obligations Payable - Current
Accrued Interest
Due To Other Funds
Accrued and Olher Liabilifies
Line of Credit and Commercial Paper
Claims Payable
Unearned Revenue
Total Liabililies

22,980
71,036

$

403,019
588,005

3,778
10,059
452,721

288,302
4,429
423,933
-

3,220

1

$

689,167

$

4,075
567,869

$

1,707,689

$

185,783

$

157,929

$

117,027

Deferred Inflows

11,682
2,920

276,805
69,811

296,159
9,861

13,326
2,164
547,889~

69,825
533,774

131,629

259,140

249,002

15,230

1,327,058

-

-

Fund Balance:
Nonspendable
Reslricted
Committed
Assigned
Unassigned
Total Fund Balance
Total Liabilities, Deferred Inflows and Fund Balance

Special
Taxing
Areas

Federal, State
and Local
Grants

24,498

$

See noles to basic financial statements.

20

65,223
51,557
141,278
689,167

-

$

(240,275)
(225,045)
567,869

$

1,327,058
1,707,689

 Service
Concession
and
Reserve
$

99

Bond, Note
Redemplion
and Interest

$

-

626,045

$

14

$

-

1,025,164

_

-

$

616,820

$

783,740

$

$

38,999

$

64,877
4,400
1,464
94,698
67,648
21,423

$

56,996
95,373
77,800

198,086

-

5,154
1,576,293

420,051

-

-

$

(26,872)
(26,872)
1,025,164

$

347,652
616,820

314,563

2,819,049

$

214,667
783,740

Amounts reported for governmental activities in the statement of nel position are different because
Capital assels used in governmental activilies are nol financial resources
and therefore are nol reported in the funds
Other long-term assels are not available to pay for current-period
expenditures and therefore are recorded as deferred inflows in the funds
Certain liabilities, including bonds payable, are not due and payable in the current
period and therefore are not reported in the funds
Net posifion of governmental acfivifies
21

1,150,682
242,233
724,769
735,640
24,498
28,689
593,643
4,075
6,016,494

254,510

139,491
75,176

347.652

537,665
1,563,515
411,085

564,629
86,731
225,459
827,180
245,613
297,309
13,326
113,862
2,374,109

-

269,168

-

620,891

$

-

211

41,873
631,985

15,553
190,447
72,552

Tolal
Governmental
Funds

370,907
16,608
79,210
38,463

2,626
97,053

82,331
223,995
85,700

5,140

77,793
439,137

-

-

-

$

$

2,578

24,868
593,643

(1,576,293)
(955,402)
626,045

$

-

-

$

Other
Governmental
Funds

491,473
2,971

2,435
5,000

$

17.119
172,490
338,533

Community
Development
and Improvement
Projects

$

24,498
1,829,431
696,067
65,223
(1,791,883)
823,336
6,016,494

8,281,174
1,242.756

$

(19,390,591)
(9.043,325)

 Exhibit 4
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF R E V E N U E S , EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES IN FUND B A L A N C E S
GOVERNMENTAL FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2014
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)

Federal,
Stale and
Local
Grants

General
Revenues.
Property Tax
UfililyTax
Sales Tax (Local)
Transportafion Tax
State Income Tax
State Sales Tax
Transacfion Tax
Special Area Tax
Recreation Tax
Other Taxes
Federal/Stale Grants
Internal Service
Licenses and Permits
Fines
Investment Income
Charges for Services
Miscellaneous
Total Revenues
Expenditures:
Current:
General Government
Health
Public Safely
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Cultural and Recreational
Employee Pensions
Olher
Capital Outlay
Debt ServicePrincipal Retirement
Inleresi and Other Fiscal Charges
Tolal Expenditures
Revenues (Under) Over Expendiiures

Special
Taxing
Areas

$

$

$

473,496
285,773
185,076
278,031
334,526
316,201
193,680
109,004
2,335
305.716
119,940
338,329
1,573
141,850
90,620

809,840
-

331,380
4,822
5
2,149

3,176,150

809,840

338,356

929,918
25,902
2,020,072
195,390
47,309
-

360,892
102,350
40,122
237,961
12,272

446,652
15
419
139,933
15

2,298
-

2,197
9,863

-

7,830
2,539

_
-

-

3,231,258
(55,108)

Continued on following pages.

22

765,657

587,034

44,183

(248,678)

 Service
Concession
and Reserve

$

Bond, Note
Redemption
and Inlerest
$

-

481,698
22,332
38,500
12,552

17

2,203

-

Community
Development
and
Improvement
Projects

Nonmajor
Governmental
Funds

$

$

-

448,143
74,641

208,996
126,019

63,055

21,245

30,046

-

Tolal
Governmental
Funds
$

929,841
570,469
324,273
406,624
404,050
334,526
379,256
331,380
193,680
130,266
812,175
335,762
122,143
353,517
69,650
172,928
179,939

21,033

15.303

27,538

15,188
106
31,073
23,296

60,640

590,568

33,117

1,041,808

6,050,479

- .

306,081
502
6,785
73,584
93,298
81,238
483,493
915
67,854

2,043,557
128,769
2,066,979
269,393
518,501
93,525
483,493
5,410
395,216

73,487
31,720

599,395
568,156

1.218,957

7,172,394

39.607

-

17,963

-

5,579

-

14

_
14
60,626

518,078
533,897
1,051,975
(461,407)

317,499

317,499
(284,382)

(177,149)

23

(1,121.915)

 Exhibit 4 - Concluded
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES IN FUND BALANCES
GOVERNMENTAL FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2014
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)

Federal,
State and
Local
Grants

General
Other Financing Sources (Uses):
Issuance of Debt
Premium
Payment lo Refunded Bond Escrow Agent

$

$

$

97,513
(44,463)

39,700
(10,081)

Transfers Out
Total Other Financing Sources (Uses)

29,619

Net Changes in Fund Balance
Fund Balance, Beginning of Year
Fund Balance, End of Year

17,168

Special
Taxing
Areas

$

141,278

See notes to basic financial statements.

24

(195,628)
1,522,686

61,351
(286,396)

(25,489)
167,057
(290)
.

53,050

17,168

$

(225,045)

$

1,327,058

 Service
Concession
Agreements
and Reserve

$

Bond, Note
Redemption
and Inlerest

$

5,000
(13,900)

328,471
9,995
(302,862)
366,198
(164,268)

(8,900)

-

51,726
(1,007,128)

$

(955,4021

Community
Developmenl
and
Improvement
Projects

$

7,004
(279,009)

137,171
(140,865)

237,534

268,443

122.036

718,950

(223,873)
197,001

(15,939)
363,591

(55,113)
269,780

(402,965)
1.226,591
(290)

(26,872)

$

-

347,652

$

-

$

123,468
2,262

Tolal
Governmental
Funds

1,004,347
17,465
(302.862)
652,586
(652,586)

$

535,240
5,208

Nonmajor
Governmental
Funds

$

25

214,667

$

823,336

 Exhibit 5
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
RECONCILIATION OF THE STATEMENT OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES
IN FUND BALANCES OF GOVERNMENTAL FUNDS TO THE STATEMENT OF ACTIVITIES
Year Ended December 31, 2014
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Amounts reported for governmental acfivifies in the statement of acfivifies are different from amounts reported for
govemmental funds in the statement of revenues, expenditures and changes in fund balances because;
Net change in fund balances - total governmental funds

$

Governmental funds report capilal outlays as expenditures. However, in
the statement of acfivities the cost of those assets is allocated over their
esfimated useful lives and reported as depreciafion expense. This is the
amount by which capital oufiays exceeded depreciafion in the current
period

(402,965)

303,167

Revenues in the statement of activilies lhat do not provide current financial
resources are not reported as revenues in the funds

(155,112)

Bond proceeds provide current financial resources fo govemmental funds,
but issuing debt increases long-term liabilifies in the statement of net
assets. This is the amount by which proceeds exceeded repayments

(115,625)

Certain expenses reported in the statement of activifies do not require
the use of currenl financial resources and therefore are not reported as
expenditures in governmental funds
Change in the net position of governmental activities

See notes to basic financial statements.

26

(1,250,462)
$

(1,620,997)

 Exhibit 6
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF R E V E N U E S AND EXPENDITURES
G E N E R A L FUND (BUDGETARY BASIS)
Year Ended December 31, 2014
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)

Revenues:
Utility Tax
Sales Tax
Transportafion Tax
Transaction Tax
Recreation Tax
Business Tax
State Income Tax
Slale Sales Tax
State Auto Rental
Federal/State Grants
Internal Service
Licenses and Permils
Fines
Investment Income
Charges for Services
Municipal Ufilifies
Leases, Rentals and Sales
Miscellaneous
Budgeted Prior Years' Surplus
and Reappropriations
Transfers In/Out

$

Tolal Revenues
Expenditures:
Currenl:
General Government
Health
Public Safely
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Debl Service:
Principal Retirement
Interest and Other Fiscal Charges
Total Expenditures
Revenues Over (Under) Expenditures ... $

B U D G E T AND ACTUAL

Original

Final

Actual

Budget

Budget

Amounts

Variance

450,274
274,505
183,732
284,627
182,565
102,470
293,700
322,272
4,100
1,500
318,212
131,668
414,680
4,725
124,476
6,656
22,118
55,920

450,274
274,505
183,732
284,627
182,565
102,470
293,700
322,272
4,100

473,496
285,773
185,076
316,201
193,680
104,829
278,031
334,526
4,175

1,500
318.212
131,668
414,680
4,725
124,476
6,656
22,118
55,920

2,335
305,716
119,940
338,329
1,573
134,593
7,257
24,127
66,493

23,222
11,268
1,344
31,574
11,115
2,359
(15,669)
12,254
75
835
(12,496)
(11,728)
(76,351)
(3,152)
10,117
601
2,009
10,573

53,417
58,608

53,417
58,608

45,472
39,700

(7,945)
(18,908)

3,290.225

3,290,225

3,261,322

(28,903)

1,051,842
28,127
1,960,557
196,446
50,873

1,051,842
28,127
1.960,557
196,446
50,873

958,216
26,229
2,037,661
189,909
46,927

93,626
1,898
(77,104)
6,537
3,946

1,830
550

1,830
550

1,830
550

3,290,225

3,290,225

3.261,322

-

See notes lo basic financial statements.

27

28,903

 Exhibit 7
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF NET POSITION
PROPRIETARY FUNDS
December 31, 2014
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Business-type Activities - Enterprise Funds
Major Funds
ChicagoMidway
International
Airport

Sewer

Water

ChicagoO'Hare
International
Airport

Chicago
Skyway

Total

ASSETS AND DEFERRED OUTFLOWS
CURRENT ASSETS;
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investments
Accounts Receivable (Nel of
Allowances)
Inlerest Receivable
Due from Other Funds
Cash and Cash Equivalents - Restricted
Investments - Reslricted
Interest Receivable - Restricted
Other Assets - Restricted
TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS

$

23,551
101.359
159,613
163
91,224
21,192
12,596
132,451
599

S

69,205
41,974
91,339

29,416
616
21,247
103,473
541

542,748

357,811

$

6,358
34,042
11,518

527

72,514

-

$

5,632
94,002
76,760
212
33,751

494,735

2,860

$

676
481

$

105,422
271,858

2

339,232
375
154,918
21,808
601,092
235,924
1,140
2,860

1,159

1,734,629

-

-

124,959

707,952

55,742
310,902
262
3,045

9,964

520,071
2,489,761
3,946
34,774
1,229
53,720

NONCURRENTASSETS
Cash and Cash Equivalents - Restricted
Investments - Restricted
Interest Receivable - Restricted
Other Assels - Restncled
Due from Other Governments - Restricted
Olher Assets

-

-

-

-

4,898

3,970

901

464,329
1,503,728
3,684
31,729
1,229
33,987

5,083

560

114,780

885,669

12,609

1,018,701

3,986.305
(966,834)
457,645

2,494,910
(495,953)
25,703

1,556,519
(519,551)
20,585

8,208,757
(2,973,903)
752,331

490.818
(233,547)

16,737,309
(5,189,788)
1,256,264

3,482,199

2.025,220

1,172,333

6,872,854

269,880

13,822,486

3,873,187

2,318,231

1,543,185

8,911,540

279,844

16,925,987

2,676,042

1,668,144

9,619,492

281,003

18,660,616

386,090

289,041

-

Property, Plant, and Equipment:
Land
Structures, Equipment and
Improvements
Accumulated Depreciafion
Construction Work in Progress
Total Property, Plant and Equipment
TOTAL NONCURRENT ASSETS;
TOTAL ASSETS
DEFERRED OUTFLOWS

4,415,935
129,229

89,905

51,633

50,172

TOTAL ASSETS and DEFERRED OUTFLOWS .. $ 4,545,164

$ 2,765,947

S 1,719,777

$ 9,659,664

See notes to basic financial statements.

28

-

S 281,003

320,939
S 18,981,555

 Business-type Activities - Enterprise Funds
Major Funds

Water

ChicagoMidway
Internalional
Airport

Sewer

ChicagoO'Hare
International
Airport

Chicago
Skyway

Total

UABILITIES
CURRENT LIABILITIES:
Voucher Warrants Payable
Due to Olher Funds
Accrued and Other Liabilities
Unearned Revenue
Current Liabilities Payable From
Restricted Assets

$

26,168 :$
20,130
92,312
22,411

4,242
71,228
31,047
18,076

$

18,732
9,134
2,165
558

$

61,106
3,519
7,409
103,182

$

-

110,388
104,026
132,933
144.227
836,290

140
15

$

144,321

124,720

72,514

494,735

.

305,342

249,313

103,103

669,951

155

2,456,933
98,106
1,577

1,710,019
71,861

1,590,934
30,128
2,310

7,536,900

TOTAL NONCURRENT LIABILITIES

2,556,616

1,781,880

1,623,372

7,539,629

-

TOTAL LIABILITIES

2,861.958

2,031,193

1,726,475

8,209,580

155

14,829,361

1,645,152

1,645,152

269,880

2,713,825

TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITIES

1,327,864

NONCURRENT LIABILITIES:
Revenue Bonds and
Commercial Paper Payable
Denvative Instrument Liability
Other

-

-

DEFERRED INFLOWS

-

2,729

.

13,294,786
200,095
6,616
13.501,497

NET POSITION:
Net Investement
in Capital Assets
Restricted Nel Position;
Debt Service
Capital Projects
Passenger Facility Charges
Contractual Use Agreement
Air Development Fund
Customer Facility Charge
Other
Unrestncted Net Position

1,393,968

520,627

_
599
. . . .

TOTAL NET POSITION

111,333

-

-

288,639

102,794

$ 1,683,206 S5

734,754

See noles to basic financial statements.

29

(115,080)

644,430

12,109
10,160
4,558
28,282

23,189
71,690
138,107
129,883
300,101
90,010
27,534
35,140

23,651
7,666
21,856
$

(6,698) $ 1,460,084

(1,634,184)

35,298
193,782
142,765
158.165
300,101
113,661
35,200
(1,185,755)

$ (1,364,304) $

2,507,042

-

 Exhibit 8
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF R E V E N U E S , E X P E N S E S AND CHANGES IN NET POSITION
PROPRIETARY FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2014
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Business-type Activities - Enterprise Funds
Major Funds

Water
Operaling Revenues;
Charges for Sen/ices - Net
Rent

Olher

S

670,559
-

Sewer
$

321,100
-

ChicagoMidway
Intemational
Airport
$

83455
86,804

ChicagoO'Hare
International
Airport
$

552,431
292,093

Chicago
Skyway
$

•

22,075

VI28

692,634

322,228

170,259

844.524

-_

120,607
55,664
1,886
22,089
57,949
77,371
21,105

14,394
3,336
64.809
.
36.701
36,740
-

47,836
23,255
44,160
.
46,163
14,345

182,984
88,143
110,928
.
218,211
112,952

-

Total Operating Expenses

356,671

155,980

175,759

Operating Income (Loss)

335,963

166,248

(515)
(98,762)
(2,223)

Total Operating Revenues
Operating Expenses:
Personnel Services
Contractual Sen/ices
Repairs and Maintenance
Commodities and Materials
Depreciation and Amortization
General Fund Reimbursements
Other

-

•_

Total
$ 1,627,545
378,897

23,203
2,029,645

10,314
-

365,821
170,398
221,783
22,089
369,338
114,111
148,402

713,218

10,314

1,411,942

(5,500)

131,306

(10,314)

617,703

2,984
(69,620)
829

3,540
(64,111)
39,889
6,514
(3,103)
(5,258)
1,522

29,838
(300,295)
131,721
36,284
(15,892)
(154)
30,845

2
18,457

35,849
(532,788)
171,610
42,798
(18,995)
(5,412)
49,430

(65,807)

(21,007)

(87.653)

18,459

(257,508)

4,826

89,032

-

95,624

.

Nonoperating Revenues (Expenses):
Investment Income (Loss)
Interest Expense
Passenger Facility Charges
Customer Facility Charges
Noise Mitigation Costs
Cosl of Issuance
Other
Total Nonoperating Revenues
(Expenses)
Capital Grants
Net Income (Loss)
Net Position (Deficit)-Beginning of Year . ..
Net Position (Deficit)-End of Year

(101,500)
1,766

-

236,229

100,441

(21,681)

132,685

8,145

455,819

1,446,977

634,313

14,983

1,327,399

(1,372,449)

2,051.223

$ 1,683,206

S 734,754

See notes to basic financial statements

30

$

(6,698) $ 1,460,084

S (1,364,304) $ 2,507,042

 Exhibit 9
CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
PROPRIETARY FUNDS
Y e a r E n d e d D e c e m b e r 31, 2014
( A m o u n t s are in T h o u s a n d s of D o l l a r s )
Business-type Activities - Enterprise Funds
Major Funds

Water

ChicagoMidway
International
Airport

Sewer

ChicagoO'Hare
International
Airport

Chicago
Skyway

Total

Cash Flows from Operating Activities-

.$

Received from Customers
Payments to Vendors
Payments to Employees
Transactions wilh Other City Funds

$

164,849
(83,377)
(39.295)
(6,440)

$

-

$

670,519 $
(80,663)
(120,607)
(143,903)

310,970
(35.780)
(43,517)
(40,218)

325,346

191,355

35,737

340,950

893,388

462,500

338,026

972,038

43,380

1,815.944

(334,191)

(167.115)

(41,443)
4,894
(5,258)
(797,008)
(82,378)
(59,237)
46,539

(289,835)
88,942
(154)

14

(832.584)
93,836
(8,558)
(797,008)
(332,835)
(606,899)
216,376
14

14

(451,714)

$

842,353
(272,612)
(167,248)
(61,543)

1,988,691
(472,432)
(370,767)
(252,104)

Cash Flows Provided By
Operating Activities
Cash Flows from Capital and Related
Financing Activities:
Proceeds from Issuance of Bonds/
Commercial Paper
Acquisition and Construction of
Capital Assets
Capilal GranI Receipts

(3,146)

Bond Issuance Costs
Payment to Refund Bonds

(43,633)
(109,432)

Principal Paid on Debt
Interest Paid

(37,929)
(59,860)

Passenger and Customer Facility Charges

(168,895)
(368,370)
169,837

Concessionaire Funds
Cash Flows (Used in) Provided By Capital

(27,902)

and Related Financing Aclivities

63,122

38,147

(525,095)

(2,609)
1,029

(15,892)
1,999

(18,501)
3,028

(1,580)

(13,893)

(15,473)

Cash Flows from Non Capital Financing Activities

-

Noise Mitigation Program

•

Proceeds from Settlement Agreement
Cash Flows Used in Non Capital
Financing Activities
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Sale (Purchases) of Investments, Net

....

Investment Income (Loss)

(306,037)
8,209

(213,388)
4.657

(111,577)
2.953

162,528
17,991

(106)
2

(468,580)
33,812

(297,828)

(208,731)

(108,624)

180,519

(104)

(434,768)

45,746

(36.320)

(17519)

(90)

(8,557)

Cash Flows Provided By (Used in)
Investing Activities
Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash and
Cash Equivalents

(384)
36,531

Cash and Cash Equivalents, Beginning ol Year
Cash and Cash Equivalents, End ol Year

S

36,147

44,706
S

90,452

See notes lo basic financial staiemenls

31

170,934
S

134.614

766

982,215
S

964,696

$

675

1,235,152
S

1,226,585

 Exhibit 9 - Concluded
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT O F CASH FLOWS
PROPRIETARY FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2014
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Business-type Activities - Enterpnse Funds
Major Funds

Sewer

Water
Reconciliation of Operating Income lo
Cash Flows from Operating Activities'
Operating Income (Loss)
Adjustments to Reconcile.
Depreciation and Amortization
Provision for Uncollectible Accounts
Change in Assets and Liabilities.
(Increase) Deaease in Receivables
(Increase) Decrease in Due From Other Funds
Increase (Decrease) in Voucher Warrants
Payable and Due to Other Funds
Increase (Decrease) in Unearned Revenue
and Olher Liabilities
(Increase) Decrease in Inventories and
Other Assets
Cash Flows from
Operating Activities

Supplemental Disclosure of
Noncash Items:
Capital asset additions in 2014
have outstanding accounts payable
and accrued and other liabilities

$

335,963

$

166,248

$

ChicagoO'Hare
Inlernational
Airport

$ (10,314) $

617,703

46,164
(329)

218,212

10,314

359,340
38,755

(45,813)
(71,789)

(29,162)
(2,489)

3,739
3,612

(10,318)
(2,542)

(1,541)

(3,463)

(4,043)

4,389

647

(8,492)

652

6

1,728
19,120

189

$

191,355

$

35,737

$

340,950

64,553

$

54,611

$

18,615

$

89,773

32

(81,554)
(73,208)

8,146

325,346

See noles lo basic financial statements.

Total

131,306

36,701
15,557

15,077

Chicago
Skyway

(5,500) $

57,949
22.537

10,775

$

ChicagoMidway
Intemational
Airport

1,494

-

$

$

-

$

893.388

227,552

 Exhibit 10
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF FIDUCIARY NET POSITION
FIDUCIARY FUNDS
December 31, 2014
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Pension
Trust

Agency

ASSETS
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investments
Investments, at Fair Value
Bonds and U.S. Government
Obligations

$

234,273
-

$

53,202
109,447

2,426,669

Slocks

5,139,698

Mortgages and Real Estate
Other
Cash and Investments wilh
Escrow Agent
Property Tax Receivable
Accounts Receivable, Net
Due From City
Properly, Plant, Equipment and other
Invested Securities Lending Collateral

668,384
1,862,939
623,874
51,519
570
906,189

Total Assets

6,437
91,619
114,155

-

$

11,914,115

$

374,860

$

341.537
906,189

$

37.534
259,623
-

1,247,726

S

297,157

_$

787

$

77,703

$

1,248,513

$

374,860

LIABILITIES
Voucher Warrants Payable
Accrued and Olher Liabilities
Securities Lending Collateral
Tolal Liabilities
Deferred Inflows
Total Liabililies and Deferred Inflows
NET POSITION

Restricted for Pension Benefits

10,665,602

Total Nel Position

$

See notes to basic financial statements.

33

10,665,602

 Exhibit 11
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT O F CHANGES IN PLAN NET POSITION
FIDUCIARY FUNDS - PENSION TRUST FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2014
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)

Tolal
ADDITIONS
Conlributions:
Employees

$

Cily

290,063

470,199
Total Contribulions

760,262

Investment Income:
Net Appreciation in
Fair Value of Investments
Interest, Dividends and Olher
Investment Expense

365,194
232,118
(50,906)

Net Investment Income

546,406

Securities Lending Transactions:
Securities Lending Income
Securities Lending Expense

2,711
1,075

Net Securities Lending Transactions

3,786

Total Additions

1,310,454

DEDUCTIONS
Benefits and Refunds of Deductions
Administrative and General

1,888,392
17,713

Total Deductions

1,906,105

Net Increase in Nel Position

(595,651)

Net Position:
Beginning of Year
EndofYear

11,261,253
$

See notes to basic financial statements.

34

10,665,602

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
1)

Summary of Significant Accounting Policies

The Cily of Chicago (City), incorporated in 1837, is a "home rule" unil under State of Illinois (State) law. The City has
a mayor-council form of government. The Mayor is the Chief Executive Officer of the City and is elected by general
election. The Cily Council is the legislative body and consists of 50 members, each representing one of the City's 50
wards. The members of the City Council are elected through popular vote by ward for four-year terms.
The accounting policies of the City are based upon accounting principles generally accepted in the Uniled States of
America as prescribed by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB). Effective January 1, 2014, the
City adopted the following GASB Statements:
GASB Statement No. 67, Financial Reporting for Pension Plans, an amendment of GASB No. 25 ("GASB
67"), was established to provide improved financial reporting by state and local government pension plans.
The Pension Plans (as defined below in subsection a) adopted GASB No. 67 during the year ended
December 3 1 , 2014.
GASB Statemeni No. 69, Government Combinations and Disposals of Government Operations ("GASB
69"), establishes accounting and financial reporting standards related to government combinations and
disposals of government operations. The Cily adopted GASB 69 for the year ended December 3 1 ,
2014. GASB 69 requires disclosures to be made about government combinations and disposals of
governmenl operations lo enable financial statemeni users to evaluate the nature and financial effects of
those transactions. There was no impact on the City's Financial Statements as a resull of the implementation
of GASB 69.
GASB Statement No. 70, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Nonexchange Financial Guarantees
("GASB 70"), establishes accounting and financial reporting standards for financial guarantees that are
nonexchange transactions (nonexchange financial guarantees) extended or received by a state or local
governmenL The Cily adopted GASB 70 during the year ended December 3 1 , 2014. GASB 70 requires a
government that has issued an obligation guaranteed in a nonexchange transaction to report the obligation
until legally released as an obligor. This Statement also requires a government lhat is required to repay a
guarantor for making a payment on a guaranteed obligation or legally assuming the guaranteed obligation to
continue to recognize a liability until legally released as an obligor. When a government is released as an
obligor, the government should recognize revenue as a result of being relieved of the obligation. This
Statement also provides addilional guidance for intra-entity nonexchange financial guarantees involving
blended component units and requires disclosures to be made about government combinations and disposals
of government operations to enable financial statement users to evaluate the nature and financial effects of
those transactions.
There was no impact on the City's Financial Statements as a result of the
implementation of GASB 70.
Other accounting standards that the City is currently reviewing for applicabilily and potenlial impact on the financial
statements include:
GASB Slalement No. 68, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Pensions ("GASB 68"), establishes new
financial reporting requiremenls for most governments that provide their employees with pension benefits
through these types of plans. GASB 68 will be effective for the Cily beginning with its year ending December
31, 2015. GASB 68 replaces the requirements of GASB Statement No. 27, Accounting for Pensions by State
and Local Governmental Employers and GASB Statement No. 50, Pension Disclosures, as they relate to
governments that provide pensions through pension plans administered as trusts or similar arrangements that
meet certain critena. GASB 68 requires governments providing defined benefit pensions to recognize their
long-term obligation for pension benefits as a liability for the first time, and lo more comprehensively and
comparably measure the annual costs of pension benefits. The Statement also enhances accountability and
transparency through revised and new nole disclosures and required supplementary information (RSI). As of
December 3 1 , 2014, the City reported a net pension obligation of $8.6 billion on the slalement of net position
and disclosed wilhin Note 11 a combined unfunded actuarial accrued liability for all of the pension plans of
$19.7 billion in accordance with GASB Statemeni No. 27. During 2014, the Pension Plans (as defined below
35

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
in subsection a) implemented GASB Statement No. 67, Financial Reporting for Pension Plans - an
amendment of GAS6 Statement No. 25. and disclosed a combined nel pension liability of S20.1 billion. The
City has not yet determined the impaci, if any, GASB 68 will have on the enterprise fund financial statements.
GASB Statement No. 7 1 , Pension Transition for Contnbutions Made Subsequent to the Measurement Date an amendment of GASB Statement No. 68 ("GASB 71"), relates to amounts associated with contribulions, if
any. made by a stale or local governmenl employer or nonemployer contributing entity to a defined benefit
pension plan after the measuremenl date of the government's beginning net pension liability. GASB 71 will be
effective for the City beginning with its year ending December 3 1 , 2015. This Statement amends paragraph
137 of Statement 68 to require lhal, at transition, a government recognize a beginning deferred outflow of
resources for ils pension contribulions, if any, made subsequent to the measurement date of the beginning
net pension liability and requires that beginning balances for other deferred outflows of resources and
deferred inflows of resources related to pensions be reported at transition only if it is practical to determine all
such amounts.
GASB Statement No. 72 Fair Value Measurement and Application ("GASB 72"), addresses accounting and
financial reporting issues related lo fair value measurements. GASB 72 will be effective for the City beginning
with its year ending December 3 1 , 2016. This Statement provides guidance for determining a fair value
measurement for financial reporting purposes and the related disclosures. This Statement requires a
government lo use valuation techniques that are appropriate under the circumstances and for which sufficient
data are available lo measure fair value. This Statement establishes a hierarchy of inputs to valuation
techniques used to measure fair value. This Statement also requires disclosures to be made about fair value
measurements, the level of fair value hierarchy, and valuation techniques.
a)

Reporting Entity - The Cily includes the Chicago Public Library. The financial statements for the City have
been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in fhe United States of America
(GAAP), applicable to governmental units, as required by the Municipal Code of Chicago (Code).
The Cily's financial statements include the following legal entities as fiduciary trust funds:
The Municipal Employees' Annuitv and Benefit Fund of Chicago is governed by a five-member board: three
members are elected by plan participants and two are members ex-officio.
The Laborers' and Relirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago is governed by an
eight-member board' two members are elected by plan participants, two are members ex-officio, two
members are appointed by the City Department of Human Resources, one member is elected by relired plan
participants and one member is elected by the local labor union.
The Policemen's Annuitv and Benefit Fund of Chicago is governed by an eight-member board: four members
are elected by plan participants and four are appointed by the Mayor.
The Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago is governed by an eight-member board: four members
are elected by plan participants and four are members ex-officio.
Financial statements for each of these four pension plans (colleclively,"Pension Plans") may be obtained at
the respective fund's office.

b)

Related Organizations - Cily officials are responsible for appointing a voting majority of the members of the
boards of other organizations, but the City's accountability for these organizations does not extend beyond
making appointments and no financial accountability or fiscal dependency exists between the City and these
organizations. Therefore, the Chicago Park District, Chicago Public Building Commission, Chicago Public
Schools, Community College District No. 508, Chicago Housing Authorily and the Chicago Transit Authority
are deemed to be related organizalions.
Government-wide and fund financial statements - The government-wide financial statements (i.e., the
slalement of nel position and the statement of activities) report information on all of the nonfiduciary aclivities
36

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
of the government. For the most part, the effect of interfund activity has been removed from these
statements.
Governmental activities, which normally are supported by taxes and intergovernmental
revenues, are reported separately from business-type activities, which rely lo a significant extent on user fees
and charges for services.
The statemeni of activities demonstrates tho degree lo which the direct expenses of a given function or
segment is offset by program revenues. Direct expenses are those lhal are clearly identified wilh a specific
function or segment Program revenues include: 1) charges lo customers or applicants who purchase, use or
directly benefit from goods, services, or privileges provided by a given function or segment and 2) grants and
contributions lhat are restricted to meeting the operational or capital requirements of a particular function or
segment. Taxes and other items not property included among program revenues are reported instead as
general revenues. Separate fund financial statements are provided for governmental funds, propnetary
funds, and fiduciary funds, even though the fiduciary funds are excluded from the government-wide financial
statements. Major individual governmental funds and major individual enterprise funds are reported as
separate columns in the fund financial statements.
c)

Measurement focus, basis of accounting, and financial statement presentation - The government-wide
financial statements are reported using the economic resources measurement focus and the accrual basis of
accounting as are the proprietary fund and fiduciary fund financial statements. Revenues are recorded when
earned and expenses are recorded when a liability is incurred, regardless of the timing of related cash flows.
Property taxes are recognized as revenues in the year for which they are levied. Grants and similar items are
recognized as revenue as soon as all eligibility requiremenls imposed by the provider have been met.
Governmental fund financial statements are reported using the current financial resources measurement
focus and the modified accrual basis of accounting. Revenues are recognized as soon as they are both
measurable and available. Revenues are considered to be available when they are collectible wilhin the
current period or soon enough thereafter lo pay liabilities of the current period. For this purpose, the City
considers revenues to be available if they are collecled within 90 days of the end of the current fiscal period
with the exceplion of property tax revenue, which is recorded as deferred inflows unless laxes are received
within 60 days subsequent to year-end. Licenses and permits, charges for services and miscellaneous
revenues are not considered to be susceptible lo accrual and are recorded as revenues when received in
cash. All olher revenue items are considered to be measurable and available only when cash is received by
the City. Expenditures generally are recorded when a liability is incurred, as under accrual basis of
accounting, except for interest and principal on long-term debt, the long-term portion of compensated
absences, claims and judgments and pension obligations.
The City reports the following major governmental funds:
The General Fund is the Cily's primary operating fund. It accounts'for and reports all financial resources
not accounted for and reported in another fund.
Federal, State and Local Grants Fund accounts for the expendiiures for programs, which include
general government, health, public safety, transportation, aviation, cultural and recreational, and capital
outlays. The majority of revenues are provided by several agencies of the Federal governmenl,
departmenls of the Illinois State government and City resources.
Special Taxing Areas Fund accounts for expenditures for special area operations and maintenance and
for redevelopment project cosls as provided by lax levies on special areas.
Service Concession and Reserve Fund accounts for monies committed for mid and long term uses.
The Mid-term portion is subject lo appropriation for neighborhood human infraslruclure programs, health,
and other initiatives, whereas the Long-term portion is committed for future budgetary and credit rating
stabilization. These reserves were created as a result of the Skyway Lease and Parking Meter Syslem
transactions. The deferred inflows result from long-term concession and lease transactions whose
proceeds are recognized as revenue over the lerm of the agreements.
37

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
B o n d , Note Redemption and Interest Fund accounts for the expenditures for principal and interest as
provided by property tax, utility tax, sales lax, transportation tax, and investment income.
Community Development and Improvement Projects Funds accounl for proceeds of debt used lo
acquire properly, finance construction, and finance aulhorized expenditures and supporting services for
various activities.
Within the governmental fund types, fund balances are reported in one of the following classifications:
Nonspendable - includes amounts that cannot be spent because they are either: a) not in a spendable
form; or b) legally or contractually required to be maintained intact
Restricted - includes amounis lhat are restricted to specific purposes, that is, when constraints placed
on the use of resources are either: a) externally imposed by creditors (such as through debt covenants),
grantors, contributors, or laws or regulations of other governments; or b) imposed by law through
constitutional provisions or enabling legislation.
Committed - includes amounts constrained to specific purposes by a government itself, using its
highest level of decision-making authority (i.e, City Council); to be reported as committed, amounts
cannot be used for any olher purpose unless the government takes the same highest-level action to
remove or change the constrainL The City's highest level of decision-making authority is held by the City
Council. The City Council passes Ordinances to commit their fund balances.
Assigned - includes amounts that are constrained by the City's intent to be used for specific purposes,
but that are neither restricted nor committed. Intent is expressed by: a) the City Council itself; or b) a
body or official to which the Cily Council has delegated the authority to assign amounts to be used for
specific purposes. The Budget Director or Comptroller have authority to assign amounts related to
certain legal obligations oulside of the appropriation process wilhin the General Fund. Within the other
governmental fund lypes (special revenue, debt service, and capital projects) resources are assigned in
accordance with the established fund purpose and approved appropriation. Residual fund balances in
these fund types that are not reslricted or committed are reported as assigned.
Unassigned - includes the residual fund balance that has not been restricted, committed, or assigned
within the General Fund and deficit fund balances of other governmental funds.
The City reports the following major proprietary funds as business-type activilies:
Water Fund accounts for the operations of the Chicago Waler System (Water). The Water system
purifies and provides Lake Michigan waler for the City and 125 suburbs. The Water Fund operates two
water treatment facilities and 12 pumping stations with a combined pumping capacity of 3,661 million
gallons per day.
Sewer Fund accounts for the operations of the Wastewater Transmission System (Sewer). The Sewer
system transports wastewater to the Metropolitan Waler Reclamation District of Greater Chicago for
processing and disposal. This service is provided for the residents and businesses of the City and certain
suburban customers.
Chicago Midway International Airport Fund records operations of Chicago Midway International
Airport (Midway) that provides regional travelers with access to airlines that generally specialize in lowcost, point-to-point, origin and destination passenger services. Midway Airport is conveniently located 10
miles from downtown Chicago.

Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Fund records operations of Chicago-O'Hare Inlernational Airport
(O'Hare), the primary commercial airpon for the City. The airlines servicing the airport operate out of four
terminal buildings. Three domestic terminal buildings, having a total of 169 gates, serve domestic flights
38

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
and certain international departures. The Inlernational Terminal, having a total of 20 gates and five
remote aircraft parking positions, servos the remaining international departures and all international
arrivals requiring customs clearance.
Chicago Skyway Fund records operations of the Chicago Skyway (Skyway) which provides vehicle
passage across the Calumet River, between the State of Indiana and the State of Illinois (Stale) through
the operation of a tollway which consists of a 7.8-mile span connecting the Dan Ryan Expressway to the
Indiana Toll Road. Facilities include a single toll plaza consisting of a central office, maintenance garage
and toll collection area. In January 2005, the City entered into a long-term Concession and Lease
Agreement of the Skyway, granting a private company the ability to operate and to collect loll revenue
during the 99-year term of the agreement. The City received a one-time upfront paymenl of $1.83 billion.
Additionally, the City reports the following fiduciary funds:
Pension Trust Funds report expenditures for employee pensions as provided by employee and
employer contributions and investment earnings.
Agency Funds account for transactions for assels held by the City as agent for certain activities or for
various entities. Payroll deductions and special deposits are the primary transactions accounted for in
these funds.
As a general rule, the effect of interfund activity has been eliminated from the government-wide financial
statements. Exceplions lo this general rule are payment-in-lieu of taxes and other charges between the City's
water, sewer, airports and skyway funds. Elimination of these charges would distort the direct costs and program
revenues reported for the various functions concerned.
Amounts reported as program revenues include: 1) charges to customers or applicants for goods and services, or
privileges provided, or fines, 2) operating grants and contnbutions, and 3) capital grants and contnbutions,
including special assessments. Internally dedicated resources are reported as general revenues rather than as
program revenues. Likewise, general revenues include all taxes.
Certain indirect costs have been included as part of the program expenses reported for the various functional
activities.
In the fund financial statements, proprietary funds distinguish operating revenues and expenses from nonoperating items. Operating revenues and expenses generally result from providing services and producing and
delivering goods in connection with a proprietary fund's principal ongoing operations. The principal operating
revenues of the waler and sewer funds are charges to customers for sales and services. The airport funds'
principal operating revenues are derived from landing fees and terminal use charges as well as rents and
concessions. Operaling expenses for enterprise funds include the cost of sales and services, administrative
expenses, and depreciation on capital assets. All revenues and expenses not meeting this definition are reported
as non-operating revenues and expenses.
When bolh restricted and unrestncted resources are available for use, it is the City's policy to use reslricted
resources first, then unrestricted resources, as they are needed.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity wilh GAAP requires management to make certain estimates
and assumplions thai affect the reported amounis of assels and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and
liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the
reporting period. Accordingly, actual results could differ from those estimates.

39

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 3 1 , 2014
d)

Assets, liabilities, deferred inflows, deferred outflows, and net position or equity
i)

Cash, Cash Equivalents and Investments generally are held with the City Treasurer as required by the
Code. Interest earned on pooled investments is allocated to participating funds based upon their average
combined cash and investment balances. Due lo conlraclual agreements or legal restrictions, the cash
and inveslments of certain funds are segregated and earn and receive inlerest directly. The City uses
separate escrow accounts in which certain lax revenues are deposited and held for payment of debt.
The Code permits deposits only lo City Council-approved depositories, which must be regularly organized
state or national banks and federal and stale savings and loan associations, located within the City,
whose deposits are federally insured.
Investments authorized by the Code include interest-bearing general obligations of the Cily, State and
U.S. Government; U.S. Treasury bills and other noninterest-bearing general obligations of the U.S.
Government purchased in the open market below face value; domesjic money market funds regulated
and in good standing with the Securilies and Exchange Commission and tax anticipation warrants issued
by the City. The City is prohibited by ordinance from investing in derivatives, as defined, without City
Council approval. The Cily values its investments al fair value or amortized cost. U.S. Government
securilies purchased at a price other than par with a maturity of less than one year are reported at
amortized cost.
The City's four retirement plans are authorized to invest in bonds, notes, and other obligations of the U.S.
Government; corporate debentures and obligations; insured mortgage notes and loans; common and
preferred stocks; stock options; real estate; and other investment vehicles as set forth in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes. These inveslments are reported at fair value.
Repurchase agreements can be purchased only from banks and certain other institutions authorized to
do business in the State. The Cily Treasurer requires that securities that are pledged to secure these
agreements have a fair value equal lo the cost of the repurchase agreements plus accrued interest.
Investments generally may not have a malurity date in excess of ten years from the date of purchase.
Certain other investments are held in accordance with the specific provisions of applicable ordinances.
Cash equivalents include certificates of deposit and olher investments with maturities of three months or
less when purchased.
Deficit cash balances resull in interfund borrowings from the aggregate of funds other than escrowed
funds. Inlerest income and expense are generally not recognized on these interfund borrowings.
Slate statutes and the City's Pension Plans' policies permit lending Pension Plan securities to brokerdealers and other entities wilh a simultaneous agreement to return the collateral for the same securities in
the future. Securilies lent al year-end for cash collateral are presented as not categorized in the schedule
of custodial credit risk; securities lent for securities collateral are classified according to the category for
the collateral.

ii)

Receivables and Payables activity between funds are representalive of services rendered, outslanding
al the end of the fiscal year, and are referred lo as either "due to/from other funds" (i.e., the current
portion of interfund loans) or "advances to/from other funds" (i.e., the noncurrent portion of interfund
loans). Any residual balances outstanding between the governmental activities and business-type
activities are reported in the governmenl-wide hnancial statements as "internal balances."
All trade and properly lax receivables are shown net of an allowance for uncollectibles. The allowance is
based on historical trends. The estimated value of services provided but unbilled at year-end has been
included in receivables.

40

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
iii) Inventory includes government-wide inventories, which are slated at cost determined principally, using
Ihe average cosl method. For proprietary funds, the costs of inventories are recorded as expenses when
used (consumption method). Governmental fund inventories are accounted for using the purchases
method and represent nonspendable resources because they do not represent expendable available
financial resources.
Iv) Assets Held for Resale includes land and buildings of $4.1 million, recorded at lower of cost or market in
the Federal, Slale and Local Grant Funds. These assels are purchased through the use of federal grants
and City resources and are intended to be resold.
v)

Restricted Assets include certain proceeds of the City's enterprise fund revenue bonds, as well as
certain resources set aside for their repayment. These assets are classified as restricted or committed in
the basic financial statements because they are maintained in separate bank accounts and their use is
limited by applicable bond covenants or specific City Council action.
The Waler and Sewer funds maintain Rale Stabilization Accounts where any net revenues remaining
after providing sufficient funds for all required deposits in the bond accounts may be transferred upon the
direction of the City to be used for any lawful purpose of the specific fund.
The O'Hare and Midway funds maintain Passenger Facility Charge accounts as reslricted as they are
subject to Federal Aviation Administration regulation and approval, to finance specific eligible capital and
debt related activities.

vi) Capital Assets, which include property, plant, equipment, and infrastructure assets (e.g. roads, bridges,
sidewalks, and similar items), are reported in the applicable governmental or business-type activities
columns in the government-wide financial statements. Capital assets are defined by the City as assets,
or a network of assets, with an initial cosl of more than $5,000 (not rounded) and an estimated useful life
in excess of one year. Such assels are recorded at historical cost or estimated historical cost if
purchased or constructed. Donated capital assets are recorded at estimated fair market value at the date
of donation.
The costs of normal maintenance and repairs that do not add to the value of the asset or materially
extend assets' lives are not capitalized.
Major outlays for capilal assets and improvements are capitalized as projects are constructed. Interest
incurred during the construction phase of capital assets of business-type activities is included as part of
the capitalizalion value of the assets constructed. The total interest expense (Governmental and
Business Activilies) incurred by the Cily during the current fiscal year was $1,184.7 million, of which
S83.8 million was capitalized as part of the capilal assets under construction projects in proprietary funds.
Property, plant, and equipment of the City are depreciated using the straight-line method, in the year
subsequent lo acquisition or when placed into service, over the following estimated useful lives:
Utility plant
Utility structures and improvements
Buildings and improvements
Airport runways, aprons, tunnels, taxiways, and paved roads
Bridge infrastructure
Lighting infrastructure
Street infrastructure
Transit infrastructure
Equipment (vehicle, office, and computer)

41

255015510-

100
100
40
30
40
25
1 0 - 25
40
5 - 20

years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
The City has a collection of artwork and historical treasures presented for public exhibition and education
lhat are being preserved for future generations. The proceeds from sales of any pieces of the collection
are used lo purchase other acquisitions. A portion of this collection is nol capitalized or depreciated as
part of capilal assets.

vii) Deferred Outflows represent the fair value of derivative instruments lhal are deemed to be effective
hedges and unamortized loss on bond refundings.
viii) Employee Benefits are granted for vacation and sick leave, workers' compensation and health care.
Unused vacation leave is accrued and may be partially carried over for one year. Sick leave is
accumulated at the rate of one day for each month worked, up to a maximum of 200 days. Severance of
employment terminates all rights to receive compensation for any unused sick leave. Sick leave pay is
not accrued. Employee benefit claims outslanding, including claims incurred but not reported, are
estimated and recorded in Ihe government-wide and proprietary fund financial statements. A liability for
these amounts is reported in governmental funds only if they have matured, for example, as a result of
employee resignations and retirements.
Employees are eligible to defer a portion of their salaries until future years under the City's deferred
compensalion plan created in accordance with Internal Revenue Code Section 457. The deferred
compensation is not available lo employees unlil termination, retirement, death or unforeseeable
emergency. Third-party administrators who maintain the investment portfolio administer the Plan. The
plan's assels have been placed in trusl accounts with the plan administrators for the exclusive benefit of
participants and their beneficiaries and are not considered assets of the City.
The City is subject to the Slate of Illinois Unemployment Compensation Act and has elected the
reimbursing employer option for providing unemployment insurance benefits for eligible former
employees. Under this option, the City reimburses the State for claims paid by the State. Expenditures
for workers' compensation are recorded when paid in the governmental funds. A liability for these
amounts is recorded in the government-wide and proprietary fund financial statements.
ix) Judgments and claims are included in the government-wide financial statements and proprietary fund
types. Uninsured claim expenditures and liabilities are reported when it is probable that a loss has
occurred and the amounl of lhat loss can be reasonably estimated. These losses include an estimate of
claims that have been incurred but not reported. In the fund financial statements, expenditures for
judgments and claims are recorded on the basis of settlements reached or judgments entered within the
current fiscal year. Amounts lhal related to deferred compensatory time and reserves for questioned
costs are treated the same way.
x)

Long-term obligations are included in the government-wide financial statements and proprietary fund
types in the fund financial statements. Long-term debt and other long-term obligations are reported as
liabilities in the applicable governmental activities, business-type activities, or proprietary fund type
statement of net position. Bond premiums and discounts, as well as issuance costs, are deferred and
amortized over the life of the related debt, except in the case of refunding debt transactions where the
amortization period is over the term of the refunding or refunded debt, whichever is shorter.
The Cily enters into interest rate swap agreements to modify interesl rates and/or cash flows on
outstanding debt. For existing swaps, the nel inleresi expendiiures resulting from these arrangements
are recorded as inlerest expense. The fair value of derivative instruments that are deemed to be effective
is accounted for as deferred outfiows. Derivative instruments lhal are deemed not effective are adjusted
to fair value with the change in fair value recorded to investmeni earnings. Under certain bond
ordinances adopted by the Cily Council, inleresi rate swaps and swaptions are authorized to be entered
into by designated City officials in connection with certain bonds issued by the City For swaps related to
O'Hare Bonds, airline approval is also required before entering inlo a swap agreement.
42

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 3 1 , 2014
In the fund financial statements, governmental funds recognize bond premiums and discounts, as well as
bond issuance cosls, during the currenl period. The face amount of debl issued is reported as olher
financing sources. Premiums received and discounts given on debt issued are reported as other
financing sources or uses. Issuance costs, whether or not withheld from the actual debt proceeds
received, are reported as expenditures.
Certain debt obligations are to be paid from sales tax, motor fuel or special area taxes.
Pension
The City's contnbutions lo the four Pension Plans primarily serving Cily employees are set by Stale
law. In recenl years, the total contributions have been lower than the actuarially required amounts for the
Plans, which has served lo increase the Plans' unfunded actuarial accrued liabilities. Recurhng cash
infiows from all sources to the Plans (including City contributions, employee contributions, and investment
earnings) have been lower than the cash outlays of the Plans in some recent years. As a result, the
Plans have liquidated investments and used assets of the Plans to satisfy their respective currenl
payment obligations in those years. The use of assets by the Plans for these purposes reduces the
amount of assets on hand to pay benefits or earn investment returns in the future.
Current Stale law for the Policemen's and Firemen's Plans, known as Public Act 96-1495 (P.A. 96-1495),
requires the City to significantly increase conlributions to those Plans beginning in 2016. In each year,
the City must conlribute the amounl needed for each Plan to achieve a 90% Funded Ralio by the end of
2040. Under the enacted Stale legislation for the Municipal Employees' and Laborers' Plans, known as
Public Acl 98-641 (P.A. 98-641), the City is required to significantly increase contributions to those two
Plans beginning in 2016. During the period 2016 through 2020, the City's contributions to the Municipal
Employees' and Laborers' Plans increase by statutorily determined amounts which are not based on
actuarial calculations. Beginning in 2021, P.A. 98-641 requires the City to contribute in each year to the
Municipal Employees' and Laborers' Plans the amount needed for each Plan to achieve a 90% Funded
Ralio by the end of 2055. P.A. 98-641 also makes certain modificalions to the automatic annual
increases paid to retirees and requires increases in employee contributions toward the cost of their
retirement benefits.
P.A. 98-641 is currently subject to challenge in a lawsuit alleging its
unconstitutionality.
Senate Bill 777 ("SB 777"), an amendment to P.A. 96-1495, passed both houses of the Illinois General
Assembly as of May 3 1 , 2015. SB 777 institutes a Phase-in Period until 2020 and a Revised
Amortization Period to 2055. A Revised Amortization Penod would reduce the annual funding obligation
required to reach a 90% Funded Ralio, but extend the number of years over which such paymenis would
need to be made. Enactment of a Phase-in Period would reduce the City's required payment in the initial
years to allow for a more gradual phase-in of the requiremenls of P.A. 96-1495. Although SB 777 has
passed bolh chambers of the Illinois General Assembly, a motion to reconsider the vote on SB 777 has
been filed in the Illinois Senate, and accordingly, SB 777 has not been sent to the Governor for
consideration. The Cily makes no represenlalion as to whether SB 777 will be enacted.
Liquidity
The Cily's general obligation bonds, sales tax revenue bonds and motor fuel tax revenue bonds were
downgraded by Moody's, Standard & Poor's and Fitch Ratings in May 2015. Moody's cited in its raling
action the Illinois Supreme Court's decision on May 8, 2015, which found the Slate Pension Reform Act
unconstitutional, as limiting the City's options for addressing its unfunded pension liabilities. Moody's
downgraded the City's general obligation, sales tax revenue and motor fuel lax revenue credits lo B a l .
Moody's indicated lhat further downgrades could follow upon the occurrence of any of the following: (a) a
determination by a court of law that P.A. 98-641 is unconstitutional; (b) continued growth in the debl
and/or unfunded pension liabilities of the Cily and overlapping governmenis; and (c) narrowing of the
City's fund balances and liquidity. Al the same lime, Moody's downgraded the City's Water senior hen
revenue bonds from A2 to B a a l , the Water second hen revenue bonds from A3 to Baa2 and the City's
Wastewater senior lien bonds from A3 to Baa2 and the Wastewater second lien revenue bonds from
Baa1 lo Baa3, each with a negative outlook.
43

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 3 1 , 2014
In May 2015, Standard and Poor's downgraded the rating of the City's general obligation bonds to Afrom A-^, Water senior lien and Wastewater senior lien revenue bonds to A from AA, and Water second
lien revenue bonds and Wastewater second lien revenue bonds to A- from AA-.
In May 2015, Fitch Ratings downgraded the rating of the City's general obligation bonds and sales lax
revenue bonds lo BBB+ from A-.
The rating actions by Standard & Poor's and Fitch, in part, cited the Moody's rating action and the
resulting uncertainly regarding the City's liquidity position.
Due to the Moody's downgrade of the City's general obligation credit to Bal (below investment grade)
from Baa2, an event of default was triggered under credit agreements the City had entered into with
certain banks to provide letters of credit supporting the City's general obligation debt (including the
general obligation variable rate demand bonds) and to provide letters of credit or revolving lines of credit
for the Cily's general obligation commercial paper notes and line of credil facilities, which consisted of
general obligation revolving lines of credit from four banks and two series of general obligation
commercial paper notes (one series backed by a letter of credit from Wells Fargo Bank and the other
series backed by a letter of credit from Bank of Montreal). Upon the event of default, the banks providing
letters of credit for Ihe general obligation debt as well as Ihe banks supporting the commercial paper/line
of credit program had the right lo demand immediate repayment of amounts owed under their credit
agreemenls. The Moody's downgrade also resulted in a termination event under the City's existing
interest rate swaps on its general obligation variable rate bonds; pursuant to those swap agreements, the
swap counterparties had the right to set an early termination date for the swaps and demand a
termination payment from the City.
Shortly afler the Moody's downgrades and resulting event of default/termination event, the City
terminated the letter of credit from Wells Fargo Bank; there were no commercial paper notes outstanding
secured by that letter of credit. Wilh respect to the olher banks supporting the commercial paper/line of
credit program, the banks providing letters of credit for the City's general obligation debt, and the
counterparties on the interest rale swaps for ils general obligation variable rate bonds, the Cily entered
into forbearance agreements pursuant to which the affected banks agreed to temporarily forbear from
exercising their respective righls resulting from the event of defaultytermination evenl. In May and June
2015, the City converted ($674 million) and/or redeemed ($132 million) all of its general obligafion
variable rale bonds and converted sales tax variable rate revenue bonds ($112 million) to long-term fixed
rate bonds and terminated the associated letters of credit and interest rate swaps (termination payment of
$221 million) for those bonds. For the agreements with the banks supporting the commercial paper/line
of credil program, the forbearance agreements ($849 million) extend to September 30, 2015, but can
terminate earlier if: (i) there are any olher events of default by the Cily under the related credit
agreemenls, (ii) there are further downgrades of the rating on the City's general obligation bonds, or (iii)
the forbearance period in one of the other forbearance agreements terminates prior lo ils scheduled end
date. The Cily plans lo issue long-lerm general obligalion fixed rate bonds in mid-2015 to repay most of
the outstanding amounts under the commercial paper/line of credit program.
With respect to the City's Series 2000 and Series 2004 Water Second Lien Revenue Bonds, the
downgrades Iriggered defaults under certain credil and/or liquidity facilities, and for the Series 2008C
Wastewater Second Lien Revenue Bonds, certain conlinuing covenant agreements with those
bondholders. The Moody's downgrades also triggered termination events under inlerest rate swap
agreements relating to these bonds. In response to the triggering of these defaults and termination
events, the City entered into forbearance agreemenls wilh Ihe holders of its Series 2008C Wastewater
Second Lien Revenue Bonds ($332 million) to June 30, 2016; and amended and/or transferred the
inlerest rate swap agreemenls for its Waler Second Lien Revenue Bonds (estimated termination value of
$125 million) and its Wastewater Second Lien Revenue Bonds (estimated termination value of $75
million) to remove such termination event from the swap agreemenls prior lo any demand being made for
a termination payment by the counterparties; and obtained a waiver of the event of default from the
provider of a letter of credit relating lo the Series 2000 Water Second Lien Revenue Bonds. With respect
44

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
to the forbearance agreements with the holders of the Series 2008C Wastewater Second Lien Revenue
Bonds, the forbearance period under each of those forbearance agreements extends to June 30, 2016,
but can terminate earlier if: (i) there are any olher events of default by the City under the related
continuing covenant agreements, (li) there are further downgrades of the rating on the Wastewater
Second Lien Bonds, or (iii) the forbearance period in one of the other forbearance agreemenls for the
Wastewater Second Lien Bonds terminates prior lo ils scheduled end dale. Wilh respect lo the Series
2008C Water and Wastewater swap agreements, a ratings downgrade below Baa3 on the Second Lien
Revenue Bonds for each of the respective credits would trigger a termination event with respect to the
related swap agreement. With respect to the Water credit and/or liquidity facilities, a ralings downgrade
below Baa3 on the Water Second Lien Revenue Bonds would trigger an event of default
The City believes ils expected revenues along with current assets are sufficient to fund its operations on
a continuing basis, Ihrough 2015 and beyond, notwithstanding the City's plans to issue additional bonds
in 2015.
xi) Deferred inflows represent amounis to be recognized as revenue on a straight line basis over the life of
the related long-lerm lease and concession agreemenls. In the fund financials, grants that meet all of the
eligibility criteria except for time availability and property taxes levied for a future period are also included
in deferred inflows.
xii) Fund equity in the government-wide statements is classified as net position and displayed in three
components:
(1) Net investement in capital assets - Consists of capital assels including restricted capital assets, net of
accumulated depreciation and reduced by the outstanding balances of any bonds, mortgages, notes
or any olher borrowings lhat are attributable lo the acquisition, construction, or improvement of those
assets.
(2) Restricted net position - Consists of net position wilh constraints placed on the use either by external
groups such as creditors, grantors, contributors, or laws or regulations of other governments, or are
legally restricted through constitutional provisions or enabling legislation.
Restricted net position for business activities are provided in Exhibit 7, Statemeni of Net Position,
Proprietary Funds.
(3) Unrestricted - All other net positions that do not meet the definition of "restricted" or "net investement
in capilal assels."
2)

Reconciliation of Government-wide and Fund Financial Statements
a)

Explanation of certain differences between
government-wide statement of net position.
I)

the

governmental

funds

balance

sheet

and

the

The governmental funds balance sheet includes a reconciliation between fund balance - total
governmental funds and nel position - governmental activities as reported in the governmenl-wide
statement of nel position. One element of lhal reconciliation explains lhat "Other long-term assets are nol
available to pay for current-period expenditures and therefore are deferred in the funds." The details of
this $1,242.8 million are as follows (dollars in thousands):

45

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Deferred infiows - property tax
Deferred inflows - grants
Net adjuslment to increase fund balance - lolal
governmental funds - lo arrive at net position governmental activilies

$

983,616
259,140

$

1,242,756

Another element of that reconciliation explains that "Certain liabilities and deferred outflows, including
bonds payable, are not due and payable in the current period and therefore are not reported in the funds."
The details of this $19,390.5 million are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Long-term liabilities:
Total bonds, notes and certificates payable
Pension and other postemployment benefits
Lease obligation
Pollution remediation
Claims and judgments

$

Total Long-term liabilities

19,516,785

Accounts payable - infrastructure retainage
Bonds, notes and other obligations payable current
Other assets - issuance cosls (bond insurance)
Deferred outfiows-unamortized loss on refunding
Accrued interest
Derivative instrument liability
Accrued and other liabilifies - compensated absences

15,272
(86,059)
(16,033)
(158,102)
2,330
25,538
90,860

Net adjustment to reduce fund balance - tolal
governmental funds - lo arrive at net position governmental activities

b)

9,606,475
8,884,304
116,858
8,532
900,616

$

19,390,591

Explanation of certain differences between the governmental funds' statement of revenues,
expenditures, and changes in fund balances and the government-wide statement of activities.
i)

The governmental funds statement of revenues, expendiiures, and changes in fund balances includes a
reconciliation between net changes in fund balances - total governmental funds and changes in net
position - governmental activilies as reported in the governmenl-wide statement of aclivities. One
element of that reconciliation explains that "Governmental funds report capital outlays as expendiiures.
However, in the statements of activities the cosl of those assels is allocated over their estimated useful
lives and reported as depreciation expense." The details of this $303.2 million are as follows (dollars in
thousands):
Capitalized asset expendiiures
Donated assets
Depreciation expense
Loss - disposal of equipment
Net adjustmenl to increase net changes in fund
balances - total governmental funds - to arrive al
changes in net position - governmental activities
46

$

656,672
14,476
(367,845)
(136)

$

303,167

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 3 1 , 2014
ii)

Another element of lhat reconciliation states lhal "Bond proceeds provide current financial resources to
governmental funds, bul issuing debl increases long-lerm liabililies in the statemeni of net position." The
details of this decrease of $115.6 million are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Proceeds of debl
Premium
Payment of refunded bond escrow agent
Principal retirement
Interest expense
Cost of Issuance
Net adjuslment to reduce nel changes in fund
balances - total governmental funds - to arrive at
changes in net position - governmental activities

$

(1,004,347)
(17,465)
302,862
599,395
3,643
287

$

(115,625)

iii) Another element of that reconciliation states that "Certain expenses reported in the statement of activifies
do not require the use of current financial resources and therefore are not reported as expenditures in
governmental funds." The details of this decrease of $1,250.4 million are as follows (dollars in
thousands):
Claims and judgments
Pension and olher post employment benefit liabilities
Pollution remediation
Vacation
Lease obligations
Inventory
Net adjustment to reduce net changes in fund
balances - total governmental funds - to arrive at
changes in net position - governmental aclivities

3)

$

(20,849)
(1,209,339)
66
(1,532)
(18,518)
(290)

$

(1,250,462)

Stewardship, Compliance and Accountability
a)

Annual Appropriation Budgets are eslablished for the General Fund and the Vehicle Tax, Pension,
Chicago Public Library and certain Miscellaneous, Special Events, Tourism and Festivals nonmajor Special
Revenue Funds, on a non-GAAP budgetary basis:
i)

Prior to November 15, the Mayor submits to the City Council a proposed budget of expendiiures and the
means of financing them for the next year.

ii)

The budget document is available for public inspection for at least len days prior lo passage of the annual
approprialion ordinance by the City Council, which is also required to hold at least one public heanng.

iii) Prior to January 1, the budget is legally enacled through passage of the appropriation ordinance.
iv) Subsequenl lo the enactment of the appropnation ordinance, the City Council has the authority lo make
necessary adjustments to the budget, which results in a change in total or individual appropriations. The
legal level of budgetary control is designated in the budget by object grouped by purpose except for the
Motor Fuel Tax Fund, which is subsequently re-appropriated by project. A separate Motor Fuel Tax Fund
Report demonstrates compliance with annual and project-length budgets required by the Stale. The

47

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014

v)

b)

separately issued Supplement to the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report provides budgetary
information for all other budgeted funds. Copies of this report are available upon request,
All annual appropriations unused and unencumbered lapse at year-end. Encumbered appropriations are
carried forward lo the following year. Project-length financial plans are adopted for Capilal Project Funds.
Appropriations for Debt Service Funds are established by bond ordinance.

Reconciliation of GAAP Basis to Budgetary Basis - The Cily's budgetary basis of accounting used for
budget vs. actual reporting differs from GAAP. For budgetary purposes, encumbrances are recorded as
expenditures bul are included in "Unassigned" fund balance for GAAP purposes. For budgetary purposes,
proceeds of long-term debt and transfers in are classified as revenues. For budgetary purposes prior years'
resources used to cover current year budgetary expenditures are recorded as revenues. For GAAP
purposes, proceeds of long-term debt and transfers out are treated as other financing sources. Provision for
doubtful account expendiiures are not budgeted. A reconciliation of the different basis of revenue and
expenditure recognition for the year ended December 31, 2014 is as follows (dollars in thousands):

General

Fund
3,176,150

Revenues, GAAP Basis
Add:
Transfers In
Prior Year's Surplus Utilized

$

Revenues, Budgetary Basis

$

3,261,322

Expendiiures, GAAP Basis
Add:
Transfers Out
Encumbered in 2014
Deduct:
Paymenis on Prior Years' Encumbrances ..
Provision for Doubtful Accounts and Other..

$

3,231,258

Expenditures, Budgetary Basis

$

39,700
45,472

10,081
29,223
(6,943)
(2,297)
3,261,322

Individual Fund Deficits include the Chicago Skyway Fund, an Enterprise Fund, which has a fund deficit of
$1,364.3 million which managemenl anticipates will be funded Ihrough recognition of deferred inflows.
Midway Internafional Airport Fund has a fund deficit of $6.7 million which will be funded through future
revenues. Federal State and Local Grants, a governmental fund, has a deficit of $225.0 million and will be
funded by the recognition of deferred granl inflows and unearned revenue. The Service Concession and
Reserve Fund, a Special Revenue Fund, has a deficit fund balance of $955.4 million which will be funded
through the recognition of deferred inflows. Also, the Bond, Note Redemplion and Interest Fund has a deficit
of $26.9 which will be funded Ihrough the issuance of General Obligalion Bonds.

48

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
4)

Restricted and Unrestricted C a s h , Cash Equivalents and Investments
a)

Investments As of December 31. 2014, the Cily had the following Investments (dollars in Ihousands):
Investment Type

Investment Maturities (in Years)
More Than
Less Than 1

City Funds
U.S. Agencies*
Commercial Paper
Corporate Bonds
Corporate Equities
Municipal Bonds
Certificates of Deposit and
Other Short-lemi

$

892,426
556.993
73,420
910
72,144

1-5
S

6-10

.3,025,098

$

182,564
300,170

10

172.590
120,707
69,591

$

_

1.593,657

s

362,888

Total

112,073
73.998
11,209

S 4,202.187
556.993
450,689
910
453,114

_
$

197,280

1,593,657
$ 7,257,550

•U.S. Agencies include investmenls in governmenl-sponsored enterprises such as Federal National Mortgage
Association, Federal Home Loan Banks, and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
Pension Trust Funds
U.S. and Foreign
Government Agencies
Corporate Bonds
Corporate Equities
Pooled Funds
Real Eslale
Secunties Received from
Secunties Lending
Venture Capital
Certificates ol Deposit and
Other Short-lerm
Derivatives
Olher

$

293,168
861,112
5,629,900
66,143
634,015

$

369.223
465,027
22,339
-

S

156,772
394,251
-

$

467,811
321,362
-

$

1,285,974
2,041,752
5,629,900
88,482
634,015

Total Pension Trusl Funds

S 9,041.879

$

856,589

S

550.023

$

789,173

$ 11,237,664

Tolal

$ 12,231.429

S

4,364.421

$

912.911

$

986.453

$ 18.495,214

906,189
435,340

-

-

-

906,189
435,340

178.686
787
36.539

-

-

-

178,686
787
36,539

i)

Interest Rate Risk - As a means of limiting its exposure to fair value losses arising from rising interest
rales, the City's investment policy limits all securities so purchased, except lax anticipation warrants,
municipal bonds, noles, commercial paper or other instruments representing a debt obligation of the City,
and shall show on their face that they are fully payable as to pnncipal and interest, where applicable, if
any, within ten years from the dale of purchase.

ii)

Credit Risk - The Code limits investments in commercial paper to banks whose senior obligations are
rated in the lop two rating categories by at least two national rating agencies and who are required to
maintain such rating during the term of such investment. The Code also limits investmenls to domestic
money market mutual funds regulated by, and in good standing wilh, the Securities and Exchange
Commission. Certificates of Deposit are also limited by the Code to national banks which provide
collateral of al least 105 percent by marketable U.S. government securities marked lo markel at least
monthly; or secured by a corporate surety bond issued by an insurance company licensed to do business

49

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
in Illinois and having a claims-paying rating in the lop raling category, as rated by a nationally recognized
statistical rating organization maintaining such raling during the term of such investmeni. The following
schedule summarizes the City's and Pension Trust Funds exposure to credil risk (in Ihousands):
Quality Rating
Aaa/AAA
Aa/AA
A/A
Baa/BBB
Ba/BB
B/B
Caa/CCC
Ca

C/CC
DID
P1/A1

$

City
176,616
4,150,011
252,722

Quality Rating
Aaa/AAA
Aa/AA
A/A
Baa/BBB
Ba/BB
B/B
Caa/CCC
Ca

Pension Trust Funds

$

116,827
136,607
252,464
352,443
162,158
150,649
36,095
828
350
528
357,957
932,256

$

2,499,162

C/CC
DID
888,599

Not Rated*

1,789,602

Total Funds

$ 7,257,550

Nol Rated
Other

* Not rated is primarily composed of money market mutual funds.
iii) Custodial Credit Risk - Cash and Certificates of Deposit: This is the risk lhat in the event of a bank
failure, the City's deposits may not be returned. The City's Investment Policy stales lhat in order to
protect the City's deposits, depository institutions are lo maintain collateral pledges on City deposits
during the term of the deposit of at least 102 percent of marketable U.S. government, or approved
securities or surety bonds, issued by lop-rated insurers. Collateral is required as security whenever
deposits exceed the insured limits of the FDIC. The bank balance of cash and certificates of deposit with
the Cily's various municipal depositories was $318.2 million. 97.7 percent of the bank balance was eilher
insured or collateralized with securities held by City agents in the City's name. $7.4 million was
uncollateralized al December 31, 2014, and thus was subject to custodial credit risk.
iv) Custodial Credit Risk - Investments: For an investment, this is the risk that, in the event of the failure of
the counterparty, the Cily will not be able to recover the value ot ils investments or collateral securities
that are in possession of an outside party. The City has no custodial credit risk exposure because
investmeni securilies are insured, registered and held by the City.

50

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
v)

Foreign Currency Risk - In the case of the Pension Trust Funds, is the risk that changes in exchange rales
will adversely affect the fair value of an investmeni or a deposit. The risk of loss is managed by limiting its
exposure lo fair value loss by requiring their internafional securities managers to maintain diversified
portfolios. The following schedule summarizes the Pension Trust Funds' exposure to foreign currency risk (in
thousands):
Foreign Currency Risk
Australian dollar
$
62,870
Brazilian real
43,414
British pound
303,227
Canadian dollar
79,768
Chilean peso
2,666
Chinese yuan
(1,493)
Columbian peso
1,941
Czech Republic koruna
2,661
Danish krone
21,222
Egyptian pound
434
European euro
394,560
Hong Kong dollar
185,487
Hungarian forint
832
Indian rupee
47,536
Indonesian rupiah
19,691
Japanese yen
317,654
Malaysian ringgil
7,704
Mexican peso
29,391
New Israeli shekel
9,136
New Romanian leu
377
New Taiwan dollar
30,860
New Zealand dollar
1,835
Nigeria Naira
(34)
Norwegian krone
19,080
Pakislan rupee
302
Peruvian Nuevo Sol
3
Philippines peso
3,252
Polish zloty
3,122
Qalari riyal
610
Russian ruble
337
Singapore dollar
18,145
South African rand
40,395
South Korean won
58,148
Swedish krona
57,088
Swiss franc
101,272
Taiwan dollar
5,175
Thailand baht
14,232
Turkish lira
19,608
Uniled Arab Emirates dirham...
4,333
Urguayan peso Uruguayo
466
Total Pension Trust Funds

51

$

1,907,307

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
vi) The following schedule summarizes the cash and investments reported in the basic financial statements
(dollars in thousands):
Per Nole 4:
Investments - City
Investments - Pension Trust Funds

Per Financial Statements:
Restricted Investments
Unrestricted Investments
Investments with Fiduciary Funds
Investmenls wilh Escrow Agent
Invested Securities Lending Collateral
Investments Included as Cash and Cash
Equivalents on the Statement of Net Position
5)

$

7,257,550
11,237,664

$

18,495,214

$

3,324,414
1,835,373
10,207,137
417,522
906,189

$

18,495,214

1,804,579

Property Tax

The City's property lax becomes lien on real property on January 1 of the year it is levied. The Cook County
Assessor (Assessor) is responsible for the assessment of all taxable real property within Cook County (County),
except for certain railroad property assessed directly by the Stale. The County Board has established a triennial
cycle of reassessment in which one-third of the Couniy will be reassessed each year on a repeating schedule
eslablished by the Assessor.
Property in the County is separated into fifteen classificafions for assessment purposes. After the Assessor
establishes the fair market value of a parcel of land, that value is multiplied by one of the classification percentages to
arrive at the assessed valuafion (Assessed Valuafion) for lhat parcel. These percentages range from 10.0 percent for
certain residenfial, commercial, and industrial property to 25.0 percenl for other commercial and industrial property.
The Illinois Departmeni of Revenue has the statutory responsibility of ensuring uniformity of real property
assessments throughout the State. Each year, the Department of Revenue furnishes the county clerks wilh an
adjuslment factor lo equalize the level of assessment among counties. This factor (Equalization Factor) is then
applied to the Assessed Valuation lo compute the valuation of property to which a tax rate will be applied (Equalized
Assessed Valuation). The County Clerk adds the Equalized Assessed Valuation of all real property in the County to
the valuation of property assessed directly by the Stale and subtracts total amounts of EAV in Tax Increment
Financing Districts to arrive at the base amount (Tax Base) used in calculating the annual lax rates.
The County Clerk computes the annual tax rale by dividing the levy by the Tax Base and then computes the rate for
each parcel of real property by aggregafing the tax rates of all governmental units having jurisdiclion over that
particular parcel. The County Treasurer then issues the lax bills. Property laxes are deposited with Ihe County
Treasurer, who remits to the City its respective share of Ihe collections. Taxes levied in one year become due and
payable in two installments during the following year on March 1 and August 1 or 30 days from mailing of tax bills if
later than July 1. The firsl inslallmenl is 55.0 percent of the prior year's tax bill. The second installment tax bill equals
the lolal lax liability for the year minus the first inslallmenl lax bill amounl.
The Cily Council has adopted an ordinance beginning in 1994, limiting the City's aggregate property tax levy to an
amounl equal to the prior year's aggregate property lax levy plus the lesser of (a) five percent or (b) the percenlage
increase in the annualized Consumer Price Index, based on the ordinance. The ordinance provides an exception for
that portion of any property tax debl service levy equal to the aggregate interest and principal paymenis on the City's
general obligation bonds and notes during the 12-month period ended January 1, 1994, subject to annual increase in
the manner described above for the aggregate levy, all as provided by the ordinance. Most general obligation bond
levies approved after 2001 have also been excluded from this limil.
52

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
6)

Interfund Balances and Transfers
a)

The following balances at December 3 1 , 2014 represent due from/to balances among al) funds (dollars in
thousands):
Fund Type/Fund

Due To

Due From

Governmental Funds:
;

$

97,053
79,210

276,805
296,159
11,682
5,140
85,700
56,996
94,698

724,769

827,180

91,224
29,416
527
33,751

20,130
71,228
9,134
3,519
15

109,514
10,059
423,933
5,000

Federal, Stale and Local Grants
Special Taxing Areas
Service Concession and Reserve
Bond, Note Redemption and Interest
Community Development and Improvement Projects..,.
Nonmajor Governmental Funds

-

Enterprise Funds:
Water

Chicago-O'Hare Internalional Airport

_

104,026

154,918
Fiduciary activilies:

-

51,519
Total Fiduciary activities

51,519
3i

Total

931,206

$

931,206

The balances resulted from the lime lag between the dales that (1) interfund goods and services are provided or
reimbursable expenditures occur, (2) transactions are recorded in the accounting system and (3) payments
between funds are made.
b)

The following balances at December 3 1 , 2014 represent inlerfund transfers among all funds (dollars in
thousands):
Fund Type/Fund
Transfer In
Transfer Out
Governmental Funds:
General
Special Taxing Areas
Service Concession and Reserve
Bond, Note Redemption and Interest
Communily Development and Improvement Projects....
Nonmajor Governmental Funds
Total Governmental Funds

$

_

39,700
97,513
5,000
366,198
7,004
137,171

10,081
44,463
13,900
164,268
279,009
140,865

!

652.586

$

652,586

!

Transfers are used lo move revenues from the fund that the statute or budget requires lo collect them to the fund
that statute or budget requires lo expend them and to move receipts reslricted lo debt service from the funds
collecting the receipts to the debt service fund as debt service paymenis become due.
53

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
7)

Capital Assets
a) Capital Assets acfivity for the year ended December 3 1 , 2014 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Additions
Disposals
Balance
Balance
January 1,
and
and
December 31,
2014
Transfers
Transfers
2014
Governmental activities:
Capital assets, not being depreciated:
Land
1,392,613
220
$ 1,392,833
30,749
14,483
45,232
Works of Art and Historical Collections
260,192
576,209
Construction in Progress
(290.872)
545,529
1,683,554
1,983.594
Total capital assets, not being depreciated.
590,912
(290,872)

Capital assets, being depreciated:
Buildings and Other Improvements
Machinery and Equipment
Infrastructure
Total capilal assets, being depreciated

2,545,699
1,381.545
8,151,833
12,079,077

28,451
68,123
258,959
355,533

Less accumulated depreciation for:
Buildings and Other Improvements
Machinery and Equipment
Infrastructure
Total accumulated depreciation

877,695
1.155,690
3,735,664
5,769,049

66,389
58,534
242,922
367,845

Total capilal assets, being depreciated, net.,

6,310,028

(12,312)

Total governmental activities

2,574,150
1,439,294
8,410,792
12,424,236

(10,374)
(10,374)

(10,238)

944,084
1,203,986
3,978,586
6,126,656

1136)

6,297,580

(10,238)

$

7,993,582

$

578,600

$

$

1,016,635
1,207,828
2,224,463

$

2,066
701,092
703,158

S

$

8,281,174

$
(652,656)
(652,656)

1,018,701
1,256,264
2,274,965

(291,008)

Business-type activifies:
Capital assets, not being depreciated:
Construction in Progress
Total capital assels, not being depreciated
Capilal assels, being depreciated:
Buildings and Other Improvements
Machinery and Equipment
Total capilal assets, being depreciated
Less accumulated depreciation for:
Buildings and Other Improvements
Machinery and Equipment
Total accumulated depreciation
Total capital assets, being depreciated, net

15,138,127
682,588
15,820,715

840,309
5,411
845,720

73,240
(2,366)
70,074

16,051,676
685,633
16,737,309

4,486,528
346.314
4,832,842

339,691
21.336
361,027

(1,605)
(2.476)
(4,081)

4,824,614
365,174
5,189,788

10,987,873

484,693

74,955

11,547,521

Total business-type activities

S

13,212,336

$

1.187,851

$

(577,701)

$ 13.822,486

Total Capital Assels

$

21,205,918

$

1,766,451

$

(868,709)

$ 22,103,660

54

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
b)

Depreciation expense was charged lo functions/programs of the City as follows (dollars in Ihousands):
Governmental activities:
General Governmenl
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Heallh
Cultural and Recreational
Total Depreciation Expense - Governmental Activilies
Business-type Activities:
Water
Sewer
Chicago Midway Inlernational Airport
Chicago-O'Hare Internalional Airport
Chicago Skyway
Tolal Depreciation Expense - Business-type Activilies

8)

$

44,735
27,464
14,936
251,702
955
28,053

$

367,845

$

54,802
34,061
46,044
215,918
10,202

$

361,027

Leases
a)

Operating Leases

The Cily leases building and office facilifies under noncancelable operating leases. Tolal costs for such leases
were approximately $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2014.
The future minimum lease payments for these leases are as follows (dollars in thousands):
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019

$

2020- 2024
2025 - 2029
2030 - 2034

7,196
336
254

2035- 2039
2040 - 2042

216
66_

Total Future Rental Expense
b)

8,986
4,096
2,813
2,457
2,183

_S

28,603

Capital Leases

During 2003, the City entered into lease and lease back agreemenls with third parties pertaining to 911 Center
Qualified Technological Equipment (QTE), wilh a book value of $143.3 million at December 3 1 , 2003. Under the
QTE lease agreement, which provided certain cash and tax benefits to the third party, the City entered into a
long-term lease for applicable assets back to the City under a sublease. Under the sublease, the City was
required lo make future minimum lease payments.

55

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
In June 2014, the City terminated the two lease/leaseback transactions relating lo its 911 and 311 systems (QTE1 and QTE-2). Under the termination agreemenls, the leases were terminated and the City regained unrestricted
tifie to its 911 and 311 systems. Under the termination agreement relating to QTE-1, the City paid a gross
amount of $1.0 million to Bank of America N.A. To terminate the QTE-2 transaction, the City made a net payment
of $1.3 million to SMBC Leasing Investmeni LLC.
During 2005, the Cily entered inlo a sale and leaseback agreement with third parties pertaining to the City owned
portion of a rapid transit line with a book value of $430.8 million at December 3 1 , 2005. Under the lease
agreement, which provides certain cash and tax benefits to the third party, the City entered into a long-term lease
for applicable assels back to the City under a lease. Under the lease, the City is required lo make future
minimum lease payments.
The future minimum payments for this lease are as follows (dollars in Ihousands):
Year Ending
December 3 1 ,
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020 - 2024
2025 - 2029
2030 - 2032

Total

$
9,000
9,000
18,977
3,003
15,016
2,000
165,164
222,160
105,302

Total Minimum Future Lease Payments
Less Interest
Present Value of Minimum
Future Lease Payments
c)

$

116,858

Lease Receivables

Most of the O'Hare land, buildings and terminal space are leased under operafing lease agreements to airlines
and olher tenants. The following is a schedule of the minimum future rental income on noncancelable operating
leases as of December 31, 2014 (dollars in thousands):

2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020 - 2024
2025 - 2029

$

93,228
93,222
94,218
93,283
91,967
8,144
9,432

Total Minimum Future Rental Income

$

483,494

Contingent rentals that may be received under certain leases based on the tenants' revenues or fuel flow are nol
included in minimum future rental income. Rental income for O'Hare, consisting of all rental and concession
revenues except ramp rentals and automobile parking, amounted to 8418.5 million, including contingent rentals of
$89.0 million.

56

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Most of the Midway land and terminal space is leased under operaling lease agreements to airlines and other
tenants. The following is a schedule of the minimum future rental income on noncancelable operaling leases as
of December 31, 2014 (dollars in thousands):

2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020-2024
2025 - 2029

$

48,634
48,171
26,763
26,609
26,609
133,045
133,045

Total Minimum Future Rental Income

$

442,876

Confingent rentals that may be received under certain leases based on tenants' revenues are not included in
minimum future rental income. Rental income for Midway, consisting of all rental and concession revenues
except aircraft parking fees and certain departure fees (turns) and automobile parking, amounted to $92.9 million,
including confingent rentals of $39.6 million.
9)

Short-term Debt
a)

Matured bonds represent principal due on coupon bonds in which the coupons have not been presented for
paymenl. As of December 31, 2014. the outstanding balance was at $0.7 million.

b)

Line o f Credit and Commercial Paper Notes The City issues commercial paper noles and maintains
revolving lines of credit for working capital in anlicipafion of receipt of other revenue and lo fund capital
projects, debt refinancing or restructuring; the latter are typically repaid from proceeds of later issuances of
general obligation bonds. Historically, the commercial paper notes have been supported by underlying letters
of credit lhat extend beyond one year from the dale of the financial statements and the lines of credit have
also extended beyond one year from the date of the financial statements. Thus, the outslanding amounts at
December 31 have been historically recorded as long-term debt.
Due to the Moody's downgrade of the Cily's general obligation credit in May 2015, see Note 17, an event of
default was triggered under each of the revolving credit agreements and the letter of credil reimbursement
agreements for the commercial paper noles. Subsequent to December 31, 2014 the Cily terminated the letter
of credit from Wells Fargo Bank; no commercial paper notes secured by that letter of credit were then
outstanding. For the remaining banks, the City enlered inlo forbearance agreemenls pursuant to which the
affected banks agreed to forbear from exercising their respective rights resulting from the event of
default. The forbearance period under each of the forbearance agreemenls extends to September 30, 2015,
but can terminate earlier if: (i) there are any other events of default by the Cily under the related credil
agreements, (ii) there are further downgrades of the raling on the City's general obligalion bonds, or (iii) the
forbearance period in one of the other forbearance agreements terminates prior lo its scheduled end date. As
the forbearance period with respect to the credit agreements and the underlying letter of credit associated
with the outstanding commercial paper notes is less than one year from the date of the financial statements,
the outstanding general obligalion commercial paper notes and lines of credil al December 3 1 , 2014 have
been recorded as fund liabilities in the fiind financials, as follows (dollars in Ihousands):

Outstanding
Type
Line ot Credit
Commercial Paper
Commercial Paper
Commercial Paper
Total

Fund
Community Development and Improvement Projects
Community Development and Improvement Projects
Bond, Note Redemption and Interest
Olher Governmental Funds

57

at 12/31/14
$75,000
2,800
198,086
21,423
$297,309

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R E N D E D D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
10) L o n g - l e r m O b l i g a t i o n s
a)

L o n g - t e r m D e b t acfivity for the year e n d e d D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 2 0 1 4 w a s a s follows (in I h o u s a n d s ) :
Amounts
Balance

Balance

Due

January 1,

December 31,

within

2014

One Year

2014'

Additions

Reductions

Governmental aclivities;
Bonds and notes payable:
General obligation debt

$

Taxincrement

7,730,178

S

88,397

Revenue

883,420

$

33,410

278,092

$

47,412

8,335,506

$

74,395

100,094
9,035

753,162

123,063

132,430

743,795

18,400

8,571,737

1,039,893

457,934

9,153.696

127,529

/\dd unamortized premium

160,014

17,465

22,712

154,767

Add accretion of capilal appreciation bonds

293,789

32,595

28,372

298.012

22.213

Total bonds, notes and certificates payable

9,025.540

1,089,953

509,018

9,606,475

149,742

7,589,929

1,340,753

46,378

8,884,304

171,674

20,805

75,621

116,858

Other liabilities:
Pension and other postemployment
benefits obligations
Lease obligations
Pollution Remediation

8,598

Claims and judgments

879,768

66

8.532

170,356

149,508

900.616

164,940

8,649,969

1,531,914

271.573

9,910,310

164,940

$ 17,675,509

$ 2,621,867

$

780,591

$

19,516,785

$

$

$

$

43,976

$

2,381,771

$

Tolal other liabilities
Total governmental activities

-

314,682

Business-type activities:
Revenue bonds and notes payable:
Water

1,996,858

Sewer

1,369,459

Chicago-O'Hare International Airpon

7,665,205

Chicago Midviray Intemational Airport

1,495.008
12,526,530

428,889

51,535

37,929

1,638,935

39,837

31,026

168,895

7,527,336

189,605

896,520

867,938

1,523,590

17,265

1,663.840

1,118,738

13,071,632

298,242

330,022

149,885

37,648

442,259

89,158

8,720

9,170

88,708

Total business-type activities

5 12.945,710

$ 1.822,445

$ 1,165,556

$

13,602,599

$

307,813

Total long-lerm obligations

5 30,621,219

$ 4,444,312

$ 1,946,147

$

33,119.384

$

622,495

Add unamortized premium
Add accretion of capital appreciation bonds

307,405

9,-571

* Commercial Paper and Line of Credit are no longer included due to reclassification as shorl term debt.
T h e P e n s i o n obligation liability will be liquidated I h r o u g h a S p e c i a l R e v e n u e F u n d ( P e n s i o n F u n d ) as p r o v i d e d by tax
levy a n d S t a t e P e r s o n a l P r o p e r t y R e p l a c e m e n l T a x r e v e n u e s .

58

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
b)

Issuance of New Debt
i)

General Obligation Bonds
General Obligalion Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2014A ($432.6 million), and Taxable Project and
Refunding Series 2014B ($450.8 million) were sold at a premium in March 2014. The bonds have
interesl rales ranging from 4.0 percenl lo 6.314 percent and maturity dates from January 1, 2018 lo
January 1, 2044. Net proceeds of $881.6 million will be used to finance infrastructure improvements;
transportation improvements; grants or loans to assist not-for-profit organizafions or educational or
cultural institutions; or to assist other municipal corporations or units of local governmenL or school
districts; cash flow needs of the City; acquisition of personal property; acquisition, demolition, remediafion
or improvement of real property for industrial, commercial or residential purposes; constructing,
equipping, altering and repairing various municipal facilities including fire stations, police stafions,
libraries, senior and health centers and other municipal facililies; enhancemenl of economic development
within the City by making grants or deposits to secure obligations of not-for-profit or for-profit
organizafions doing or seeking lo do business in the Cily; litigation judgments or setfiements agreements
involving the City, including escrow accounts or olher reserves needed for such purposes; payments of
certain pension contributions; repayment of Commercial Paper Noles and Lines of Credil; providing for
facilifies, services and equipment lo protect and enhance public safely, and other uses permitted by the
Ordinance ($628.0 million), to refund certain maturities of bonds outstanding ($185.2 million), and to fund
capitalized inlerest ($68.3 million). The current refunding of the bonds increased the City's total debt
service payments by $217.8 million, resulted in a net economic loss of approximalely $13.5 million and a
book loss of approximately $7.9 million.

ii)

Motor Fuel Tax Revenue Bonds
Motor Fuel Tax Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2013 ($105.9 million) were sold at a premium in June
2014. The bonds have interest rales ranging from 2.0 percenl to 5.0 percent and malurity dates from
January 1. 2015 to January 1, 2033. Net proceeds of $114.7 million and prior bonds reserves of $2.9
million were used to advance refund all maturities of the outslanding Motor Fuel Tax Revenue Bonds,
Series 2003 ($114.7 million) and fund the debt service reserve account ($2.9 million). The advance
refunding of the bonds decreased the Cily's lolal debt service paymenis by $13.6 million and resulted in
an economic gain of $9.9 million and a book loss of approximately $2.4 million.

iii) Tax Increment Allocation Bonds
Tax Increment Allocafion Revenue Refunding Bonds (Pilsen Redevelopment Project), Series 2014A
($17.3 million) and 2014B Taxable ($16.1 million) were sold al a premium in November 2014. The bonds
have inlerest rates ranging from 0.95 percent to 5.0 percent and malurity dates from June 1, 2015 to
June 1, 2022. Nol proceeds of $35.0 million and prior bonds reserves of $5.1 million were used to
refund all maturities of principal and inlerest outslanding on the Series 2004B Pilsen Bonds ($25.9
million), the Senes 2004G Bonds for the Pilsen Redevelopment Project ($10.7 million) and fund the debt
service reserve account ($3.5 million). The currenl refunding of the bonds decreased the City's total debt
service payments by $7.9 million, resulted in a nel economic gain of approximately $5.4 million and a
book loss of approximalely $1.1 million.
iv) Revenue Loans
In June 2013, the City entered into a loan agreement with the United States Department of Transportation
under the Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Acl (TIFIA) program lo complete the
Wacker Drive Reconstruction Project. The loan amount of 598.66 million will fund the Chicago Riverwalk
along the main branch of the Chicago River. The interest rate is 3.33 percent and the final malurily of the
loan is January 1, 2048. There have been loan disbursements made lo the City in the total of $17.2
million as of December 31, 2014.

59

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 3 1 , 2014
v)

Enterprise Fund Revenue Bonds and Notes
In August 2013, the Cily enlered inlo a loan agreement wilh the United Stales Department of
Transportation under the Transportation Infraslruclure Finance and Innovation Act (TIFIA) program to
fund a portion of Consolidated Rental Car Facility at O'Hare, additions, extensions and improvements to
the airport transit system (ATS) including the purchase of new ATS vehicles and certain public parking
facilifies. The loan amount of $288.1 million is subordinate to the O'Hare Customer Facility Charge
Senior Lien Revenue Bonds, Series 2013. The inleresi rale is 3.86 percent and the final maturity of the
loans is January 1, 2052. There were no loan disbursements made to the City as of December 31, 2014.
Chicago Midway Internafional Airport Second Lien Revenue Bonds, Series 2014 A&B ($771.8 million)
were sold at premium in June 2014. The bonds have interest rates ranging from 4.0 percent to 5.0
percent and maturity dates from January 1, 2019 to January 1, 2041. Net proceeds of $842.2 and olher
monies ($20.6 million) were used to finance the costs of certain Airport projects ($114.9 million), to
refund certain maturities of bonds outslanding ($673.7 million), fund capitalized and debt service reserve
($16.5 million) and lo repay the Commercial Paper noles ($57.7 million). The current refunding
decreased the City's total debt service payments by $135.7 million, resulted in a net economic gain of
approximately S69.2 million and a book loss of approximately $15.9 million.
Chicago Midway Internafional Airport Second Lien Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series 2014C ($124.7)
were sold in June 2014. The bonds were issued at a daily rate of 0.08 percent. The bonds have
maturities of January 1, 2041 to January 1, 2044. Nel proceeds of $124.4 million were used to refund
certain maturities of bonds outstanding ($124.1 million). The current refunding resulted in a book loss of
approximately of $0.6 million.
Second Lien Waler Revenue Bonds, Series 2014 ($367.9 million) were sold at a premium in September
2014. The bonds have inlerest rates ranging from 3.0 percent lo 5.0 percent and maturity dates from
November 1, 2015 to November 1, 2044. Net proceeds of $400.0 million will be used to finance certain
costs of improvements and extensions lo the water system.
On May 27, 2014, a loan agreement was signed with the Illinois Environment Protection Agency to
install water meters at residences throughout the Cily lhal are currently unmelered. In 2014 the Water
Fund drew $6.5 million from this loan agreement. The loan has an interest rate of 2.295% with maturity
dates from September 21, 2014 to March 2 1 , 2034.
On August 5, 2013, a loan agreement was signed with the Illinois Environment Protection Agency to
replace approximately 10 miles of damaged, undersized and leaking watermains located throughout the
City wilh new 8-inch diameters walermain. In 2014 the Waler Fund drew $39.4 million from this loan
agreement. The loan has an interest rate of 1.93% wilh maturity dates from January 16, 2015 to July 16,
2034.
On September 19, 2013, a loan agreement was signed with the Illinois Environment Protection Agency to
install water meters at residents throughout the City lhal are currently unmelered. Installations will be
performed by a private contractor. Meters will be equipped with an AMR (Automatic Meter Reading)
capabilities. In 2014 the Water Fund drew $15.0 million from this loan agreemenl. The loan has an
interest rale of 1.93% wilh maturily dates from April 16, 2015 to October 16, 2034.
Second Lien Wastewater Transmission Revenue Bonds, Series 2014 ($292.4 million) were sold al a
premium in September 2014. The bonds have inlerest rales ranging from 3.0 percenl to 5.0 percenl and
malurity dates from January 1, 2016 to January 1, 2044. Net proceeds of $320.0 million will be used lo
finance certain costs of improvemenls and extensions lo the wastewater system.
In 2014, the Sewer Fund drew $15.0 million from the Illinois Environment Protection Agency loan
agreemenl line lo replace existing sewer pipes throughout the city. The loan has an interesl rate of 2.295
percent with maturily dates from March 4, 2015 to September 4, 2034.
60

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
In 2014, $31.0 million of Chicago O'Hare Internalional Airport Commercial Paper Notes Series 2013 were
issued. Outstanding O'Hare Commercial Paper Notes at December 3 1 , 2014 were $51.0 million. The
proceeds were used to finance portions of the cosl of aulhorized airport projects.
In 2014, $30.0 million of Chicago Midway Internafional Airport Commercial Notes Series 2013 were
issued. The proceeds were used to finance portions of the costs of aulhorized airport projects.
c)

Annual requirements listed below for each year include amounts payable January 1 of the following year.
Bonds maturing and inlerest payable January 1, 2015 have been excluded because funds for their payment
have been provided for. Annual requirements fo amortize debt outstanding as of December 31, 2014 are as
follows (dollars in thousands):
General Obligation
Year Ending
December 3 1 ,

Principal

Interest

2015
2016

$ 235,676
251,072

$ 438,328
428,190

2017
2018

274,537
287.152

417,278
405,157

296,244
1,554,715
1,532,769
1,790,238
1,277.419
772,425

392,075
1,780,488
1,452,485
1,025,642
554,626
94,623

$8,272.247

$6,988,892

2019
2020-2024
2025-2029
2030-2034
2035-2039
2040-2043

Tax Increment
Principal

$

Revenue
Year Ending
December 31,
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020-2024
2025-2029
2030-2034
2035-2039
2040-2043

Principal
$

18,170
17,880
18,250
19,150
20,335
119,187
141,116
132,133
200,730
38,445

$ 725,396

9,335
10,640
11,795
16,010
6,020
16,195

$

3,272
2,795
2,306
1,757
960
1,392

69,995

$

12,482

Business-type Activities

Interest
$

Interest

34,316
33,397
32,487
31,590
30,649
137,871
120,681
126,900
39,362
1.922

$ 589,175

Interest

Principal
314,322
392,640
445,178
457,732
441,142
2,194,324
2,614,614
3,083,740
2,134,220
699,065

$

640,650
624,517
606,773
586,321
567,407
2,519,632
1,963,663
1,208,250
517,087
62,832

$12,776,977

$

9,297,132

$

For the debt requirements calculated above, inlerest rales for fixed rale bonds debl range from 1.92 percenl to 7.78
percent and interest on variable rate debt was calculaled at the rale in effect or the effective rate of a related swap
agreement, if applicable, as of December 3 1 , 2014. Standby bond purchase agreemenls or letters of credit were
issued by third party financial institutions that are expected to be financially capable of honoring their agreemenls.
The Cily's variable rate bonds may bear interest from lime lo lime at a flexible rate, a daily rale, a weekly rale, an
adjustable long rale, or the fixed rate as determined by the remarketing agent, in consultation wilh the Cily. An
irrevocable letter of credit provides for the timely payment of principal and interesl. In the evenl the bonds are put
61

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
back to the bank and not successfully remarketed, or if the letter of credil agreements expire withoul an extension or
substitution, the bank bonds will convert to a term loan. There is no principal due on the potenfial term loans within
the next fiscal year.
d)

Derivatives
i)

Interest Rate Swaps
(1) Objective of the swaps. In order to proiect against the potential of rising interest rates and/or
changes in cash flows, the City has enlered into various separate interest rate swaps at a cost less
than whal the City would have paid to issue fixed-rate debt. The notional amounts related to bonds
maturing on January 1, 2015 have been excluded in the following table because funds for their
payment have been provided for.

Changes in Fair Value
Classification
Amount

Fair Value at
December 31, 2014
Classification
Amount

Notional
Amount

Governmental Activities
Hedges:

Interest Rate Swaps

Deferred
Outflow of
Resources

Investment
Income

$ (15,850)

Deferred
Ouirow of
Resources

$(158,328)

$1,192,175

(4,821)

Investment
Revenue

(32,467)

363.700

(50,998)

Deferred
Outflow of
Resources

(200,095)

924,280

Investmeni Derivative Instruments:
Interesl Rate Swaps
Business-type Activities
Hedges:

Inleresi Rale Swaps..

Deferred
Outflow of
Resources

Total..

$ (390,890)

(2) Terms, fair values, and credit risk. The objective and terms, including the fair values and credit
ratings, of the City's hedging derivative instruments outstanding as of December 3 1 , 2014, are as
follows. The notional amounis of the swaps match the principal amounts of the associated debt. The
City's swap agreements contain scheduled reductions lo outstanding notional amounts that are
expected to approximalely follow scheduled or anticipated reductions in the associated "bonds
payable" category. The notional amounts related to bonds maturing on January 1, 2015 have been
excluded below because funds for their payment have been provided for. Under the swaps on a net
basis for each related series of bonds, the Cily pays the counterparty a fixed payment and receives a
variable payment computed according to the London Interbank Offered Rale (LIBOR) and/or The
Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA) Municipal Swap Index. The terms as
of December 31, 2014, are as follows (dollars in thousands):

62

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014

Associated
Bond Issue
Hedging Instruments

Notional
Amounts

Effective
Date

Terms

Fair
Values

Tennination
Date

Counterparty
Credit
Rafinq

Governmental Activities:

GO VRDB (Series 2007EFG)

GO VRDB (Series 2005D)
Sales Tax Revenue Refunding Bonds
(VRDB Series 2002)
Tax bicrement/^locaton Bonds
(Near Nor*i TIF, Series 1999A)
Business-type Activities:
Chicago Midway tnternational Airport
Revenue Bonds (Series 2004C&D)

$ 150,000
50,000
200,000
155,953
66,837

11/8/2007
11/8/2007
1/1/2014
8/17/2005
8/17/2005

100,000
61,395
61,395

1/1/2014
1/1/2014
1/1/2014

207,680

1/1/2031

Water Variable Rate Revenue
Refunding Bonds (Series 2004)
Second Lien Water Revenue
Relunding Bonds (Scries 2000)

1/1/2042 A3/A
8/1/2018 Baa2/A1/1/2042 Aa3/AA7/1/2020 Baal/A
1/1/2040 Aa3/A+
1/1/2031 Aa2/AA1/1/2031 A3/A
1/1/2031 A3/A
1/1/2040 A2/A

111,715

6/27/2002 Pay 4 23% receive 75.25%of 3 Mo. LIBOR

(26,657)

27,000

9/1/1999 Pay 5.084%; receive 67% of 1 Mo. LIBOR

(3,207)

84.405
56,270

49,835
49,835

12/14/2004 Pay4.174% receive SFMA Plus 05%
4/21/2011 Pay 4.247% receive SFMA Plus 05%
Pay 3.886% receive95%of3 Mo LIBOR
(ifLIBORis<3%)or
1/3/2011 67%of3Mo LIBOR (if LIBOR is > 3%)
Pay 3 886% receive SFMA
7/29/2004 (If LIBOR IS < 3%)
7/29/2004 or 67% of 1 Mo. LIBOR (if LIBOR is > 3%)

173,345

8/5/2004 Pay3.8694% receive67%of1 Mo Libor

(30,995) 11/1/2031 A2/A

182.230

8/5/2004 Pay3.8669% receive 67%of1 Mo Libor

(37 650) 11/1/2031 Aa3/AA-

100,000

4/16/2008 Pay3.8694% receive67%oil Mo Libor

232,560
Wastewater Transmission Vanable
Rate Revenue Bonds (Series 20D8C)...

Pay 3.9982% receive SIPA
$ (43,370)
Pay 3.9982% receive SIFMA
(5,443)
Pay SIFMA, receive 72.5% of 1 Mo. LIBOR*
(17,373)
Pay 4.104% receive SFMA
(23,181)
Pay 4.104% receive SFMA
(20,287)
Pay SIFMA+.045%
receive 72.5% of 1 Mo. LIBOR *
(6,096)
Pay SIFMA; receive 72 5%of 1 Mo LIBOR'
(3,343)
Pay SIFMA; receive 72 5% of 1 Mo LIBOR*
(3.343)
Pay SIFMA+ .05%
receive 72 5%of 1 Mo. LIBOR *
(6,028)

1/1/2034 Aa3/A+
1/1/2019 A2/A

(17,678) 1/1/2035 Baal/A
(12,450) 1/1/2035 Aa3/AA-

(49,027)

1/1/2039 A3/A

(11,472)
(11,362)

1/1/2039 A2/A
1/1/2039 Aa3/A+

(29,460) 11/1/2030 A2/A

Investment Instruments
Governmental Activities:
136,385
45.465
45.465
GO VRDB (Senes 2003B)

136,385

Pay 4.052%
8/7/2003 receive 66 91%of 10 Yr USD ISDA Swap Rate
Pay 4 052%
8/7/2003 receive 66 91%of 10 Yr USD ISDA Swap Rale
Pay 66 91% of 10 Yr USD ISDA Swap Rate +
3/1/2014 .05% receive 75%of1 Mo LIBOR *
Pay 66 91%ol 10 Yr USD ISDA Swap Rale
11/1/2014 receive75%oil Mo. LIBOR *
Total

See Table 31 in Slalislical Seclion lor Couinierparly Enlilies and additional details lor credit ralings
See Foolnole 1 8 - Subsequent Events for swap terminations and amendments to agreements effective in 2015
Type and obieclive for all the Swaps is the same, as mentioned earlier.
' Reflccls Swap Overlay agreement
VRDB means variable rate demand bonds

63

(20,434)

1/1/2034 Aa3/AA-

(6,755)

1/1/2034 Aa3/A+

(1,361)

1/1/2019 A2/A

(3,917)

1/1/2019 Aa2/AA-

$ (390,890)

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
(3) Fair Value. As of December 3 1 , 2014, the swaps had a negalive fair value of $390.9 million. As per
industry convenfion, the fair values of the City's outstanding swaps were estimated using the zerocoupon method. This method calculates the future net settlement payments required by the swap,
assuming lhat the forward rates implied by the yield curve correctly anticipate future spot rates.
These payments are then discounted using the spot rates implied by the current yield curve for
hypothetical zero-coupon bonds due on the dale of each future net setfiement on the swap. Because
interest rates are below the Fixed Rale Paid, the Cily's swaps had negative values. Note lhal the
combination of the negalive fair value of $390.9 million less the unamortized interest rate swap
premium balance of $6.9 million related to investmeni derivative instruments and $34.9 million related
to governmental cash flow hedges represent the total fair value of the derivative liability in the
statement of net posifion. During 2014, the City terminated the swap associated with Series 2002B
General Obligation Variable Rate Demand Bond (Neighborhoods Alive 21 Program); the termination
payment amounted to $36.3 million.
(4) Credit Risk. The City is exposed to credit risk (counterparty risk) through the counterparties with
which it enters into agreemenls. If minimum credit rafing requirements are not maintained, the
counterparty is required to post collateral to a third party. This protects the City by mitigating the
credit risk, and therefore the ability to pay a termination payment, inherent in a swap. Collateral on all
swaps is to be in the form of cash or Eligible Collateral held by a third-party custodian. Upon credil
events, the swaps also allow transfers, credit support, and lerminalion if the counterparty is unable to
meet the said credit requirements.
(5) Basis Risk. Basis risk refers lo the mismatch between the variable rate payments received on a swap
contract and the interest payment actually owed on the bonds. The two significant components
driving this risk are credit and SIFMA/LIBOR ratios. Credit may create basis risk because the City's
bonds may trade differently than the swap index as a result of a credit change in the Cily.
SIFMA/LIBOR ratios (or spreads) may create basis risk. With percentage of LIBOR swaps, if the
City's bonds trade at a higher percentage of LIBOR over the index received on the swap, basis risk is
created. This can occur due lo many factors including, without limitation, changes in marginal tax
rates, lax-exempt status of bonds, and supply and demand for variable rate bonds. The City is
exposed to basis risk on all swaps except those that are based on Cost of Funds, which provide cash
Hows that mirror those of the underlying bonds. For all olher swaps, if the rate paid on the bonds is
higher than the rate received, the City is liable for the difference. The difference would need to be
available on the debt service payment date and it would add additional underlying cost to the
transacfion.
(6) Tax Risk. The swap exposes the City to tax risk or a permanent mismatch (shortfall) between the
fioafing rate received on the swap and the variable rate paid on the underiying variable-rate bonds
due lo tax law changes such that the federal or slate tax exemption of municipal debt is eliminated or
its value reduced. There have been no lax law changes since the execufion of the City's swap
transactions.
(7) Termination Risk. The risk that the swap could be lerminaled as a resull of certain events including a
rafings downgrade for the issuer or swap counterparty, covenant violation, bankruptcy, payment
default or olher defined events of default. Termination of a swap may result in a payment made by
the issuer or to the issuer depending upon the market at the time of termination.
(8) Rollover Risk. The risk that the City may be exposed to rising variable interest rates if (i) the swap
expires or terminates prior lo the maiunty of the bonds and (ii) the City is unable lo renew or replace
the swap.
(9) Swap payments and associated debt. Bonds maturing and interest payable January 1, 2015 have
been excluded because funds for their paymenl have been provided for. As of December 3 1 , 2014,
debt service requirements of the City's outstanding variable-rate debt and net swap payments,
assuming current interest rates remain the same, for their term are as follows (dollars in thousands):
64

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014

Interest
Rate

Variable-Rate Bonds
Year Ending
December 3 1 ,
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020 - 2024
2025 - 2029
2030 - 2034
2035 - 2039
2040 - 2042

e)

Principal
$

Interest

Swaps, Net

Total

31,965
51,365
53,750
59,865
58,410
413,660
300,625
418,560
235,900
43,535

$

4,201
4,215
4.017
3,810
3,593
14,894
9,418
5,744
1,504
20

$

62,676
61,330
59,429
57,437
55,167
236,467
168,159
100,499
35,232
2,608

$

$ 1,667,635

$

51,416

$

839,004

$ 2,558,055

98,842
116,910
117,196
121,112
117,170
665,021
478,202
524,803
272,636
46,163

Debt Covenants
Water Fund - The ordinances authorizing the issuance of outstanding Water Revenue Bonds provide for
the creation of separate accounts into which net revenues, as defined, or proceeds are to be credited, as
appropriate. The ordinances require that nel revenues available for bonds, as adjusted, equal 120
percent of the current annual debl service on the outstanding senior lien bonds and that City
managemenl maintains all covenant reserve account balances at specified amounts. The above
requirements were met al December 3 1 , 2014. The Water Rate Stabilization account had a balance in
restricted assets of $88.4 million al December 31, 2014.
The ordinances authorizing the issuance of outslanding Second Lien Waler Revenue Bonds provide for
the creation of separate accounts into which monies will be deposited, as appropriate. The ordinances
require that net revenues are equal to the sum of the aggregate annual debl service requirements for the
fiscal year of the outstanding senior lien bonds and 110 percent of the aggregate annual debt service
requirements of the outstanding second lien bonds. This requirement was met al December 31, 2014.
ii)

Sewer Fund - The ordinances authorizing the issuance of outstanding Wastewater Transmission
Revenue Bonds provide for the creation of separate accounts inlo which net revenues, as defined, or
proceeds are to be credited, as appropriate. The ordinances require that net revenues available for
bonds equal 115 percent of the current annual debt service requirements on the outslanding senior lien
bonds. This requirement was met at December 3 1 , 2014. The Sewer Rate Stabilization account had a
balance in restricted assets of $32.6 million at December 31, 2014.
The ordinances authorizing the issuance of outslanding Second Lien Wastewater Transmission Revenue
Bonds provide for the creation of separate accounts into which monies will be deposited, as appropriate.
The ordinances require that nel revenues equal 100 percenl of the sum of the currenl maximum annual
debl service requirements of the outstanding senior lien bonds and the maximum annual debt service
requirements of the second lien bonds. This requirement was met at December 31, 2014.

iii) Chicago Midway International Airport Fund - The Master Indenture of Trust securing Chicago Midway
Airport Revenue Bonds requires in each year the Cily sel rates and charges for the use and operation of
Midway and for services rendered by the City in Ihe operation of Midway so that revenues, together with
any other available monies and the cash balance held in the Revenue Fund on the first day of such fiscal
year not then required to be deposited in any fund or account, will be at least sufficient (a) to provide for
the Operation and Mainlenance Expenses for the fiscal year and (b) to provide for the greater of (i) the
65

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
amounis needed to be deposited inlo the First and Junior Lien Debt Service Funds, the Operations &
Maintenance Reserve Account, the Working Capital Account, the First Lien Debt Service Reserve Fund,
the Repair and Replacemenl Fund, and the Special Project Fund and (ii) an amount not less than 125
percent of the Aggregate First Lien Debl Service for such Fiscal Year reduced by an amount equal to the
sum of any amount held in any Capitalized Interest Account for disbursement during such Fiscal Year to
pay inlerest on First Lien Bonds. These requiremenls were met al December 31, 2014.
The Master Indenture of Trusl Securing Chicago Midway Airport Second Lien Obligations requires lhal
the City set rentals, rates and olher charges for the use and operation of Midway and for certain services
rendered by the City in the operation of Midway in order lhat in each Fiscal Year, Revenues, together with
Other Available Moneys deposited with the First Lien Trustee or the Second Lien Trustee with respect to
such Fiscal Year and any cash balance held in the Firsl Lien Revenue Fund or the Second Lien Revenue
Fund on the first day of such Fiscal Year not then required lo be deposited in any Fund or Account under
the Firsl Lien Indenture for the Second Lien Indenture, will be at least sufficient (1) to provide for the
payment of Operafion and Maintenance Expenses for the Fiscal Year and (2) to provide for the greater of
(A) or (B) as follows: (A) the greater of the amounts needed lo make the deposits required under the First
Lien Indenture described in the immediately preceding paragraph above; or (B) the greater of the
amounts needed to make the deposits required under the First Lien Indenture described in the
immediately preceding paragraph above or an amount nol less than 110 percent of the Aggregate First
Lien Debt Service and Aggregate Second Lien Debt Service for the Bond Year commencing during such
Fiscal Year, reduced by (X) any amount held in any Capitalized Interest Account for disbursement during
such Bond Year to pay interest on First Lien Bonds, and (Y) any amount held in any capitalized interest
account established pursuant to a Supplemental Indenture under the Second Lien Indenture for
disbursement during such Bond Year to pay inlerest on Second Lien Obligations. These requirements
were met at December 31, 2014.
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Fund - The Master Indenlure of Trust securing Chicago O'Hare
Internafional Airport General Airport Senior Lien Obligations requires lhat Revenues in each Fiscal Year,
together with Other Available Moneys deposited wilh the Trustee wilh respect to that Fiscal Year and any
cash balance held in the Revenue Fund on the first day of that Fiscal Year nol then required to be
deposited in any Fund or Account, will be at least sufficient: (i) to provide for the payment of Operafion
and Mainlenance Expenses for the Fiscal Year; and (ii) lo provide for the greater of (a) the sum of the
amounts needed to make the deposits required to be made pursuanl lo all resolutions, ordinances,
indentures and trust agreements pursuant to which all outstanding Senior Lien Bonds Obligations or other
outstanding Airport Obligations are issued and secured, and (b) one and len-hundreths times Aggregate
Debt Service for the Bond Year commencing during that Fiscal Year, reduced by any proceeds of Airport
Obligations held by the Trustee for disbursement during that Bond Year lo pay principal of and interest on
Senior Lien Obligations. This requirement was met at December 31, 2014.
The Master Trust Indenture securing Chicago O'Hare Internalional Airport Passenger Facility Charge
(PFC) Obligations requires PFC Revenues, as defined, to be deposited into the PFC Revenue Fund. The
City covenants lo pay from the PFC Revenue Fund not later than the twentieth day of each calendar
month the following amounis in the following order of priority: (1) to the Trustee for deposit in the Bond
Fund, the sum required to make all of the Sub-Fund Deposits and Other Required Deposits to be
disbursed from the Bond Fund [to meet debt service and debt service reserve requirements] in the
calendar month pursuant to the Master Indenture; (2) to make any payments required for the calendar
month with respect lo Subordinated PFC Obligations; and (3) all moneys and securities remaining in the
PFC Revenue Fund shall be transferred by the Cily (or the Trustee if it then holds the PFC Revenue
Fund pursuanl lo the Master Indenlure) to Ihe PFC Capilal Fund.
The
Lien
City
plus
and

Indenture of Trust Securing Chicago O'Hare International Airport Customer Facility Charge Senior
Revenue Bonds requires that, as long as any Bonds remain Outstanding, in each Fiscal Year, the
shall set the amount of the CFC (when multiplied by Ihe total number of projected Contract Days)
projected Facility Rent at an annual level sufficient to provide sufficient funds (1) to pay principal of
inleresi on the Bonds due in such Fiscal Year, (2) to reimburse the Rolling Coverage Fund, the
66

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Supplemental Reserve Fund, the Debt Service Reserve Fund and any Subordinate Reserve Fund for any
drawings upon such Funds over a period not to exceed twelve months, as determined by the City, (3) to
provide funds necessary to pay any "yield reduction paymenis" or rebale amounis due lo the United
States under the Indenture for which funds in the Rebate Fund or the CFC Stabilization Fund are not
otherwise available. (4) lo maintain the balance of the CFC Stabilization Fund in an amounl of no less
than the CFC Stabilizafion Fund Minimum Requirement and lo reimburse any drawings below the CFC
Stabilization Fund Minimum Requirement over a period not to exceed twelve months, as delermined by
the City, and (5) to maintain the balance of the Operation and Maintenance Fund in an amounl of no less
than the Operation and Mainlenance Fund Requirement and lo reimburse any drawings below the
Operation and Maintenance Fund Minimum Requirement over a period of not to exceed twelve months,
as delermined by the City.
f)

No-Commitment Debt and Public Interest Loans include various special assessment, private activity
bonds and loans. These types of financings are used to provide private entifies wilh low-cost capital financing
for construction and rehabilitation of facilities deemed to be in the public interest. Bonds payable on nocommitment debt are not included in the accompanying financial statements because the City has no
obligation to provide for their repayment, which is the responsibility of the borrowing entities. In addition,
federal programs/grants, including Communily Developmenl Block Grants and Community Service Block
Grants, provide original funding for public interesl loans. Loans receivable are not included as assets
because payments received on loans are used to fund new loans or olher program activifies in the current
year and are not available for general Cily operating purposes. Loans provided to third parties are recorded
as current and prior year programs/grants expendiiures. Funding for future loans will be from a combination
of the repayment of existing loans and additional funds committed from future programs/grants expenditures.

g)

Defeased B o n d s have been removed from the Statement of Net Position because related assets have been
placed in irrevocable trusts that, together with interest earned thereon, will provide amounts sufficient for
payment of all principal and interest. Defeased bonds at December 3 1 , 2014, not including principal
payments due January 1, 2015, are as follows (dollars in thousands)'
Amount
Defeased

Outstanding

General Obligation Emergency Telephone System - Series 1993
General Obligation Bonds - Series 2001A
General Obligalion Project Bonds - Series 2004A
General Obligafion Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 2005B
General Obligation Direct Access Bonds - Series 2005E
General Obligation Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 2006A
General Obligalion Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 2007A
Lakefront Millennium Project Parking Facilities Bonds - Series 1998
Special Transportation Revenue Bonds - Series 2001

$

213,730
406,571
323,040
11,435
22.186
28,695
10,505
149,880
118,715

$

103,570
64,805
3,405
1,750
5,555
7,440
4,350
43,880
90,395

Total

$ 1,284,757

$

325,150

67

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
11) Pension Funds
a)

Retirement Benefit-Eligible Cily employees participale in one of four single-employer defined benefit pension
plans (Plans). These Plans are: the Municipal Employees'; the Laborers' and Refiremenl Board Employees';
the Policemen's; and the Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Funds of Chicago. Plans are administered by
individual refiremenl boards of trustees comprised of City officials or their designees and of trustees elected
by plan members. Certain employees of the Chicago Board of Education participate in the Municipal
Employees' Fund or the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund. Each Plan
issues a publicly available financial report that includes financial statements and required supplementary
information.
The financial statements of the Plans are prepared using the accrual basis of accounting. Employer and
employee conlributions are recognized in the period in which employee services are performed. Benefits and
refunds are recognized when payable.
Plan investmenls are reported at fair value. Short-term investments are reported at cost, which approximates
fair value. Securities traded on national or international exchanges are valued at the last reported sales price
at current exchange rates. Fixed income securilies are valued principally using quoted market prices
provided by independent pricing services. For collective investments, the net asset value is delermined and
certified by the investment managers as of the reporting date. Real estate investmenls are generally valued
by appraisals or other approved methods. Investments that do not have an established market are reported
at esfimated fair value.
The Plans have a securifies lending program. At year-end, the Plans have no credil risk exposure to
borrowers because the amounts the Plans owe the borrowers exceed the amounis the borrowers owe the
Plans. The contract with the Plans' master custodian requires it to indemnify the Plans if the borrowers fail to
return the securities (and if the collateral is inadequate to replace the securifies lent) or fail to pay the fund for
income distributions by fhe securities' issuers while Ihe securities are on loan. All securities loans can be
terminated on demand by eilher the Plans or the borrower, although the average term of the loans has not
exceeded 154 days. The Plans' custodian lends securilies for collateral in the form of cash, irrevocable
letters of credit and/or U.S. government obligafions equal to at least 102 percent of the fair value of securifies
or internafional securities for collateral of 105 percent. Cash collateral is invested in the lending agents' shortterm investmeni pool, which at year-end has a weighted average malurily that did nol exceed 39 days. The
Plans cannot pledge lo sell collateral securities received unless the borrower defaults. Loans outstanding as
ot December 3 1 , 2014 are as follows: market value of securilies loaned $883.6 million, market value of
cash collateral from borrowers $906.2 million and market value of non-cash collateral from borrowers $1.5
million.
The Plans provide retirement, disability, and death benefits as established by State law. Benefits generally
vest afler 20 years of credited service. Employees who retire at or after age 55 (50 for policemen and
firemen) with 20 years of credited service qualify lo receive a money purchase annuity and those wilh more
than 20 years of crediled service qualify to receive a minimum formula annuity. The annuily is computed by
multiplying the final average salary by a percenlage ranging from 2.0 percenl lo 2.5 percent per year of
credited service. The final average salary is the employee s highest average annual salary for any four
consecutive years wilhin the last 10 years of credited service.
Historically, Stale law required City conlributions at statutorily, nol acluanally, determined rates. The City's
contribution was calculated based on the total amount of contributions by employees to the Plan made m the
calendar year two years prior, multiplied by (in recenl years) 1.25 for the Municipal Employees', 1.00 for the
Laborers', 2.00 for the Policemen's, and 2.26 for the Firemen's. State law also requires covered employees
to contribute a percenlage of their salaries.
Beginning in 2016, currenl Slate law requires significantly increased contribulions by the City lo Ihe
Policemen's and Firemen's Plans. This is projecled to require an increase in the Cily's conlributions lo the
Policemen's and Firemen's Plans by more than $548 6 million starting in 2016 and increasing by
68

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
approximately three percent each year thereafter. A bill was recently passed by the Illinois General
Assembly which would, among olher things, institute an extension lo 2055 of the period by which the
unfunded liabililies of the Policemen's and Firemen's Plans are amortized lo a 90 percenl Funded Ratio. This
would also phase-in over the nexl five years the increases in the Cily's contribulions to the Policemen's and
Firemen's Plans. A motion to reconsider this vole has been filed in the Illinois Senate and is under
consideration.
Also beginning in 2016, Stale law requires significantly increased conlributions by the Cily lo the Municipal
Employees' and Laborers' Plans. The multiplier determining the Cily contribution, based on the total amount
of contribufions by employees lo the respective Plans made in the calendar year two years prior, will
increase as follows: for the City conlribution to be made in 2016, 1.60 (Laborers') and 1.85 (Municipal
Employees'); for the contribufion made in 2017, 1.90 (Laborers') and 2.15 (Municipal Employees'); for the
conlribution made in 2018, 2.20 (Laborers') and 2.45 (Municipal Employees'); for the contribution made in
2019, 2.50 (Laborers') and 2.75 (Municipal Employees'); and for the conlribulion made in 2020, 2.80
(Laborers') and 3.05 (Municipal Employees'). Beginning in 2021, the City's payment contribufions for
Laborers' and Municipal Employees' will equal the Normal Cost (based on acluarial calculations) for such
year plus the amount, determined on a level percentage of payroll basis, that is sufficient to achieve a Funded
Rafio of 90 percent in Laborers' and Municipal Employees' by the end of contribution year 2055. This will
require an increase in the City's contributions to the Municipal Employees' and Laborers' Plans of more than
$89.1 million starfing in 2016 and increasing by approximalely three percent each year thereafter.
The City's annual pension cost for the current year and related information for each Plan is as follows (dollars in
thousands):
Municipal
Employees'

Laborers"

(a)
8.5%

(a)
8.5%

Contnbution rales:
City (a)
Plan members
Annual required contribution
Interesl on nel pension obligatjon
Adjustmenl to annual required
contribution

. S

839,038
200,461

$

106,018
2,336

(210,521)

Policemen's

Firemen's

(a)
9.0%
$

(2,453)

491.651
209.449

Total
n/a
r/a

(a)
9 125%

$

304.2G5
150,726

$

1.740,972
562,972
(515,792)

(147,857)

(154.961)

Annual pension cost
Contnbutions made

828.978
149,747

105,901
12,160

553,243
178,158

300,030
107,334

1,788.152
447.399

Increase in net pension obligation
Net pension obligation.
beginning of year
Net pension obligation,
end of year

679,231

93,741

375.085

192.696

1,340,753

2,672,812

31,148

2,702,573

1,384,074

7,290.607

I

3,352,043

$

124.889

69

$

3,077,658

S

2.076,770

$

8.631,360

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014

Municipal
Employees'

Laborers'

Policemen's

Firemen's

12/31/2014

12/31/2014

12/31/2014

12/31/2014

Acluarial valuation date
Acluarial cost method
Amortization metfxDd
Remaining amortization period
Asset valuation method

Entry age normal Entry age normal
Entry age normal
Entry age normal
Level dollar, open Level dollar, open Level percent, open Level dollar, open
30 years
30 years
30 years
30 years
5-yr. Smoothed
5-yr. Smoothed
5-yr. Smoothed
5-yr. Smoothed
Market
Market
Market
Market

Actuarial assumptions:
Investment rale of return (a)
Projected salary increases (a):
Inflation
Seniority/Merit
Postretirement benefit increases
(a)

7.5%

7.5%

7.5%

8.0%

3.0
(b)
(f)

3.0
(c)
(f)

3.0
(d)
(g)

3.0
(e)
(g)

Proceeds from a tax levy noi more than the amount equal to the total amounl of contnbutions by Iho employees to the FurxJ made tn the
calendar year, two years prior to the year for which the annual applicable tax is levied mLiltiplicd by 1 25 for Municipal. 1 00 for Laborers'.

^t))

2 00 Policemen's and 2.26 for Firemen's.
Service-based increases equivalent lo a level annual rate increase of 1.4 percent over a full career

(c)

Serwce-based increases equivalent to a level annual rate increase of 1 9 percent over a full career.

(d)

Service-based increases equivalent to a level annual rate increase of 1 8 percent over a full career.

(e)

Service-based increases equivalent to a level annual rate increase of 1 6 percent over a full career.

(0

The lessor of 3.0 percenter 1/2 of CPI (simple) per year, applied to the anrxjity in effect as of December 3 1 , 2014, wfltha minimum of 1.0
percent per year for total annuities less than $22,000.00 . Beginning at the earlier of.
1) the later of the firsl of January of the year after retirement and age 6 1 ;
2) the later of the first of January of the year aller the fourth anniversary of relirement and age 54

(g)

Uses 3 0 percent per year for annuitants age 55 or over, born before 1955 with at least 20 years of service
and 1.5 percent per year for 20 years for annuitants age 60 or over, born in 1955 or later.
For particpants tfial first became members on or after January 1, 2 0 1 1 . increases arc equal to the lesser of 3.0 percenl and 50 percent of
CPI-u of the original benefit, commencing at age 60.

The following tables of information assist users in assessing each fund's progress in accumulafing sufficient assels to
pay benefits when due. The three-year historical informafion for each Plan is as follows (dollars in thousands):

Year
Municipal Employees':
2012
2013
2014
Laborers':
2012
2013
2014
Policemen's:
2012
2013
2014
Firemen's:
2012
2013
2014

Annual
Pension
Cost
$

% of Annual
Pension Cost
Contributed

Net Pension
(Asset) /
Obligation

687,519
812.463
828,978

21.65%
18.24
18.06

77,857
106,439
105,901

15 22
10.88
11.48

483,359
531,355
553,243

40 94
33.79
32.20

2,350,739
2,702,573
3,077,658

268,112
291,064
300,030

30.41
35.62
35.77

1,696,679
1,884,074
2,076,770

70

$

2,008,546
2,672,812
3,352,043
(63,707)
31.148
124,889

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
SCHEDULE OF FUNDING PROGRESS
(dollars in thousands)

Year
Municipal Employees':
2012
2013
2014
Laborers';
2012
2013
2014
Policemen's:
2012
2013
2014
Firemen's:
2012
2013
2014

Actuarial
Valuation
Date

Actuarial
Value of
Assets
(a)

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
(AAL)
Entry Age
(b)

12/31/12 $
12/31/13
12/31/14

5,073,320
5,114,208
5,039,297

S 13,475,377
13,828,920
12,307,094

12/31/12
12/31/13
12/31/14

1,315,914
1,354,261
1,357,451

12/31/12
12/31/13
12/31/14
12/31/12
12/31/13
12/31/14

Unfunded
AAL
(b-a)
$

Funded
Ratio
(a/b)

Covered
Payroll
(c)
1.590.794
1.580,289
1,602,978

Unfunded
(Surplus)
AAL as a
Percentage
of Covered
Payroll
((b-a)/c)
528 %
551
453

8,402,057
8,714,712
7,267,797

38% S
37
41

2,336,189
2,383,499
2,107,110

1,020,275
1,029,238
749,659

56
57
64

198,790
200,352
202,673

513
514
370

3,148,930
3,053,882
2,954,319

10,051,827
10,282,339
11,334,799

6,902,897
7,228,457
8,380,480

31
30
26

1,015,171
1,015,426
1,074,333

680
712
780

993,284
991,213
988,141

4,020,138
4,128.735
4,338,593

3,026,854
3,137,522
3,350,452

25
24
23

418,965
416,492
460,190

722
753
728

The unfunded liability to the Plans poses significant financial challenges. The unfunded liability has
consistently increased in recent years, but is expected to decrease in the future. Such a decrease is
expected to resull from significantly increased City contributions to the Plans, beginning in 2016, as required
by State law (see Nole 1). These increased contributions to the Plans are expected to pose a substantial
burden on the City's financial condition.
b)

Other Post Employment Benefits (OPEB) - The Pension Funds also conlribute a portion of the City's
conlribution as subsidy toward the cost for each of their annuitants to participate in the City's health
benefits plans, which include basic benefits for eligible annuitants and their dependents and supplemental
benefits for Medicare eligible annuitants and their dependents. The amounts below represent the accrued
liability of the City's pension plans related to their own annuitants and the subsidy paid to the City (see Nole
12). The plan is financed on a pay as you go basis (dollars in Ihousands).

71

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Annual O P E B Cost and Contributions Made
For Fiscal Y e a r Ended December 31, 2014
Municipal
Employees'
Contribution Rates City

Annual Required Contribution
Interesl on Nel OPEB Obligation
Adjustment to Annual Required Conlribulion

Laborers'

Policemen's

Firemen's

Total

A portion of the Citys employer contribution to the Pension Funds is
used lo finance the health insurance supplement benefit payments.
S

9,826
3,404

$

2,520
290

$

9,723
547

$

2,739
536

$

24,808
4,777

(26,330)

(2.243)

(4,079)

(4,143)

(36,795)

Annual OPEB Cosl (Gain)
Conlributions Made

(13,100)
9,051

567
2.360

6,191
9,657

(868)
2,471

(7,210)
23,539

Decrease in
Nel OPEB,Obligalion

(22,151)

(1,793)

(3,466)

(3,339)

(30,749)

Net OPEB Obligalion,
Beginning of Year

75,637

6,442

12,150

11,902

106,131

Net OPEB Obligation,
End of Year

$

53,488

$

4,649

$

8,684

$

8,563

$

75,382

Actuarial Method and A s s u m p t i o n s - For the Pension Funds' subsidies, the actuarial valuation for the fiscal year
ended December 3 1 , 2014 was determined using the Entry Age Normal actuarial cosl method. Projections of
benefits for financial reporting purposes are based on the substantive plan (the plan understood by the employer and
plan members) and included the types of benefits provided al the time of each valuafion and the historical pattern of
sharing of benefit costs between the employer and plan members to thai point. The actuarial method and
assumptions used include techniques that are designed to reduce the effects of short term volatility in actuarial
accrued liabililies and the actuarial value of assels, consistent with the long lerm perspecfive of the calculafions.

72

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Municipal
Employees'

Laborers'

Policemen's

Firemen's

12/31/2014

12/31/2014

12/31/2014

12/31/2014

Entry /\ge
Normal

Entry Age
Normal

Entry Age
Normal

Entry Age
Normal

Level Dollar,
Open

Level Dollar,
Open

Level Percenl,
Open

Level Dollar.
Open

2 years Closed

2 years Closed

2 years Closed

2 years Closed

No Assets
(Pay-as-you-go)

No Assets
(Pay-as-you-go)

No Assets
(Pay-as-you-go)

No Assets
(Pay-as-you-go)

4.5%

4.5%

4.5%

4.5%

3.0%

3.0%

3.0%

3.0%

Actuarial Valuation Date
Actuanal Cost Method
Amortization Method
Remaining
Amortization Method
/^sset Valuation Method
/Vctuarial assumptions:
OPEB Investment
Rate of Return (a)
Projected Salary Increases (a)
Inflation
Senionty / Ment
Healthcare Cost Trend Rate (e)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(d)

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

( a ) Compounded /\nnually
( b ) Service-based increases equivalent lo a level annual rate of increase of 1.4 percent over a full career
( c ) Service-based increases equivalent to a level annual rate of increase of 1.9 percenl over a full career
( d ) Service-based increases equivalent lo a level annual rate of increase of 1.8 percent over a full career
( e ) Trend not applicable - fixed dollar subsidy

OPEB COST SUMMARY
(dollars in thousands)
Annual
OPEB
Cost

Year

% of Annual
OPEB
Obligation

Net
OPEB
Obligation

Municipal Employees'

2012
2013
2014

Laborers'

2012
2013
2014

2.994
3,009
567

85.56
83.67
416.04

5,951
6,442
4,649

Policemen's

2012
2013
2014

10,573
10.536
6.191

92.37
93.46
155 99

11,461
12,150
8,684

Firemen's

2012
2013
2014

63.13
62.66

10,382
11.902
8,563

$

13.703
13,389
(13.100) *

4,154
4.071
(868)

69.49 %
71.01

-

-

S

71,756
75,637
53,486

* The negative cost is primarily due to the insurance subsidy ending in 2016
Actuarial valuations of an ongoing plan involve esfimates of the value of reported amounts and assumpfions about the
probability of occurrence of events far into the future. Examples include assumptions about future employment,
mortality, and the healthcare cost trend. Amounts determined regarding the funded status of the plan and the annual
required contnbutions of the employer are subject to continual revisions as the results are compared with past
expectations and new estimates are made about the future The schedule of funding progress, presents, as required.
73

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
supplementary information following the noles to the financial statements (dollars in thousands, unaudited).
Unfunded

Actuarial
Valuation
Date

Actuarial
Value of
Assets
(a)

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
(AAL)
Entry Age
(b)

Unfunded
(Surplus)
UAAL
(b-a)

Municipal
Employees'

12/31/2014

Laborers'

12/31/2014

-

4,593

4,593

Policemen's

12/31/2014

18,762

18,762

Firemen's

12/31/2014

-

4,995

4.995

$

$

17,495

S

17,495

Funded
Ratio
(a/b)

-

Covered
Payroll
(c)

$

(Surplus)
A M . as a
Percentage
of Covered
Payroll
(( b-a ) / c )

1,602,978

1.09

202,673

2.27

1,074,333

1.75

460.190

1.09

12) Other Post Employment Benefits - City Obligation
Up to June 30, 2013, the annuitants who refired prior to July 1, 2005 received a 55 percent subsidy from the City and
the annuitants who retired on or after July 1, 2005 received a 50, 45, 40 and zero percent subsidy from the City based
on the annuitant's length of actual employment with the City for Ihe gross cost of refiree heallh care under a court
approved setfiement agreement, known as the "Settlement Plan." The pension funds coniributed their subsidies of $65
per month for each Medicare eligible annuitant and $95 per month for each Non-Medicare eligible annuitant to their
gross cost. The annuitants coniributed a total of $84.8 million in 2014 to the gross cost of their retiree health care
pursuant to premium amounts set forth in the below-referenced settlement agreemenL
The City of Chicago subsidized a portion of the cost (based upon service) for hospital and medical coverage for eligible
retired employees and their dependenls based upon a settlement agreement enlered in 2003 and which expired on
June 30, 2013.
On May 15, 2013, the City announced plans lo, among olher things: (i) provide a lifetime heallhcare plan to former
employees who refired before August 23, 1989 with a contribution from the Cily of up to 55% of the cost of lhat plan;
and (li) beginning July 1, 2013, provide employees who refired on or after August 23, 1989 wilh heallhcare benefits in a
new Retiree Heallh Plan (Health Plan), but wilh significant changes to the terms including increases in premiums and
deductibles, reduced benefits and the phase-out of Ihe Health Plan for such employees by December 31, 2016.
The cost of health benefits is recognized as an expenditure in the accompanying financial statements as claims are
reported and are funded on a pay-as-you-go basis. In 2014, the net expense to the City for providing these benefits lo
approximalely 24,381 annuitants plus their dependents was approximately $79.3 million.
Plan Description Summary - The City of Chicago was party to a writlen legal settlement agreement outlining the
provisions of Ihe Settlement Plans, which ended June 30, 2013. The Health Plan provides for annual modifications lo
the City's level of subsidy. 11 is set lo phase out over three years, at which the Health Plan, along with any further City
subsidy, will expire by December 3 1 , 2016, for all but the group of former employees (the Korshak class of members)
who retired before August 23, 1989, who shall have lifetime benefits. Duty Disabled retirees who have statutory pre63/65 coverage will confinue to have fully subsidized coverage under the active heallh plan unlil age 65.
The provisions of the Health Plan provide in general, that the City pay a percentage of the cosl (based upon an
employee's service) for hospital and medical coverage lo eligible retired employees and their dependenls for the
specified period, ending December 3 1 , 2016. The percenlage subsidies were revised to reduce by approximalely 25
percenl of 2013 subsidy levels in 2014 and 50 percent of 2013 subsidy levels in 2015. Additional slep downs in
subsidy levels for 2016 have not yet been finalized.
74

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2014
In addition. Slate law authorizes the four respective Pension Funds (Policemen's, Firemen's, Municipal Employees',
and Laborers') to provide a fixed monthly dollar subsidy lo each annuitant who has elected coverage under any City
heallh plan through December 31, 2016. After lhat date, no Pension Fund subsidies are authorized. The liabilifies for
the monthly dollar Pension Fund subsidies contributed on behalf of annuitants enrolled in the medical plan by their
respective Pension Funds are included in the NPO acluarial valuafion reports of the respective four Pension Funds
under GASB 43 (see Note 11).
Special Benefits under the Collective Bargaining Agreements (CBA) - Under the terms of the collective
bargaining agreements for the Fraternal Order of Police (FOP) and the Internalional Associaiion of Fire Fighters
(lAFF), certain employees who retire after attaining age 55 with the required years of service are permitted to enroll
themselves and their dependents in the healthcare benefit program offered to actively employed members. They may
keep this coverage until Ihey reach the age of Medicare eligibility. These retirees do not conlribute towards the cost
of coverage, but the Policemen's Fund contributes S95 per month towards coverage for police officers; the
Firemen's Fund does not contribute.
Both of these agreements which provide pre-65 coverage originally expired at June 30, 2012. These benefits have
been renegotiated to continue through 2016 or June 30, 2017, depending on bargaining unit agreements. This
valuafion assumes lhat the CBA special benefits, except for those who will have already relired as of December
31, 2016, will cease on December 31, 2016 or June 30, 2017, depending on bargaining unit agreemenls. The
renegofiated agreemenls also provided lhat retirees will contribute 2% of their pension toward the cost of their heallh
care coverage.
Funding Policy - No assels are accumulated or dedicated to funding the retiree heallh plan benefits.
Annual OPEB Cost and Net OPEB Obligation - The City's annual olher post-employment benefit (OPEB) cost
(expense) is calculated based on the annual required contribution of the employer (ARC). The ARC (Annual
Required Contribution) represents a level of funding that, if paid on an ongoing basis, is projecled to cover the normal
cosl each year and to amortize any unfunded actuarial liabililies over a period of len years.
The following table shows the components of the City's annual OPEB cosls for the year for the Heallh Plan and CBA
Special Benefits, the amount actually contributed to the plan and changes in the City's net OPEB obligation. The Net
OPEB Obligation is the amount enlered upon the Cily's Statement of Nel Position as of year end as the net liability for
the other post-employment benefits - the Health Plan. The amount of the annual cosl that is recorded in the
Statemeni of Changes in Net Posifion for 2014 is the Annual OPEB Cost (expense).

75

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Annual OPEB Cost and Contributions Made
(dollars in thousands)

Contribution Rates:
City
Plan Members
Annual Required Contribution
Interest on Net OPEB Obligalion
Adjustment to Annual Required Contribution

Retiree

CBA

Settlement

Special

Health Plan

Benefits

Total

Pay As You Go

Pay As You Go

Pay As You Go

N/A

N/A

N/A

$

67.713

S

1,806

Decrease in Net OPEB Obligation

$

Net OPEB Obligation, End of Year

128,625
5,795

(15,135)

(21,988)

62.666

49,766

112,432

93,962

34,099

128,061

(31,296)

15,667

(15.629)

60,210

Net OPEB Obligation, Beginning of Year

$

3,989

(6.853)

Annual OPEB Cost
Contributions Made

60.912

28,914

132,981

$

148,648

193,191
S

177,562

The Cily's annual OPEB cosl, the percentage of annual OPEB cost contributed to the plan, and the nel OPEB
obligalion for fiscal year 2014 are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Schedule of Contributions,
OPEB Costs and Net Obligations
Fiscal Year
Ended
Settlement Plan
12/31/2014
12/31/2013
12/31/2012

Annual
Percentage of Annual
OPEB Cost OPEB Cost Contributed

Net OPEB
Obligation

62,666
75,444
37,444

149 9%
148.4
260.5

28,914
60,210
96,760

12/31/2014
12/31/2013
12/31/2012

49,766
41,722
39,533

68.5%
65.5
46.6

148,648
132,981
118,601

12/31/2014
12/31/2013
12/31/2012

112,432
117,166
76,977

113.9%
118.9
150.6

177,562
193,191
215.361

CBA Special Benefits

Total

Funded Status and Funding Progress - As of January 1, 2014, the most recenl acluarial valuation dale, the
actuarial accrued liability for benefits was $964.6 million all of which was unfunded. The covered payroll (annual
payroll of active employees covered by the plan) was approximately $2,425.0 million and the ralio of the unfunded
actuarial accrued liability to the covered payroll was 39.8 percent.
Actuanal valuations of an ongoing plan involve estimates of the value of reported amounis and assumplions about the
probability of occurrence of events far inlo the future. Examples include assumptions about future employment,
mortality, and the heallhcare cost trend. Amounis determined regarding the funded status of the plan and the annual
required conlributions of the employer are subjecl to continual revisions as the results are compared with past
76

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL S T A T E M E N T S
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
expectations and new estimates are made about the future. The schedule of funding progress, presents, as required,
supplementary information following the noles to the financial statements (dollars in Ihousands, unaudited).

Actuarial
Valuation
Date

Actuanal
Value of
Assets

Unfunded
Actuarial
Acluarial
Accrued
Accrued Liability
Liability (AAL)
(UAAL)

Funded
Ralio

Covered
Payroll

UAAL
as a
Percenlage of
Covered Payroll

Settlement Plan
12/31/2013

$

$

498,205

$

498,205

0%

$ 2,425,000

20.5 %

CBA Special Benefits
12/31/2013

$

$

466,421

$

466,421

0%

$ 1,400,269

33.3 %

$

$

964,626

$

964,626

0%

$ 2,425,000

39.8 %

Total
12/31/2013

Actuarial Method and A s s u m p t i o n s - Projecfions of benefits for financial reporting purposes are based on the
substantive plan (the plan understood by the employer and plan members) and included the lypes of benefits
provided at the fime of each valuation and the historical pattern of sharing of benefit costs between the employer and
plan members lo that point. The actuarial method and assumptions used include techniques that are designed lo
reduce the effects of short lerm volatility in acluarial accrued liabilities and the acluarial value of assets, consistent
with the long lerm perspective of the calculations.
For the Heallh Plan benefits (not provided by the Pension Funds), the entry age normal actuarial cosl method was
used. The acluarial assumpfions included an annual heallhcare cosl trend rale of 8.0% inifially, reduced by decrements
lo an ultimate rale of 5.0% in 2026. The range of rates included a 3.0% infialion assumplion. Rates included a 2.5%
inflation assumpfion. The plan has not accumulated assets and does nol hold assels in a segregated trusl. However,
the funds expected to be used to pay benefits are assumed to be invested for durations which will yield an annual
return rate of 3.0%. The remaining Unfunded Accrued Acluarial Liability is being amortized as a level dollar amount
over ten years. The benefits include the provisions under the new Health Plan, which will be completely phased-oul by
December 3 1 , 2016, except for the Korshak category, which is enfified lo lifetime benefits. Also included in the NonCBA benefits are the duty disability benefits under the active health plan payable to age 63/65.
For the Special Benefits under the CBA for Police and Fire, the renewed contracts' expirafion dates of June 30, 2016
(for Police Caplains, Sergeants and Lieutenants) and June 30, 2017 for all other Police and Fire are reflected, such
lhal liabililies are included only for payments beyond the end of the calendar year of contract expiration on behalf of
early retirees already retired and in pay status as of December 31 of the expiration year of the contract. The entry age
normal method was selected. The actuarial assumptions included an annual heallhcare cost trend rate of 8.0% in
2014. reduced by decrements to an ultimate rale of 5.0% in 2026. Rates included a 2.5% infialion assumplion. The
plan has not accumulated assets and does not hold assets in a segregated trust. The funds expected to be used to pay
benefits are assumed to be invested for durations which will yield an annual return rale of 3.0%. The remaining
Unfunded Accrued Actuarial Liability is being amortized as a level dollar amounl over len years.

77

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Summary of Assumptions and Methods

Actuarial Valuation Date

Seillemenl
Health Plan

CBA
Special Benelits

December31.2013

December 31, 2013

Actuarial Cost Method

Entry Age Normal

Entry Age Normal

Amortization Method

Level Dollar, open

Level Dollar, open

Remaining Amortization Period
Asset Valuation Method
Actuarial Assumptions:
Investment Rate of Retum
Projected Salary Increases
Healthcare Inflation Rate

10 years

10 years

Market Value

Markel Value

3.0%
2.5%
8.0% initial to 5.0% in 2026

3.0%
2.5%
8.0% initial to 5.0% in 2026

13) Risk Management
The Cily is exposed lo various risks of loss related to torts; theft of, damage to and destruction of assets; errors and
omissions; certain benefits for and injuries to employees and natural disasters. The City provides worker's
compensation benefits and employee health benefits under self-insurance programs except for insurance policies
maintained for certain Enterprise Fund acfivities. The City uses various risk management techniques lo finance these
risks by retaining, transferring and controlling risks depending on the risk exposure.
Risks for O'Hare, Midway, and certain other major properties, along with various special events, losses from certain
criminal acts committed by employees and public official bonds are transferred to commercial insurers. Claims have
nol exceeded the purchased insurance coverage in the past three years, accordingly, no liability is reported for these
claims. All other risks are retained by the City and are self-insured. The City pays claim setfiements and judgments
from the self-insured programs. Uninsured claim expenditures and liabilities are reported when it is probable that a
loss has occurred and the amount of that loss can be reasonably estimated. These losses include an esfimate of
claims that have been incurred but not reported. The General Fund is primarily used to record all non-Enterprise
Fund claims. The esfimated portion of non-Enterprise Fund claims nol yet settled has been recorded in the
Governmental Activities in the Statemeni of Net Position as claims payable along with amounts related to deferred
compensatory lime and estimated liabililies for quesfioned costs. As of December 3 1 , 2014, the tolal amount of nonEnterprise Fund claims was $483.2 million and Enterprise Fund was $57.1 million. This liability is the City's best
esfimate based on available information. Changes in the reported liability for all funds are as follows (dollars in
thousands):
2014
2013
Balance, January 1
Claims incurred and
change in esfimates
Claims paid on currenl and
prior year events

$ 547,674

$608,485

627,488

699,582

(634,890)

Balance, December 31

$ 540,272

(760,393)
$547,674

14) Expenditure of Funds and Appropriation of Fund Balances
The City expends funds by classificafion as they become available, and "Restricted" lunds are expended firsl. If/when
City Council formally sets aside or designates funds for a specific purpose, they are considered "Committed.'" The
Mayor (or his/her designee) may in this capacity, also set aside or designate funds for specific purposes and all of
these funds will bo considered "Assigned."" Any remaining funds, which are not specifically allocated in one or more
of the previous three categories, are considered "Unassigned" unlil such allocation is completed.
78

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
In addition to the categories above, any amounts which will be used to balance a subsequenl year's budget will be
considered "Assigned" as Budgetary Stabilization funds. The amounts may vary from fiscal year to fiscal year or
depending on the City's budgetary condition, or may not be designated al all. The funds may be assigned by the
Mayor or his designee, up lo the amount of available "Unassigned" fund balance al the end of the previous fiscal year.
a)

Fund Balance Classifications
On the fund financial statements, the Fund Balance consists of the following (dollars in thousands):

General
Nonspendable Purpose'
Inventory
$ 24,498
Restncled PurposeTIF and Special Service Area Programs and
Redevelopment
Capital Projects
-

Grants

-

Federal,
Stale and
Local
Grants

Community
Service
Bond, Nole Development
Other
Special
Concession Redemplion Improvement Governmental
Taxing Areas and Reserve and Interesl
Proiecis
Funds
.

.
-

.

.
1.327,058

15,230

.

.
-

.

Debt Service
.
.
General Government
Committed Purpose:
Debt Service
.
Budget and Credit Rating Stabilization
Repair. Mainlenance and City Services....
Assigned Purpose'
Future obligations
.
.
Special Projects
65,223
.
Unassigned
51.557 (240,275)
^
Tolal Government Fund Balance
$ 141,278 t (225,045) $ 1,327,058

.

.
-

.

.
347,652

.
.

.
620,891

.

.

.
.

.

.

139,491

.

.

.
.

.

75,176

.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
(1,576.293) (26,872)
S (955.402) $ (26,872) $ 347,652

.
.
- _
S 214,667

Al the end of the fiscal year, total encumbrances for the General Operating Fund amounted to $29.2 million, S47.3
million for the Special Taxing Areas Fund, $75.5 million for the Capital Projects Fund and $7.3 million for the Non
Major Special Revenue Fund.
15) Commitments and Contingencies
The City is a defendant in various pending and threatened individual and class aclion litigation relating principally lo
claims arising from conlracls, personal injury, property damage, police conduct, alleged discrimination, civil rights
actions and other mailers. City management believes lhat the ulfimate resolution of these matters will nol have a
material adverse effect on the financial position of the City.
The City participates in a number of federal-and stale-assisted granl programs. These grants are subject to audits by
or on behalf of the grantors lo assure compliance with grant provisions. Based upon past experience and
management's judgment, the City has made provisions in the General Fund for questioned cosls and olher amounis
estimated to be disallowed. City management expects such provision to be adequate to cover actual amounis
disallowed, if any.
As of December 3 1 , 2014, the Enterprise Funds have entered inlo contracts for approximately $518.1 million for
construction projects.
The City's pollution remediation obligation of $8.5 million is primarily related to Brownfield redevelopment projects.

79

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
These projects include removal of underground storage tanks, cleanup of contaminated soil, and removal of olher
environmental pollution identified at the individual sites. The estimated liability is calculaled using the expected cash
flow technique. The pollution remediation obligation is an estimate and subject to changes resulfing from price
increases or reductions, technology, or changes in applicable laws or regulations.
16) Concession Agreements
The major fund entitled Service Concession and Reserve Fund is used for the purpose of accounting for the deferred
inflows associated wilh governmental fund long-term lease and concession transactions. Deferred inflows are
amortized over the life of the related lease and concession agreements. Proceeds from these transacfions may be
transferred from this fund in accordance with ordinances approved by the City Council lhat define the use of
proceeds.
In February 2009, the Cily completed a $1.15 billion concession agreemenl lo allow a private operator lo manage and
collect revenues from the City's metered parking system for 75 years. The City received an upfront payment of $1.15
billion which was recognized as a deferred inflow that will be amortized and recognized as revenue over the term of
the agreement. The City recognizes $15.3 million of revenue for each year through 2083.
In December 2006, the City completed a long-term concession and lease of the City's downtown underground public
parking system. The concession granted Chicago Loop Parking, LLC (CLP) the right lo operate the garages and
collect parking and related revenues for the 99-year lerm of the agreement. The City received an upfront payment of
$563.0 million of which $347.8 million was simultaneously used to purchase three of the underground garages from
the Chicago Park District. The City recognized a deferred inflow that will be amortized and recognized as revenue
over the lerm of the lease. The City recognizes $5.7 million of revenue for each year through 2105. In January 2014,
CLP assigned all of its interests in the concession and lease agreement to LMG2, LLC, the designee of its lenders, in
lieu of foreclosure by the lenders on their leasehold mortgage on the underground garages.
In January 2005, the City completed a long-term concession and lease of the Skyway. The concession granted a
private company the right lo operate the Skyway and to collect toll revenue from the Skyway for the 99-year term of
the agreemenl. The City received an upfront payment of $1.83 billion; a portion of the paymenl ($446.3 million)
advance refunded all of the outstanding Skyway bonds. The City recognized a deferred inflow of $1.83 billion lhat will
be amortized and recognized as revenue over the 99-year term of the agreement. The City recognizes $18.5 million
of revenue related to this transaction for each year through 2103. Skyway land, bridges, other facilities and
equipment continue to be reported on the Statement of Net Posifion and will be depreciated, as applicable, over their
useful lives. The deferred inflow of the Skyway is reported in the Proprietary Funds Statement of Nel Position.
17) Subsequent Events
Ratings
In February 2015, Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) downgraded the ralings of the City's General Obligalion
bonds. Sales Tax revenue bonds and Motor Fuel Tax revenue bonds from Baa1 to Baa2, the City's Wastewater
senior lien revenue bonds from A2 to A3, and the Wastewater second lien revenue bonds from A3 to B a a l , each with
a negalive outlook.
In March 2015, Kroll Bond Raling Agency (Kroll) raled the City's General Obligation bonds A- with a stable outlook.
In May 2015 Moody's downgraded the City's General Obligafion bonds. Sales Tax revenue bonds and Molor Fuel
Tax revenue bonds from Baa2 to B a l , wilh a negalive outlook. At the same time, Moody's downgraded the Cily's
Water senior lien revenue bonds from A2 to B a a l , the Water second lien revenue bonds from A3 to Baa2 and the
City's Wastewater senior lien bonds from A3 to Baa2 and the Wastewater second lien revenue bonds from Baal to
Baa3, each with a negative outlook. The Moody's May 20.15 downgrades triggered (with respect to the City's General
Obligation debl, Sales Tax revenue bonds. Waler second lien revenue bonds and Wastewater second lien revenue
bonds) defaults under certain credil and/or liquidity facilities, certain general obligation revolving credit agreements
and, for the Series 2008C Wastewater second lien revenue bonds, certain continuing covenant agreements with
those bondholders. The Moody's May 2015 downgrades also Iriggered lerminalion events under interesl rate swap
80

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
agreemenls lo which the Cily is a party. The City does nol have any such facilities or agreemenls relating to its Molor
Fuel Tax revenue bonds. In response to the triggering of these defaults and termination events, the City took several
actions: (i) it lerminaled the Wells Fargo letter of credit securing two series of its General Obligation commercial
paper notes (no such notes were outslanding al the time of lerminalion) and terminated the associated
reimbursement agreemenl; (ii) il entered into forbearance agreements with (A) the providers of credil and/or liquidity
facilities for its General Obligation bonds. General Obligation commercial paper notes and Sales Tax revenue bonds,
(B) Ihe lenders on ils General Obligafion revolving credit agreements, (C) the counterparties on its General Obligalion
and Sales Tax Revenue inlerest rate swap agreements, and (D) the holders of ils Series 2008C Wastewater second
lien revenue bonds; (iii) it amended and/or transferred the interesl rate swap agreements for its Water second lien
revenue bonds and its Wastewater second lien revenue bonds to remove such terminafion event from the swap
agreemenls prior to any demand being made for a termination payment by the counterparties; and (iv) it obtained a
waiver of the event of default from the provider of a letter of credit relafing to its Waler second lien revenue bonds.
In May 2015, subsequent lo the Moody's downgrades, Standard and Poor's (S&P) downgraded the Cily's General
Obligafion bonds from A+ lo A- wilh a negafive watch. S&P also downgraded the Cily's Water senior lien revenue
bonds from AA lo A, the Water second lien revenue bonds from AA- to A- the City's Wastewater senior lien bonds
from AA lo A and the Wastewater second lien revenue bonds from AA- to A-, each with a negative watch.
In May 2015, subsequenl lo the Moody's downgrades. Filch Rafings (Fitch) downgraded the City's General Obligation
bonds and Sales Tax revenue bonds from A- to BBB+, with a negative watch.
In June 2015. Kroll rated the Sales Tax revenue bonds AA+ with a stable outlook.
Bonds
In May 2015, the Cily converted ils General Obligation Bonds (Neighborhoods Alive 21 Program), Series 2002B
($176.2 million) from variable rate to fixed rale. Tho bonds were converted at inlerest rates ranging from 5.0 percenl
lo 5.5 percenl and mandatory sinking fund or maturity dates from January 1, 2016 to January 1, 2037. Proceeds
were used to pay a portion of the purchase price of the bonds mandatorily tendered on the conversion dale and the
costs of conversion. The remaining portion of $24.8 million was redeemed by the City.
In May 2015, the City converted its General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2003B ($170.1 million)
from variable rate to fixed rate. The bonds were converted at inlerest rates ranging from 5.0 percenl lo 5.5 percent
and malurity dales from January 1, 2016 to January 1, 2034. Proceeds were used lo pay a portion of the purchase
price of the bonds mandatorily tendered on the conversion date and the costs of conversion. The remaining portion
of $11.8 million was redeemetj by the City.
In June 2015, the Cily converted its General Obligafion Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2005D ($174.0 million)
from variable rate to fixed rate. The bonds were converted at an inleresi rate of 5.5 percenl and mandatory sinking
fund or maturity dales from January 1, 2033 to January 1, 2040. Proceeds were used to pay a portion of the
purchase price of the bonds mandatorily tendered on the conversion date and the costs of conversion. The remaining
portion of $48.8 million was redeemed by the Cily.
In June 2015, the City converted ils General Obligalion Bonds, Refunding Series 2007E, F and G ($153.7 million)
from variable rate to fixed rate. The bonds were converted al an interest rale of 5.5 percent and mandatory sinking
fund or malurily dates from January 1, 2034 lo January 1, 2042. Proceeds were used lo pay a portion of the
purchase price of the bonds mandatorily tendered on the conversion dale and the cosls of conversion. The remaining
portion of $46.3 million was redeemed by the City.
In June 2015, the City converted its Sales Tax Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2002 ($111.7 million) from variable
rate to fixed rale The bonds were converted at interest rates ranging from 2.0 percent lo 5.0 percent. Proceeds
were used lo pay the purchase price of the bonds mandatorily lendered on the conversion dale and the costs of
conversion.

81

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R ENDED D E C E M B E R 31, 2014
Swaps
In May and June 2015, the City terminated all of its General Obligafion and Sales Tax revenue swaps and transferred
and modified certain thresholds with respect lo Addifional Terminafion Events for ils Water second lien revenue
swaps and Wastewater second lien revenue swaps.
The City terminated the swaps relafing to its (1) General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2003B for
total termination payments of $31.0 million, (2) General Obligalion Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2005D for
total termination paymenis of $62.8 million, (3) General Obligafion Bonds, Refunding Series 2007 E, F and G for total
terminafion payments of $62.0 million and 4) Sales Tax Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2002 for a terminafion
payment of S29.0 million.
The City transferred the swaps with UBS related to its Water Second Lien Revenue Bonds, Series 2000 ($100.0
million notional amount) and Series 2004 ($173.3 million notional amounl) to Barclays. At the same fime, the ATE
rafing threshold was reduced from below Baal by Moody's or BBB+ by S&P to below Baa3 or BBB- by Moody's and
S&P respectively. In addition, the swap wilh Royal Bank of Canada relating to the City's Water Second Lien Revenue
Bonds, Series 2004 ($182.2 million notional amount) was modified to reduce the ATE rafing threshold from below
B a a l by Moody's or BBB+ by S&P to below BBB+ by S&P or Fitch.
The City modified the ATE raling thresholds related to its Second Lien Wastewater Transmission Revenue Bonds,
Series 2008C swaps wilh JPMorgan ($49.8 million notional amount) and Bank of America ($49.8 million notional
amount) from below Baal by Moody's or BBB+ by S&P to below Baa3 or BBB- by Moody's or S&P, respectively.
Commercial Paper, Letters of Credit, Lines of Credit and Continuing Covenant Agreements
As of December 3 1 , 2014, the outslanding balance for the City's General Obligafion Commercial Paper Notes and
General Obligafion Lines of Credit (G.O. CP) was $297.4 million. Since January 2015, the City has paid down $54.2
million of G.O. CP and has issued $591.8 million lo refund certain outslanding bonds, facilitate the conversion of
variable rate bonds to fixed rate, fund swap termination payments and pay certain settlements and judgments. The
current G.O. CP outstanding is approximately $835.0 million.
In February 2015, the City's Midway Commercial Paper program was reduced from $150 million to $85 million. As
such, the PNC letter of credit was not extended.
In April 2015, the City issued $30.5 million aggregate principal amount of its Chicago O'Hare International Airport
Commercial Paper Noles (O'Hare CP Noles). The proceeds of these O'Hare CP Noles were used to finance a
porfion of the cost of aulhorized airport projects.
In May and June 2015, the City converted its General Obligalion bonds and Sales Tax revenue bonds from variable
rate lo fixed rale, as discussed above. The related letters of credit and liquidity facilities were terminated al the time
of the conversion.
Due lo the May 2015 downgrades by Moody's, the City entered inlo forbearance agreements with ils General
Obligafion commercial paper credil providers (except Wells Fargo), the lenders on its General Obligalion revolving
credit agreements and the Orange Line letter of credit provider. The forbearance agreemenls extend to September
30, 2015, unless another event of default is triggered, including another rating downgrade by Moody's or a downgrade
below investment grade by S&P or Fitch. The Wells Fargo letter of credit was terminated; there were no such
General Obligation commercial paper noles outstanding secured by that letter of credit. The City also entered into
forbearance agreements with the holders of its Series 2008C Wastewater second lien revenue bonds. Each of those
holders has a confinuing covenant agreemenl with the City with respect lo ils bonds. An evenl of default was
triggered under each continuing covenant agreement due lo the May 2015 downgrades by Moody's. The forbearance
agreements extend lo June 30, 2016 (provided that the Cily has taken certain steps prior to June 30, 2016 lo convert
the Series 2008C Wastewater second licn revenue bonds to fixed rates of inleresi), unless another event of default is
triggered, including another rating downgrade by Moody's or a downgrade below investment grade by S&P or Fitch.
In May 2015, the City entered into a Line of Credit Agreement wilh DNT Asset Trusl, which allows the City to draw on
the line of credit in an aggregate amount not lo exceed $200 0 million lo facilitate the conversions of the City's
82

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2014
General Obligation variable rale bonds to fixed rale, by funding a portion of the purchase price of tendered bonds as
well as paying for the redemplion of bonds which were nol converted to fixed rate. The line of credil was
subsequently reduced to $151.6 million, to reflect the amount of the draws related to the conversions. The Cily's
repayment obligation under the line of credit is a general obligation of the City. The line of credit expires September
30, 2015. In June 2015, the Cily amended its Revolving Credil Agreement wilh Bank of America, which increases the
line of credit amounl lo $348.4 million. The Cily's repayment obligation under the line of credit is a general obligation
of the City. The line of credit remains in effect Ihrough the forbearance period ending on September 30, 2015,
although any draws on the line of credil during and after the forbearance period are subject to approval by the bank in
its sole discretion.

83

 REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
S C H E D U L E OF OTHER POSTEMPLOYMENT B E N E F I T S FUNDING P R O G R E S S
Last Three Years (dollars arc in thousands)

Actuarial
Valuation
Date

Municipal
Employees'
2012
2013
2014

12/31/2012
12/31/2013
12/31/2014

Laborers'
2012
2013
2014

Actuarial
Value
of Assets
(a)

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability (AAL)
Entry Age
(b)

Unfunded
Actuarial
Accrued
Liabilily
(UAAL)

(b-a)

Funded
Ratio
(a/b)

Covered
Payroll
(c)

Unfunded
(Surplus)
AAL as a
Percentage
of Covered
Payroll
((b-a)/c)

162,083
27,573
17,495

162,083
27,573
17,495

$ 1,590,794
1,580,289
1,602,978

10.19
1.74
1.09

12/31/2012
12/31/2013
12/31/2014

38,654
7,074
4,593

38.654
7,074
4,593

198,790
200,352
202,673

19.44
3.53
2.27

Policemen's
2012
2013
2014

12/31/2012
12/31/2013
12/31/2014

168,811
28,376
18,762

168,811
28,376
18,762

1,015,171
1,015,426
1,074,333

16.63
2.79
1.75

Firemen's
2012
2013
2014

12/31/2012
12/31/2013
12/31/2014

46,206
7,692
4,995

46,206
7,692
4,995

418,965
416,492
460,190

11.03
1.85
1.09

City of Chicago
2012
2013
2014

12/31/2011
12/31/2012
12/31/2013

470,952
997,281
964,626

470,952
997,281
964,626

2,518,735
2,385,198
2,425,000

18.70
41.81
39.78

$

84

%

%

  

APPENDIX 

PROPERTY TAX ES

 

 PAGE INTENTIONALIN LEFT 

PROPERTY TAXES
Real Property A.ssessment, 'I'ax Levy and Collecfion Procedures
General
Inlormaiion under this caption provides a general summary of the current procedures for real
property a.ssessment, tax levy and lax collection in Cook Couniy (the "County"). The following is nol an
exhaustive discussion, nor can there be any assurance that the procedures described under this caption
will not be changed cither retroactively or prospectively. The Illinois laws relating to real properly
taxation are conlained in the Illinois Property Tax Code (the "Property Tax Code").
Substantially all (approximately 99.99 percent) ofthe "Equalized As.sessed Valuation" (described
below) of taxable property in the Cily is located in the County. The remainder is located in DuPage
Couniy Accordingly, unless olherwise indicated, the information set forth under this caption and
elsewhere in this OlTicial Statement wilh respect lo taxable property in the City does nol reflect the
portion situated in DuPage County
Assessment
The Cook County Assessor (the "Assessor") is responsible for the assessment of all taxable real
properly wilhin ihe Couniy, e.xccpl for certain railroad property and pollution conlrol equipment assessed
directly by the State. One-third ofthe real property in the County is reassessed each year on a repeating
triennial schedule established by the Assessor. The suburbs in the northern and northwestern portions of
the County were reassessed in 2013. The suburbs in the wesiern and southern portions ofthe Couniy
were rea.s.scsscd in 2014 The City is being reassessed in 2015.
Real property in the Couniy is separated inlo various classificalions for assessment purposes
After the Assessor establishes the fair cash value of a parcel of land, lhat value is multiplied by one oflhe
classification percentages to arrive at the assessed valuation (the "Assessed Valuation") for the parcel.
Beginning with the 2009 lax year, the classillcation percentages range from 10 to 25 percent depending
on the lype of property (eg, residential, industrial, commercial) and whether it qualifies for certain
incentives for reduced rales. For pnor years, the classification percentages ranged from 16 to 38 percent.
The Cook Couniy Board of Commissioners has adoplcd various amendments lo Ihc County's
Real Property A.ssessment Classification Ordinance (the "Classification Ordinance"), pursuant to which
the Assessed Valuation of real property is established Among olher things, these amendments have
reduced certain properly classification percentages, lengthened certain renewal periods of classifications
and created new properly classifications.
'I he Assessor has established procedures enabling taxpayers to contest the Assessor's tentative
Assessed Valuations Once ihe Assessor certifies final Assessed Valuations, a taxpayer can seek review
of ils assessment by the Cook Couniy Board of Review (the "Board of Review") The Board of Review
has powers lo review and adjust Assessed Valuations set hy the Assessor Owners of property are able lo
appeal decisions ofthe Board of F^cview to Ihe Illinois Property Tax Apjieal Board (the "PTAB"). a statewide adminisiralive body, or lo the Circuit Court of Cook Couniy (the "Circuit Court'") The PTAB has
the power lo determine the Assessed Valuation of real property based on equity and the weight of the
evidence Based on the amount of the proposed change in a.ssessed valuation, laxj^aycrs may appeal
decisions of the PTAB lo either the Circuit Court or the Illinois Appellate Court under the Illinois
Adminislralivc Review Law

D-

 In a series of PTAB decisions, the PTAB reduced the assessed valuations of certain commercial
and industrial properly in the Couniy based upon ihc appliealion of median levels of assessment derived
from Illinois Departmeni of Revenue sales-ratio studies instead of utilizing ihc assessment percentages
provided in the Classification Ordinance. On appeal, the Illinois Appellate Courl determined that it was
improper for the PTAB, on its own initiative, to u.se the sale.s-ratio studies when such studies were not
even raised as an issue by the taxpayer before the Board of Review or in its appeal lo the PTAB.
The Appellate Court decisions do nol preclude a taxpayer in a properly presenled case from
introducing into evidence sales-ratio studies for the purpose of obtaining an assessment below lhat which
would resull from application of the Classification Ordinance No prediction can be made whether any
currently pending or future case would be successful. The City believes that the impact of any such case
on the Cily would be minimal, as the Cily's ability to levy or collect real property laxes would be
unaffected.
As an alternative to seeking review of Assessed Valuations by the PTAB, laxpayers who have
first exhausted their remedies before the Board of Review may file an objection in the Circuit Court. The
City filed a petition lo intervene in certain of these proceedings for the first time in 2003, but the Circuit
Court denied the City's petition in early 2004. The City appealed Ihe Circuit Court decision. On appeal,
Ihc Circuit Courl decision was reversed and the matter was remanded lo the Circuil Courl with
instructions to allow the City to proceed with its petitions to intervene In addition, in cases where tlie
Assessor agrees lhal an assessment error has been made afier tax bills have been issued, the Assessor can
correct the Assessed Valuation, and Ihus reduce the amount of taxes due, by issuing a Certificate of Error.
Equaliicuion
After the Assessed Valuation for each parcel of real estate in a county has been determined for a
given year including any revisions made by the Board of Review, the Illinois Departmeni of Revenue
reviews the assessments and determines an equalization factor (the "Hqualization Factor"), commonly
called the "multiplier," for each county The purpose of equalization is to bring the aggregate assessed
value of all real property, except farmland, wind turbines with a nameplale capacity of at least 0.5
megawatts and undeveloped coal, in each couniy to the staiulor>' requirement of 33-1/3 percenl of
estimated fair cash value Adjustments in Assessed Valuation made by the PTAB or the courts are not
reflected in the Equalization Factor. The Assessed Valuation of each parcel of real estate in the County is
multiplied by the County's Equalization I-'aclor lo delerminc Ihe parcel's equalized assessed valuation (the
"Equalized Assessed Valuation").
The Equalized Assessed Valuation for each parcel is the final property valuation used for
determination of lax liability, fhe aggregate Equalized Assessed Valuation for all parcels in any taxing
body's jurisdiction, after reduction for all applicable exemptions, plus the valuation of property assessed
directly by the Slale, conslitules the lolal real eslale lax base for the laxing body and is the figure used lo
calculate tax rates (Ihe "Assessment Base") The Equalization Factor for a given year is used in
computing ihe taxes extended for collection in the following year fhe Equalization Eactors for each of
the last 11 lax levy years, from 2003 through 2013 (the most recenl years available), are listed in this
Official Slalement under "FINANCIAL DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS—Properly Taxes" (see the
lable captioned "Assessed, Equalized /\ssessed and Estimated Value of All Taxable Properly 20032014").
In 1991, legislation was enacted by the State which provided lhal for 1992 and for subscqueni
years" lax levies, the Equalized Assessed Valuation used to detornnne any applicable tax limits is the one
for the iniinediaiely preceding year and not the currenl year This legislation impacts laxing dislncis with

D-2

 rate limits only and currently does not apply to the City
below.

See "—Property Tax Limit Considerations"

E.xempiions
The Illinois Constitution allows homestead exemplions for residential propert>'. Pursuant lo the
Illinois Property Tax Code, property must be occupied by the owner as a principal residence on .January 1
oflhe lax year for which the exemption will be claimed
•fhe annual general homestead exemption provides for the reduction ofthe Equalized Assessed
Valuation ("EAV") of certain properly owned and used exclusively for residenlial purposes by the
amount ofthe increase over the 1977 EAV, currently up to a maximum reduction of $7,000 in Cook
County and $6,000 in all other counties. There is an additional homestead exemption for senior citizens
(individuals at least 65 years of age), for whom the Assessor is authorized lo reduce the EAV by $5,000.
There is also an exemption available for homes owned and exclusively used for residential purposes by
disabled veterans or their spouses, for whom the Assessor is authorized to annually exempt up to $70,000
of the Assessed Valuation. An addilional exemption is available for disabled persons, for whom the
Assessor is authorized lo reduce the EAV by $2,000. An exemption is available for homestead
improvements by an owner of a single family residence of up to $75,000 ofthe increase in the fair cash
value of a home due to certain home improvements to an existing structure for at least four years from the
dale the improvement is completed and occupied. Senior citizens whose household income is $55,000 or
less, and who are either the owner of record or have a legal or equitable interest in the property, qualify to
have the EAV of their properly frozen in the year in which they first qualify for the so-called "freeze" and
' each year thereafter in which the qualifying criteria are maintained Each year applicants for the Senior
Citizens Assessment Freeze Homestead Exemption musl file the appropriate application and affidavit
with the chief county assessment office
Aside from homestead exemptions, upon application, review and approval by the Board of
Review, or upon an appeal to the Illinois Department of Revenue, there are exemptions generally
available for properties of religious, charitable (including qualifying not-for-profit hospitals), and
educational organizations, as well as units of federal, slale and local governmenis.
Additionally, counlies have been authonzed to create special property tax exemptions in longestablished residential areas or in areas of deteriorated, vacant or abandoned homes and properties. Under
such an exemption, long-lime, residential owner-occupaiils in eligible areas would be entitled to a deferral
or exemption from that portion of property taxes resulting from an increase in markel value because of
refurbishment or renovation of other residences or construction of new residences in the area On .lune 5,
2001, the Couniy enacted Ihe Longtime lloineowner E.xcmplion Ordinance, which provides properly lax
relief from dramatic rises in properly laxes directly or indirectly attributable to gentrification in the form
of an exemption. This is generally applicable lo homeowners (i) who have resided in their homes for 10
consecutive years (or five conscculivc years for homeowners who have received assislance in the
acquisition o f l h e property as part of a governmenl or nonprofit housing program), (li) whose annual
household income foi ihc year oflhe homeowner's triennial assessment does not exceed 115 percenl of
the Chicago Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area median income as defined by the United States
Dcparimcnt of Mousing and Urban Development, (lii) whose properly has increased in assessed value to a
level exceeding 150 percenl oflhe currenl average assessed value for properties in the assessment district
where the propert\- is located, (iv) whose properly has a markel value for assessment purposes ol"
$300,000 or less in the currenl reassessment year, and (v) who, for any triennial assessment cycle, did nol
cause a substantial improvement vvhich resulted in an increase in the property's fair cash value in excess
oflhe $45,000 allowance sci forth in the Pioijerly lax Code

D-3

 Tax Levy
There are over 800 units of local government (the "Units") located in whole or in part tn the
Couniy lhal have laxing power, 'fhe major Units having laxing power over properly within the City are
the City, the Chicago Park Dislricl, ihc Board of Education of ihc City of Chicago, the School Finance
Authority, Community College District No 508, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater
Chicago, the Couniy and the Forest Preserve District of Cook County.
As part of the annual budgetary process of the Units, each year in which the determination is
made to levy real estate taxes, proceedings are adopted by the governing body for each Unit The tax levy
proceedings impose the Units' respective real estate taxes in terms of a dollar amount. Each Unit certifies
its real estate lax levy, as eslablished by the proceedings, lo the Couniy Clerk's Office. Ihc remaining
administration and collection of the real estate taxes is statutorily assigned lo the County Clerk and the
County Treasurer, who is also the County Collector (the "County Collector").
After the Units file their annual lax levies, the County Clerk computes Ihe annual tax rate for each
Unit by dividing the levy of each Unit by the Assessment Base ofthe respective Unit. Jf any lax rale thus
calculated or any component of such a lax rale (such as a levy for a particular fund) exceeds any
applicable statutory rate limit, the County Clerk disregards the excessive rate and applies the maximum
rate permitted by law.
The County Clerk then computes the total tax rate applicable to each parcel of real property by
aggregating the lax rates of all the Units having jurisdiction over Ihe particular parcel. The County Clerk
enters in the books prepared for the County Collector (the "Warrant Books") the tax (determined by
multiplying that total tax rate by the Equalized Assessed Valuation of lhat parcel), along with the lax
rates, the Assessed Valuation and the Equalized Assessed Valuation. The Warrant Books are the County
Collector's authorily for Ihe collection of taxes and are used by Ihe Couniy Collector as the basis for
issuing tax bills to all property owners.
The Illinois I'ruth in Taxation Law (the " Truth in Taxation Law") contained within the Property
Ta.x Code imposes procedural limitations on a Unit's real eslale laxing powers and requires lhat a notice
in a prescribed form musl be published if the aggregate annual levy is estimated lo exceed 105 percent of
the levy ofthe preceding year, exclusive of levies for debt service, levies made for the purpose of paying
amounts due under public building commission leases and election cosls. A public hearing must also be
held, which may not be in conjunction wilh the budget hearing oflhe Unit on the adoption oflhe annual
levy No amounl in excess of 105 percent ofthe preceding year's levy may be used as the basis for
issuing tax bills to property owneis unless the levy is accompanied by certification of compliance vvith the
foregoing procedures, fhe Truth in Taxalion Law does not impose any limitations on the rate or amounl
oflhe levy to pay principal of and interesl on the general obligations bonds and notes oflhe City
Collection
Properly taxes are collected by the Couniy Collector, who remits to each Unit ils share oflhe
collections faxes levied in one year become payable during the following year in two installments, the
firsl due on March I and the second on the later of August I or 30 days after the mailing ofthe lax bills
The firsl inslallmenl is an estimated bill calculated al 55 percent oflhe prior year's lax bill, 'fhe second
installment is for the balance oflhe current year's tax bill, and is based on the current levy, assessed value
and Equalization Factor and applicable lax rales, and reflects any changes from the prior year m those
factors. Taxes on railroad real properly used for iransportalion purposes are payable in one lump sum on
the .same date as the sect^nd in.slallment

D-4

 The following lable sets forth the second installment penalty date for the lax years 2005 to 2014,
Ihc first installment penally dale has been March 2 or March 3 for all years.
Second liisbillnicnt
Tax Year
2014
2013
2012
2UI1
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
2005

Pcii»llv DMIC

August 3, 2015
August I, 2014
Augasl 1, 2013
November 1, 2012
November 1,2011
December 13,2010
December 1,2009
November 3, 2008
December 3, 2007
September 1,2006

The County may provide for tax bills lo be payable in four installments instead of two. The
County has not determined lo require paymenl of lax bills in four installments. During the periods of
peak collections, lax receipts are forwarded to each Unit not less than weekly.
At the end of each collection year, the County Collector presents the Warrant Books to the Circuit
Court and applies for a judgment for all unpaid taxes. The court order resulting from the application for
judgment provides for an annual sale of all unpaid taxes shown on the year's Warrant Books (the "Annual
Tax Sale"). The Annual Tax Sale is a public sale, at which time successful tax buyers pay the unpaid
taxes plus penalties Unpaid ta.xes accrue interest al the rate of I 5 percent per month from their due date
until the date of sale. Taxpayers can redeem their property by paying the amount paid at the sale, plus an
addilional penally fee calculated from Ihe penally bid al sale times a certain multiplier based on each sixmonth period after the sale. If no redemption is made within the applicable redemption period (ranging
from six months to two and one-half years depending on the type and occupancy of the property) and the
lax buyer files a petition in Circuit Court, notifying the necessary parties in accordance with applicable
law, the lax buyer receives a deed to the properly. In addition, there are miscellaneous stalulory
provisions for foreclosure of tax liens.
If there is no sale oflhe tax lien on a parcel of property al Ihe Annual 'fax Sale, the taxes are
forfeited and eligible to be purchased al any lime ihereafter al an amounl equal lo all delinquenl taxes,
interest and certain olher cosls lo the dale of purchase Redemption periods and procedures are the same
as applicable lo the Annual fax Sale, except that a different penally rale may apply depending on the
length oflhe redemption period.
A scavenger sale (Ihc "Scavenger Sale"), like the Annual fax Sale, is a sale of unpaid taxes. A
Scavenger Sale must be held, at a minimum, every two years on all properly in which laxcs are delinquent
for two or more years The sale price oflhe unpaid laxes is the amount bid al the Scavenger Sale, which
may be less than the amounl oflhe delinquent laxes Redemption periods vary from six months lo two
and one-half years depending upon Ihe lype and occupancy oflhe properly.
•fhe annual appropriation ordinance ofthe City has a provision for an allowance for uncollectible
taxes 'fhe City reviews this provision annually to determine whether adjustments are appropriate For
tax year 2014, collectible m 2015, Ihe allowance for uncollectible laxes is about four percenl ofthe
eslimalcd gross tax levy for financial reporting purposes, uncollected taxes are written off by the City
after four > cars. bul arc fully reserved alter one )'ear

D-5

 Property Ta.v Limit Considerations
State of Illinois, fhe Properly Tax Code limits (a) the amount of properly taxes that can be
extended for non-home rule units of local governmenl located in the County and five adjacent counties
and (b) the ability of those entities to issue general obligation bonds without voter approval (collectively,
the "State 'l ax Cap") Generally, the extension of property taxes for a unit of local government subject to
the Stale 'fax Cap may increase in any year by five percent or the percent increase in the Consumer Price
Index for the preceding year, whichever is less, or the amounl approved by referendum. The Slale Tax
Cap does not apply to "limited bonds" payable from a unit's "debl service extension base" or lo "doublebarreled alternate bonds" issued pursuant to Section 15 ofthe Local Government Debt Reform Acl.
As a horne rule unit of government, the Cily is not subject to the Stale fax Cap. Under the
Illinois Constitution of 1970, the enactment of legislation applying the State Tax Cap to the City and
other home rule municipalities would require a law approved by the vote of three-fifths ofthe members of
each house oflhe Illinois General Assembly and the concurrence ofthe Governor of the State of Illinois.
It is not possible to predict whether, or in what form, any property lax limitations applicable to the Cily
would be enacted by the Illinois General Assembly The adoption of any such limits on the extension of
real property taxes by the Illinois General Assembly may, in future years, adversely affect the City's
ability lo levy property taxes lo finance operations at current levels and the City's power to issue
additional general obligation debt without the prior approval of voters
As a home rule unit of government, the City is nol limited as to the amount of debt it may issue
payable from ad valorem property laxcs. The General Assembly may limit by law the amount and require
referendum approval ofsuch debt, but only to the extent such debt, in the aggregate, exceeds three percent
oflhe assessed value of all ta.xable properly in the City
Stale law imposes certain nolice and public hearing requirements on non-home rule units of local
government that propose lo issue general obligation debl. These requirements do not apply lo the Cily.
The City In 1993, the City Council of the City adopted an ordinance (the "Chicago Property Tax
Limitation Ordinance") limiting, beginning in 1994, Ihc Cily's aggregate property lax levy lo an amounl
equal lo the prior year's aggregate property tax levy (subject to certain adjustments) phis the lesser of (a)
five percent or (b) the percentage increase in the annualized Consumer Price Index for all urban
consumers for all items, as published by the United States Department of Labor, during the 12-month
period most recently announced prior to Ihe filing oflhe preliminary budget cslimate report fhe Chicago
Property Tax Limitalion Ordinance also provides that such limitation shall not reduce lhal portion of each
levy attributable lo the greater of (i) for any levy year, interest and principal on general obligation notes
and bonds oflhe City outstanding on .lanuary 1, 1994, to be paid from collections oflhe levy made for
such levy year, or (ii) the amount ofthe aggregate interest and principal payments on the City's general
obligation bonds and noles during the 12-month period ended January 1, 1994, subject lo annual increase
in Ihe manner described above for the aggregate levy (the "Safe Harbor") Additional .safe harbors are
provided for portions of any levy attributable to paymenis under inslallmenl conlracls or public building
commission lea.ses or allnhutahle to paymenis due as a result ofthe refunding of general obligation bonds
or noles or ofsuch inslallmenl conlracls or leases
Pursuanl to the Bond Ordinance, the taxes levied by the City for the payment of principal and
interesl on ihe Bonds are not subject lo the limitations contained in the CUy Property Tax l..imiialion
Ordinance

D-6

  

APPENDIX 

RETIREMENT FUNDS

 

 PAGE LEFT 

RETIREMENT FUNDS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
General
Source Information
Background Information Regarding the Retirement Funds
Determination of Employee Contributions
Delerminalion of Cily's Contributions
The Actuarial Valuation
Actuarial Methods
Actuarial Assumptions
Funded Status ofthe Retirement Funds
Net Pension Liability and Discount Rate
Projection of Funded Status
Legislative Changes
Diversion of Grant Money to the Retirement Funds Under P.A. 96-1495 and P.A 98-641
Effect on MEABF and LABF If P.A. 98-641 Found Unconstitutional
Pension Reform
Report and Recommendations oflhe Commission lo Strengthen Chicago's Pension Funds
Special Revenue and Enterprise Fund Allocation of Retiremenl Fund Costs
Impaci of Retirement Funds' Unfunded Liability on the City's Bond Ralings
PAYMENT FOR OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFI fS
General
The Settlement
City Financing ofthe Health Plan
Acluarial Considerations
Funded Status
Retiree Heallh Benefits Commi.ssion
Status of Healthcare Benefits After the Settlement Period

E-1
E-2
E-3
E-7
E-8
E-ll
E-13
E-15
E-17
E-25
E-26
E-32
E-36
E-36
E-40
E-40
E-42
E-42
E-43
E-43
E-44
E-44
E-45
E-46
E-47
E-47

  PAGE LEFT 



RETIREMENT FUNDS
General
Pursuant lo the Illinois Pension Code, as revised from lime to lime (the "Pension Code"), the Cily
contributes to four relirement funds, which provide benefits upon retirement, death or di.sability to
members of these retirement funds. Such retirement funds arc, in order from largest lo smallest
membership: (i) the Municipal Employees' Annuily and Benefit Fund of Chicago ("MEABF"); (li) the
Policemen's Annuily and Benefit Fund of Chicago ("PABF"), (iii) the Firemen's Annuity and Benefit
Fund of Chicago ("FABF"); and (iv) the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and
Benefit Fund of Chicago ("LABF" and, together with MEABF, PABF and FABF, the "Retirement
Funds').
The Retiremenl Funds are established, administered and financed under the Pension Code, as
separate bodies politic and corporate and for the benefit ofthe members of the Retirement Funds. The
City's contributions lo the Retirement Funds, and benefits for members of the Retirement Funds, are
governed by the provisions ofthe Pension Code. See "— Determination ofCity's Contribulions" below.
This Appendix describes, among other things, the current provisions oflhe Pension Code applicable lo
the City's funding ofthe Retirement Funds. No as.surance can be made that the Pension Code will not be
amended in Ihe future.
The Retiremenl Funds' funding sources are the City's contributions, the employees' coninbuiions
and investment income on the Retirement Funds' assels. The City's and employees' contribution levels
are determined pursuant to the Pension Code.
The Retirement Funds have been actuarially determined lo be significantly underfunded. See "—
Funded Status ofthe Retirement Funds" and "— Projection of Funded Status" belovv. The funded status
ofthe Retirement Funds has adversely impacted, and threatens to further negatively impact, the City and
its taxpayers in several ways, ccrlain of which are described in this paragraph and throughout this
Appendix First, the City's bond ralings have declined based, according to the reports of the rating
agencies issued with respect lo such downgrades, in part on the size ofthe Retirement Funds' unfunded
liabililies and the projected impact of future Cily contribulions lo the Retirement Funds on the City See
"Impact of Retiremenl Funds' Unfunded Liabilities on the City's Bond Ratings" below In addition, as
described in the following paragraphs, the magnitude of the Retiremenl Funds' underfunding has
prompted the Illinois General Assembly lo pass legislation which would, as currenlly con.sliluled,
significantly increa.se the Cily's contributions lo the Retiremenl Funds Such additional conlributions are
expected lo subslanlially burden the City's financial condition Further, the governmental units wilh
which the lax base ofthe Cily overlaps, which include, but are not limited lo, the Chicago Board of
Education of the City of Chicago (the "Board of Education"), the Chicago Park Di.striet ("CPD"), the
Couniy of Cook (the "County") and the Stale of Illinois (the "Slale") (collectively, all such olher units are
referred to herein as the "Guvernmenial Units"), as defined and described herein, have overlapping tax
bases with the City and are also experiencing significant pension plan underfunding which, in
combination wilh the currenl financial position of the Retirement Funds, places a sub.slanlial potential
burden on ihc Cilys taxpayers who bear the burden of funding a portion oflhe conlnbutions oflhe City
and the Governmental Units. See "—Background Information Regarding the Retiremenl Funds—
Overlapping fax Bodies ' below
As noted above, in an effort lo improve the funded status oflhe Retirement Funds, the Illinois
General Assembly passed two sialules designed lo improve the funding levels oflhe Retiremenl Funds
PA 98-641 (which is defined and descnbed herein), which modifies provisions of the Pension Code

E-1

 related lo MEABF and LABF, and P.A. 96-1495 (which is defined and described herein), which modifies
provisions ofthe Pension Code with respect to PABF and FABF.
PA 98-641 significantly increases ihe City's contributions to MEABF and LABF and makes
olher adjustments lhat caused the unfunded liabilities ofMEABF and LABF lo decrease on its effective
date and will cause such unfunded liabilities to decrease further over time See "—Determination of
City's Contributions"—City 's Required Conlnbutions to LABF and MEABF Pursuanl to P.A. 98-641"
below. Information regarding projected future City contributions to LABF and MEABF pursuanl to P.A
98-641 is set forth in TABLE 13—"Projection of Future Funding Status—MEABF," TABLE 14—
"Projeclion of Future Funding Status—LABF" and TABLE 18—"Projected Conlnbutions MEABF and
LABF" below. P.A 98-641 is currently being challenged as to ils con.stitutionality in two separate
lawsuits. See"—Legislative Changes—P.A. 98-641" hclow.
P.A. 96-1495 is expected to reduce the unfunded liabilities of PABF and FABF because it
significantly increased future City contributions lo be made by the City to PABF and FABF. See " —
Determination of City's Contribulion.s—City's Required Contributions lo PABF and FABF Beginning in
2016" below P.A. 96-1495 has been projected lo require an increase in the City's contributions to PABF
and FABF from approximaicly $297 million in 2015 lo approximalely $839 million in 2016, wilh
increase of approximately three percent each year thereafter. See TABLE 15—"PROJECTION OF
FUTURE FUNDING STATUS"—FABF" and TABLE 16—"PROJECTION OF FUTURE FUNDING
STA TUS—PABF" below in addition, as a resull of ccrlain changes lo PABF's actuarial assumptions
beginning with the 2014 Actuarial Valuation (as defined and described herein), the City's contributions lo
PABF are expected to increase by approximately $62 million for the 2017 Contribution. The City expects
that the increases in the City's contributions to PABF and FABF mandated by P A 96-1495 will
subslanlially burden the Cily's financial condition, 'fakcn together wilh the increase in Cily contributions
under P.A. 98-641, the burden on the Cily's financial condition would be even greater.
Certain statements made in this Appendix are based on projections, are forward-looking m nature
and are developed using assumptions and information currently available. Such statements are subject to
certain risks and uncertainties The projections set forth in this Appendix rely on information produced
by the Relirement Funds' independent acluaries (except where specifically noted otherwise) and were nol
prepared with a view toward complying with the guidelines established by the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants with respect to prospective financial information This information is not
fact and should not be relied upon as being necessarily indicative of future results Readers of this
Appendix are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the prospective financial information. Neither the
City, the City's independent auditors, nor any olher independent accountants have compiled, examined, or
performed any procedures with respect lo the prospective financial information contained herein, nor have
ihey expressed any opinion or any olher form of assurance on such information or its aehicvability, and
assume no responsibility for, and disclaim any association with, the prospective financial information.
Source Information
The mformation contained in this Appendix relies in part on information produced by the
Retirement Funds, their independent accounlanls and their independent acluaries (the "Source
Information") Neither the Cily nor the City's independent auditors have independenlly verified the
Source Information and make no representations nor express any opinion as to the accuracy ofthe Source
Information
Furthermore, where the tables in this Appendix present aggregate information regarding the
Rciircmenl Funds, such combmed information results solely from the arithmetic calculation of numbers

E-2

 presenled in the Source Information and may nol conform to the requiremenls for the presentation ofsuch
mformation by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board ("GASB"') or the Pension Code.
Certain of the comprehensive annual financial reports of the Retirement Funds (each a "CAFR"'
and together the "CAFRs"), and ccrlain of the acluarial valuations of the Rctircmcnl Funds (each, an
"Actuarial Valuation" and together, the "Actuarial Valuations"), may be obtained by contacting the
Retirement Funds Certain of these reports may also be available on the Relirement Funds" websites
(www.meabf org; www.chipabf org, www labfchicago.org, and wwwfabforg), provided, however, that
the contents of these reports and oflhe Retirement Funds' websites are not incorporated herein by such
reference.
The Relirement Funds typically release their Actuarial Valuations in the April or May following
the close of their fi.scal year on December 31. All oflhe Retirement Systems have released their 2014
Acluarial Valuations.
Background Information Regarding the Retirement Funds
General
Each of the Retirement Funds is a single-employer, defined-benefit public employee retirement
system. "Single-employer" refers lo the fact lhat there is a single plan sponsor, in this case, the City.
"Defined-benefit" refers lo the fact that the Relirement Funds pay a periodic benefit lo employees upon
relirement and survivors in a fixed amount determined at the time of retirement. The amount of the
periodic benefit is generally determined on the basis of service credits and salary Eligible employees
receive the defined benefit on a periodic basis for life, along with certain benefits to spouses and children
lhat survive the death oflhe employee.
To fund the benefits lo be paid by a defined-benefit pension plan, bolh employees and employers
make contributions to the plan. Generally in a defined-benefit pension plan, employees contribute a fixed
percentage of their annual salary and employers contribute the additional amounis required (which
amounis may be determined pursuanl lo statute, as in the case of the Cily). when combined wilh the
investment earnings on plan assels, to pay the benefits under the pension plan
See "Table I Membership," "—Delerminalion of Employee Contribulions" and "—Determination of City's
Contributions" below
The benefits available under the Relirement Funds accrue throughout the lime an employee is
employed by the City. Although the benefits accrue during employment, certain age and service
requirements must be achieved by an employee lo generate a retirement or survivor's periodic defined
benefit payment upon relirement or lerminalion from the City 'fhe Relirement Funds also provide certain
disability' benefits and, until the later ofthe date on which the City no longer provides a health care plan
for the annuitants or December 31, 2016, retiree heallhcare benefits to eligible members
Section 5 of Article XIII oflhe Illinois Constitution (ihc "Pension Clause") provides as follows
"Membership in any pension retirement system oflhe Slale, any unil of local governmenl
or school district, or any agency or instiumenlality thereof shall be an enforceable
contiaciual relalionshij), the benefits of which shall nol be diminished or impaired "'
For a discussion ofthe Pension Clause in the context ol" possible pension reform related lo the Retirement
Funds, sec "—Pension Reform" hclow

E-3

 References in this Appendix lo "member" are references lo the active, inactive and relired
employees oflhe City and their beneficiaries, the active, inactive and retired employees ofthe Relirement
Funds participating in the Retirement Funds and their beneficiaries, and wilh regard to MEABF, certain
employees of the Board of Education who are members of MEABF as described below, and their
beneficiaries.
The Relirement Funds
Municipal Employees" Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago MEABF is established by and
administered under Article 8 ofthe Pension Code MEABF provides age and service retirement benefits,
survivor benefits and disability benefits to all eligible members. MEABF is administered under Ihe
direction of afive-memberboard of trustees (the "MEABF Board"), whose members are responsible for
managing and administering MEABF for the benefit of its members In addition to City and Retirement
Fund employees, former employees and survivors, MEABF's membership includes non-inslruclional
employees of the Board of Education ("CBOE Employees"). With respect to MEABF, the terms
"employee" and "member" include the CBOE Employees. The CBOE Employees account for almost
half of MEABF's membership. The Mayor ofthe City, the City Clerk, the City Treasurer, and members
oflhe Cily Council may participale in MEABF if such persons file, while in office, writlen application lo
the MEABF Board.
Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago PABF is established by and administered
under Article 5 of the Pension Code PABF provides retiremenl and di.sability benefits lo the police
officers of the City, their surviving spouses and their children PABF is administered by an eight-member
board of trustees (the "PABF Board"). Members oflhe PABF Board are charged wilh administering the
PABF under the Pension Code for the benefit of ils members.
Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago. FABF is established by and administered under
Article 6 of the Pension Code. FABF provides retirement and disability benefits to fire service employees
and their survivors. FABF is governed by an eight-member board of trustees (the "FABF Board")
Members ofthe FABF Board are statutorily mandated to discharge their duties solely in the interest of
FABF's members.
Laborers" and Retirement Board Employees' Annuily and Benefit Fund of Chicago. LABJ- is
established by and administered under Article 11 oflhe Pension Code. LABF provides retirement and
disability benefits for employees of the City and the Board of Education who arc employed in a title
recognized by the Cily as labor service and for the survivors ofsuch employees. LABF is governed by an
eight-member board of trustees (the "LABF Board" and, together with the MEABF Board, the PABF
Board and the FABF Board, the "Retirement Fund Boards"). Members ofthe LABF Board are statutorily
mandated to discharge their duties solely in the interest of LABF's members.
'fhe membership oflhe Relirement Funds as of December 31, 2014, was as follows'

E-4

 TABLE 1 - MEMBERSHIP
Retirement
Fund
MEABF
PABF
FABF
LABF
Tolal

Active
Members
30,160
12,020
4,809
2,837
49,826

Inactive/
Entitled to
Bcnellts
15.495
630
65
1,449
17,639

Retirees and
Bcncflciaries
24,855
13,230
4,703
3,902
46,690

Totals
70,510
25,880
9,577
8,188
114,155

Source Actuarial Valuations o f l h e Retiremenl Systems as o f December 3 1 , 2014.

Overlapping Taxing Bodies
The C i t y ' s tax base overlaps with ihe Governmental Units, which includes, but is not limited to,
the Board o f Education, the C P D , the County and the State. Certain o f l h e Governmental Units maintain
their own defined benefit pension plans (collectively, all such olher plans are referred to herein as the
"Other Retirement Funds"), many o f which are also significantly underfunded. The underfunding o f
these Other Retirement Funds places a substantial additional potential burden on the C i t y ' s laxpayers,
who bear the burden o f funding a portion o f t h e contributions o f the Governmental Units.
State Pension R e f o r m A c t a n d L i t i g a t i o n
O n M a y 8, 2015, the Illinois Supreme Court
affirmed the decision o f l h e Sangamon Couniy Circuit Court lhat Public A c l 98-0599 (the "State Pension
Reform A c t " ) is unconstitutional. The State Pension Reform A c t would have provided for certain costsaving and olher reforms to the Stale's four largest pension plans, including, but not limited to, changes to
the employee and employer contribution formula, cosl o f l i v i n g adjustments, retirement ages and
employee contributions The Slate Pension Reform A c t was challenged on behalf o f various classes o f
annuitants, current and former workers, and labor organizations, alleging, among other things, lhat the
legislation violates the Pension Clause.
Chicago P a r k D i s t r i c t Pension R e f o r m O n Januaiy 7, 2014, then Governor Pal Quinn signed
Public Act 98-0622 into law (the " C P D Pension Reform A c l " ) 'The C P D Pension Reform A c t provides
for certain cost-saving and other reforms to C P D ' s pension plan, including, bul nol limiled lo, changes to
the employee and employer conlnbution formula, cosl o f living adjustments, rciircmenl ages and
employee contributions Such changes became effective on June 1, 2014. The City is nol aware o f any
lawsuil that has been filed challenging the C P D Pension Reform A c t 'The Cily makes no prediction as to
whether any lawsuil w i l l be filed challenging the CPD Pension Reform A c l , or whether the filing o f any
such lawsuil or ils outcome would impact the C i t y ' s pension reform efi'orts, nor does the City make any
prediction as lo whether the Illinois Supreme Courl decision with respect lo the Stale Pension Reform A c l
w i l l impact the CPD Pension Reform A c t
For more mformalion on ihese Olher Retirement Funds, please refer lo the Slate's Coinnirssion
on Government Forecasting and Accountability ( " C O G F A " ) website at httpV/cgfa ilga gov/homc aspx,
provided, however, that the contents o f the C O G F A website are nol incorporated herein by such
reference 'The City believes the inlormaiion on C O G F A s website to be reliable, however, the City lakes
no responsibility for the continued accuracy o f t h e Internet address or for the accuracy or timeliness o f
information posted on lhat website

R-5

 Certain Duties
Each Retirement Fund Board is a fiduciary of its respective Retirement Fund and is authorized lo
perform all functions necessary for operation oflhe Retirement Funds. The Pension Code authorizes each
Retirement Fund Board to make certain decisions, including decisions regarding the investment of funds,
the management of assets, ihc disbursement of benefits, and the hiring of staff, financial advisors and
asset managers.
Each Retirement Fund Board is authorized lo promulgate rules and procedures regarding their
administration of benefits and other matters in accordance with the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act,
and their decisions in awarding, limiting, or denying benefits are subject lo the Illinois Administrative
Procedure Act. Certain aspects of the Retirement Funds, however, including the defmed benefits and the
employer and employee contribution levels, are established in the Pension Code and may be amended
only by an amendment to the Pension Code.
'The Pension Code provides lhal the expenses incurred in connection with the administration of
the Retirement Funds are not construed to be debt imposed upon the City. Such expenses are the
obligation ofthe Retirement Funds exclusively, as separate bodies politic and corporate
The Illinois Attorney General and annuitants may bring a civil action to obtain relief for
violations of a fiduciary duty lo the Retirement Funds or any act or practice which violates any provision
of the Pension Code.

Investments
Each Retirement Fund Board manages the investmenls of its respective Relirement Fund. State
law regulates the lypes of investments in which the Retirement Funds' assets may be invested.
Furthermore, the Retiremenl Fund Boards invest the Relirement Funds' assels in accordance wilh the
prudent person rule, which requires members ofthe Retirement Fund Boards, who are fiduciaries ofthe
Retirement Funds, to discharge their duties with the care, prudence and diligence that a prudent person
acting in a like capacity and familiar wilh such matters would use in a similar situation.
In carrying out their investment duly, the Retirement Fund Boards may appoint and
investment managers as fiduciaries lo manage the invesimenl assets of the Relirement Funds
investment managers are granted discretionary authority to manage the Retirement Funds'
Additional information regarding the Relirement Funds' inveslments and investment management
found on the Retiremenl Funds' websites; provided, however, thai the conlenls ofsuch websites
incorporated into this Appendix by such reference.

review
Such
assets.
may be
are nol

Table 2 provides information on the investment returns experienced by each of the Retirement
Funds

E-6

 TABLE 2 - INVESTMENT RATES OF RETURN, 2005-2014
Fiscal
Year
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Assumed Rate'"
Source

(1)

MEABF

FABF

LABF

PABF

6 6%
12.7
73
(28 7)
19.6
14 2
0.1
12.8
16.1
4.7
75

9.5%
140
11 0
(33 8)
23.7
17.7
(2.0)
162
19.5
29
8.0

7.8%
11 2
8.0
(29.2)
21 5
15 5
(0.3)
14.6
15.8
3.8
7.5

7 3%
12.1
8.8
(27.8)
21 5
12 7
0.8
124
137
59
7.5

For FABF, the audited financial .sliilcmcnts of FABF lorfi.'scalyears 2003-2012 and the Actuarial Valuations of FABF
lor tlscal years 2013 and 2014 For MLAU1-, the CAFRs of MliABF for fiscal years 2003 and 2004 and the Actuarial
Valuation of MKABF as of December 31, 2014 For LABF and PABF, ihe respedive CAFRs of such Relirement
Funds for Ihe fiscal years 2003-2012 and the respective Actuarial Valuations ofsuch Retirement Funds for tlscal years
2013 and 2014.
Rellecls the assumed rate of return oflhe Retiremenl Funds as of Decenibei 31, 2014, as discussed in further detail
under "Actuarial Assumption.s—Assumed Investment Rate of Return" below

Determination of Employee Conlributions
Employees are required lo conlribute to their respective Retirement Fund as set forth in the
Pension Code
Prior to the implementation of PA. 98-641 on Januaiy I, 2015, MEAFJF employees contributed
8.5 percenl of their salary lo MEABF (consisting of a 6.5 percenl conlribulion for employee benefits, a
1.5 percent contribution for spouse benefits, and a 05 percenl contribution for an annuity' increase
benefit). For a summary oflhe increases in employee contributions that lake effect under P.A. 98-641,
sec "—Legislative Changes —P.A 98-641 "
PABF employees contribute 9.0 percent of their salarj' to PABF (consisting of a 7 0 percent
contribution for employee benefits, a I 5 percenl contribution for spouse benefits and a 0 5 percent
contribution for an annuily increase benefit)
FABF employees conlribule 9 125 percent of their salaiy lo FABF (consisting of a 7.125 percent
conlribulion for empli;)yee benefits, a I 5 percenl conlribution for spouse benefits, a 0 375 percent
contribution for an annuity increase benefit and a 0 125% contribution for disability benefits).
Prior 10 the implcmcnlation of PA 98-641 on January I, 2015, LABF employees coniribulcd 8.5
percent of their salary lo LABF (consisting of a 6 5 percenl conlribulion for employee benefits, a I 5
percenl contribution for spouse benefits, and a 0 5 percenl conlribulion for an annuity increase bcnefil)
For a summary oflhe increases in employee contribulions lhal took effect under PA 98-641, see "—
Legislative Changes—/-'..-J. 98-641 "

E-7

 For each Retirement Fund, if an employee leaves without qualitymg for an annuily, accumulated
employee contributions are refunded.
Determination of Cify's Contributions

I

Under the Pension Code, the Cily's contributions to the Retiremenl Funds are delermined
pursuant to a statutory formula on an annual basis. Currently, the Cily's contributions equal the
Multiplier Funding (as defined below) and certain other amounts as required by the Pension Code.
"Multiplier Funding" is equal to the product of a multiplier eslablished by the Pension Code for each
Retiremenl Fund (each, a "Multiplier"') and the amounl contributed by Ihc Cily's employees two years
pnor to the year in which the tax is levied. With respect to the City's 2015 contribution, the Multiplier
for each Retirement Fund is as follows 1.25 for MEABF; 2.00 for PABF; 2 26 for FABF; and 1.00 for
LABF. The City's contributions are made as governed by the Pension Code and are not based on the
Actuarially Required Contribution (as hereinafter defined). See "—The Acluarial Valuation—City's
Contributions Nol Related lo GASB Standards" below. However, pursuant to P.A. 96-1495, beginning in
2016, the City's contributions to PABF and FABF will be determined pursuant to the P.A 96-1495
Funding Plan (as hereinafter defined) rather than the Multiplier Funding .system. See "—City's
Contributions lo PABF and FABF Beginning in 2016" below. Furthermore, beginning in 2021, P.A. 98641 requires that the City's contributions to MEABF and LABF be determined pursuant to the PA. 98641 Funding Plan (as hereinafter defined) rather than the Multiplier Funding system. See "—City's
Required Contributions to LABF and MEABF Pursuant to P.A. 98-641" below.
The Pension Code provides lhal the Retirement Fund Boards must each annually certify to the
City Council a delerminalion of the required Cily conlribulion lo the Retiremenl Funds. In making ils
request for the City's annual contribution, each Relirement Fund, acting through its Retirement Fund
Board, annually approves and then submits a resolution to the City Council requesting that the City
Council levy for a particular conlribulion amounl. The Cily has generally paid the amounis so requested.
See "—City's Contributions to FABF" below.
The City's contributions to the Retirement Funds have historically been made primarily from the
proceeds of an annual levy of properly laxes for each ofthe Retirement Funds (collectively, the "Pension
Levy") by the City solely for such purpose, as provided by the Pension Code However, the Pension
Code allows the Cily lo use any olher legally available funds (collectively, the "Other Available Funds,"
as described below) in lieu oflhe Pension Levy to make ils conlnbutions to the Retirement Funds, fhe
amounl ofthe Pension Levy, like any City properly lax levy, must be approved by the City Council fhe
Pension Levy is exclusive of and in addition to the amounl of property laxes which the City levies for
other purposes
If Other Available Funds are being utilized lo pay a portion ofthe Citys contributions, .such
fiinds are lo be deposited wilh the Cily Treasurer lo be used for ihc same purpose as the j'ension Levy
fhe City's practice has been lo use a portion of the City's Personal Properly Replacement Tax revenue
("PPRT") to pay a portion oflhe Cily's contributions PPRT revenue is paid by the Slale of Illinois (the
"State") lo the City from the Personal Property Replacemenl 'fax Fund oflhe Slate pursuanl lo Section 12
oflhe Revenue Sharing Acl oflhe Slale 'fhe City's dislnbulive share of PPRT is nol required lo be used
for this purpose but it can be used by the City for corporate purposes. Since 2003, the amounl of PPRT
contributed by the Cily to the Retirement Funds in the aggregate has averaged approximately $78,387,000
annually In 2012, 2013 and 2014, Ihe amounts of PPRT contributed to the Retirement Funds in the
aggregate were approximately $101,875,000, $126,639,000 and $127,239,000 respectively For those
.same"year-s, the City's total distributive share of PPRT was $139,461,000, $159,559,000 and
$I5X,547,()()0, respectively

E-8

i
,
 

 'fhe contributions lo the Retirement Funds in accordance wilh the Pension Code, which have been
generally lower than the Actuarially Required Contribution, have contributed to the significant
underfunding of the Retirement Funds. Moreover, the contributions to the Retirement Funds in
accordance with the Pension Code have had the effecl of deferring the funding of the Retirement Funds'
liabilities, which increases the cosls ofsuch liabilities and the associated financial risks, including the risk
that each Retirement Fund will nol be able lo pay Us obligations as they become due. Any significant
increases in the City's contributions (such as those scheduled to occur under P.A 96-1495 and P A. 98641 if determined to be constitutional) to the Relirement Funds can be expected lo place significant strain
on the City's finances. As shown in TABLE 15—"Projection of Future Funding Status—FABF" and
TABLE 16—"Projeclion of Future Funding Status—PABF'" herein, the City's contributions to FABF and
PABF are projected to increase infiscalyear 2016, when compared lo fiscal year 2015, by approximately
$136.3 million and $405.0 million, respeclively, pursuant to the provisions of P.A. 96-1495. In addition,
as shown in TABLE 13—"Projection of Future Funding Status—MEABF," TABI-E 14—"Projection of
Future Funding Status—LABF" and TABLE 18—"Projected Contributions—MEABF and LABF"
herein, the City's contributions to MEABF and LABF are projected to increase in fiscal year 2016, when
compared to the Cily's contributions in fiscal year 2015, by approximalely $85.3 million and $9 6
million, respectively pursuant to the provisions of P.A 98-641, if such acl is determined lo be
constitutional.
City's Contributions to FABF
Wilh respect lo the contribution lo be made in 2015, the FABF has requested ccrlain amounts which
the City has determined are not required by the Pension Code. The amount requested by the FABF Board
in excess of the amounl the City has determined lo be the statutory requirement for 2014 was
$18,147,000. 'The FABF Board has made similar requests for amounis in e.xcess ofthe amounl Ihe Cily
has determined to be Ihe statutorT>' requirement in each of the last several years In each such year,
including the current year, the City has indicated lhat it will not conlribute amounis in excess of the
amount the City has determined to be the statutory contribution requirement for the City to FABF.
City's Required ContribuUons to PA BF and FABF Beginning in 2016
Public Act 096-1495 ("P A 96-1495") was signed into law on December 30, 2010. Among other
things, P.A. 96-1495 created a new method of detennining the contributions to be made by ihe City to
PABF and FABF P.A. 96-1495 requires lhal, beginning in 2016, the Cily's contributions each year for
PABF and FABF (Ihc "P A. 96-1495 Conlribution") will be equal lo the amounl necessary' to achieve a
Funded Ratio (as hercaflcr defined) of 90 percent in PABF and FABF by the end of fiscal year 2040 (the
"P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan").
Pursuant to the RA 96-1495 Funding Plan, the P A 96-1495 Contribution for PABF and FABF
will be calculated as the level percenlage of payroll ncces.sary lo reach Ihe 90 percenl Funded Ralio target
by 2040 In Cook and DuPage Counties (in which the City is located), properly laxes levied in one year
become payable during the following year in two installments As such, any property lax to be levied by
the Cit)' for the purpose of raising the P A 96-1495 Contribution to be made by the City in 2016 would
be levied in calendar year 2015 and collecled in calendar year 2016
Unless amended by ihe Illinois General Assembly, ihe PA 96-1495 Funding Plan will
significanlly increase ihe City's required coninbuiions to PABf and FABf beginning in 2016 and will
impose a significant financial burden on the City Based on the amounts budgeted by ihe City for the
2015 contribution lo PABF and FABI- and the 2013 Actuanal Valuation for PABF and FABF, the City's
required contribution to PABF and FABF is expected to increase hy appioximately $549 million in 2016
when compared lo ihe budgeted conlribulion for 2015 This contribution is expected lo increase by an

E-9

 additional $62 million for fiscal year 2017 as a result of new assumptions lo be used by the actuary for
PABF beginning with the 2014 Actuarial "Valuation See "—Funded Status of the Retirement Funds"'
herein
Senate Bill 777 ("SB 777") passed bolh houses oflhe Illinois General Assembly as of May 31,
2015. SB 777 would extend the period by which the unfunded liabilities of PABF and FABF are
amortized to a 90 percent Funded Ratio from 2040 to 2055 (the "Revised Amortization Period") and
institute a phase-in period during 2016-2020 to reduce the City's required payment in the initial years to
allow for a more gradual phase-in of the requiremenls of P.A. 96-1495 (the "Phase-in Period"). The
Revised Amortization Period would reduce the annual funding obligation required lo reach a 90 percent
Funded Ratio, hut extend the number of years over which such paymenis would need to be made. A
mofion to reconsider the vote on SB 777 was filed in the Illinois Senate on May 31, 2015, and, as such,
SB 777 has not been sent to the Governor for consideration In addition to, or in lieu of, a Revised
Amorlizalion Period or a Phase-in Period, the Illinois General Assembly may consider olher legislation
that could affect the City payment obligations for PABF and FABF and/or funding sources for those
obligations, including a City-owned casino. The City makes no representation as lo whether or when SB
777 or any such other legislation would be enacted inlo lavv.
Any change to the P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan which would reduce the contributions required of
the City, such as a Revised Amortization Period or a Phase-in Period, would have the effect of increasing
the unfunded liabilities and decreasing the Funded Ratios of PABF and FABF when compared lo the
projected unfunded liabilities and Funded Ratios ofsuch Retirement Funds set forth in Tables 13 and 14
below. The City expects that the City Council will consider options for addressing its pension funding
requirement for PABF and FABF, including improvements in operaling efficiencies and incremental
revenues, afler the Illinois General Assembly concludes ils spring session. If an increase in property taxes
were the sole source of incremental City contributions to PABF and FABF, and those contributions were
not reduced by a Revised Amortization Period or Phase-in Period, the projecled increase in the City's
contribution to such Retirement Funds in 2016 would be $549 million, as described above, on a tolal
estimated 2015 aggregate lax levy of $4 2 billion, including the Cily and overlapping laxing jurisdictions.
City "s Required Conlributions to LABF and MEABF Pursuant to P.A. 98-641
PA 98-641, which became law on June 9, 2014, modifies the manner in which the City's
contribulions lo LABF and MEABF arc calculated. For paymenl years 2016 Ihrough 2020, P A 98-641
retains the Multiplier Funding system as the method of calculating the City's contribulions lo LABF and
MEABF (unless Ihe amount determined pursuanl lo the Multiplier Funding syslem for any year is more
than the Normal Cost (as hereinafter defined) for such year plus the amount, determined on a level
percentage of payroll basis, lhal is sufficieni to achieve a Funded Ratio of 90 percent by the end of
contribution year 2055), bul increases the Multiplier as follows: for ihe contribution made in 2016, 1.60
(LABF) and 1 85 (MEABF); for the contribution made in 2017, I 90 (LABF) and 2 15 (MEABF); for the
contribution made in 2018, 2.20 (LABF) and 2 45 (MEABF), for the contribution made in 2019, 2.50
(LABF) and 2.75 (MEABF); and for the conlribulion made in 2020, 2.80 (LABF) and 3 05 (MEABF)
Beginning in 2021, the City's contributions for LABF and MEABF will equal the Normal Cosl for such
year plus the amount, determined on a level percenlage of payroll basis, that is sufficient to achieve a
Funded Ratio of 90 percent in LABF and MEABF by the end of contribution year 2055 (the "P.A 98-641
Funding Plan").
PA. 98-641 IS currenlly the subjecl of mulliple legal challenges as lo ils conslilulionalily. Sec
"Legislative Changes—PA 98-641'" below If PA. 98-641 is ovcrliirned by a courl, ihe concomitant
reversion to the Pension Code provisions ciTective prior to its enactment would have the effecl of
increasing the UAAL and decreasing the Funded Ratio ol MliABf and LABI' Sec "—Effect on MEABF

E-10

 and LABF if P A 98-641 Found Unconslilulional" below for addilional information regarding the effect
of P.A 98-641 being overturned on the funded status ofMEABF and LABF.
The Actuarial Valuation
General
The Pension Code requires that the Retirement Funds annually submit lo the City Council a
report containing a detailed slalement oflhe affairs ofsuch Relirement Fund, its income and expenditures,
and assets and liabililies, which consists of the Actuarial Valuation. With respect to the Retirement
Funds, the Actuarial Valuation measures the financial position of a Retirement Fund, determines the
amount lo be contributed by the City lo such Retirement Fund pursuanl lo the slalulory requirements
described above, and produces certain information mandated by the financial reporting standards issued
by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board, as described below.
In producing the Actuarial Valuations, the Retirement Funds' actuaries use demographic data
(including employee age, salary and service credits), economic assumplions (including estimated future
salary and interest rates), and decrement assumptions (including employee turnover, mortality and
relirement rales) lo produce the information required by the Prior GASB Standards or the New GASB
Standards, each as hereinafter defined. 'The Retirement Funds' Acluarial Valuations are publicly
available and may be obtained from the Retirement Funds. See "—Source Information" above A
description of the staii.slics generated by the Relirement Funds' actuaries in the Acluarial Valuations
follows in Ihe next few paragraphs. This information was derived from the Source Information.
GASB, which is part of a private non-profit corporation known as the Financial Accounting
Foundation, promulgates standards regarding accounting and financial reporting for governmental
entities. These principles have no legal effect and do not impose any legal liability on the City 'The
references to GASB principles in this Appendix do nol suggest and should not be construed to suggest
olherwise
Prior G.ASB Standards
For the fiscal years discussed in this Appendix prior to and including December 31. 2013, the
applicable GASB financial reporting standards were GASB Stalcmenl No 25 ("GASB 25") and GASB
Statement No. 27 ("GASB 27"' and, together with GASB 25, the Pnor GASB Standards"). The Prior
GASB Standards required the determination of the Actuarially Required Contribution and the calculation
of pension funding statistics such as the UAAL and the Funded Ralio in the Actuarial Valuation. In
addition, the Prior GASB Standards allowed pension plans lo prepare financial reports pursuant to a
variety of approved actuarial methods, certain of which arc described in "—Acluarial Methods" below
GASB 25 required disclosure of an "Acluanally Required Conlribulion," which was such
pronouncement's method for calculating the annual amounis needed to fully fund the Retirement Fund.s,
though the Actuarially Required Contribution was a financial reporting requirement and not a funding
requirement. The Pnor GASB Standards referred lo the Acluanally Required Contribution as the
"Annual Required Contribution", however, ihis Appendix refers to the concept as the Actuarially
Required Contribution lo denote the fact that the Acluanally Required Conlribulion is the amounl an
actuary would calculate pursuanl to the Prior GASB Standards to be contributed m a given year, to
differcntiale it from the amounl the Cily will be required to conlribule under the Pension Code
•fhe Acluanally Required Conlnbutiun as defined in GASB 25, consisted of two components (I)
lhal portion oflhe present value of pension plan benefits which is allocated lo the valuation year by the

E-1 1

 actuarial cosl method (as described in "—Actuarial Melhods—Actuarial Accrued Liability" below),
termed the "Normal Cost", and (2) an amortized portion of any UAAL (defined below)
•fhe Actuarial Accrued Liability was an estimate of the present value of the benefits each
Retirement Fund musl pay lo members as a result of past employment with the City and participation in
such Retirement Fund The Actuarial Accrued Liability was calculated by use of a variety of
demographic and other data (such as employee age, salary and service credits) and vanous assumptions
(such as estimated salary increases, interest rales, employee turnover, retirement dale and age and
mortality and disability rales). The Actuarial Value of Assets refiecled the value ofthe investmenls and
olher assels held by each Retirement Fund. Various methods existed under the Prior GASB Standards for
calculating the Actuarial Value of Assets and the Acluarial Accrued Liability. For a discussion of the
methods and assumptions used to calculate the Retirement Funds' Actuarial Accrued Liability and
Actuarial Value of Assets under GASB 25, see "—Acluarial Methods" and "—Actuarial Assumptions"
below
Any shortfall between the Actuarial Value of Assets and the Actuarial Accrued Liability was
referred to as the "Unfunded Acluarial Accrued Liability" or "UAAL." The UAAL represented the
present value of bencftls attributed lo past service lhat are in excess of plan assels In addition, the
actuary computed the "Funded Ratio," which was the Actuarial "Value of Assets divided by the Actuarial
Accrued Liability, expressed as a percentage. The Funded Ratio and the UAAL provide one way of
measuring the financial health of a pension plan.
New GASB Standards
Beginning wilh the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014, GASB 25 was replaced with GASB
Statement No. 67 ("GASB 67"), and GASB 27 will be replaced with GASB Statement No 68 beginning
with the fiscal year ending December 31, 2015 ("GASB 68" and, together wilh GASB 67, the "New
GASB Standards"). Unlike the Prior GASB Standards, the New GASB Standards do nol establish
approaches to funding pension plans. Instead, the New GASB Standards provide standards solely for
financial reporting and accounting related to pension plans The New GASB Standards require
calculation and disclosure of a "Net Pension Liabilily," which is the difference between the acluarial
present value of projected benefit paymenis lhat is attributed lo past periods of employee service
calculated pursuant to the methods and assumplions set forth in the New GASB Standards (referred to in
such statements as the "Total Pension Liability") and the fair market value oflhe pension plan's assels
(referred to as the "Fiduciary Nel Position"). This concept is similar lo the UAAL, which was calculated
under the Prior GASB Standards, but most likely will differ from the UAAL on any calculation dale
because the Fiduciary Net Position is calculated at fair market value and because ofthe differences m the
manner of calculating the Total Pension Liability as compared lo the Actuarial Accrued Liability under
the Prior GASB Standards
Furthermore, the New GASB Standards employ a rate, referred lo in such staiemenls as the
"Discount Rate," which is used to discount projected benefit paymenis lo iheir actuarial preseni values
The Discount Rate may be a blended rate comprised of (I) a long-term expected rate of return on a
Retirement Fund's inveslments (lo the extent lhal such assets are projecled to be sufficient lo pay
benefits), and (2) a tax-exempt municipal bond rate meeting certain siKcifications sel forth in the Ne\v
GASB Standards Therefore, in certain cases in which Ihe assets of a Retirement Fund arc not expected lo
be sufficient to pay the projecled benefits ofsuch Retirement Fund, the Discount Rate calculaled pursuant
to the New GASB Standards may differ from ihe assumed invesimenl rale ol" relurn used in reporting
pursuanl lo Ihe Prior GASB Standards.

E-12

 Finally, the New GASB Standards require lhal Ihe Nel Pension Liabilily be disclosed in the noles
lo the financial statements of the pension system and that a proportionate share of the Nel Pension
Liability be recognized on the balance sheets ofthe employer In addition, the New GASB Standards
require an expense (the "Pension Expense") to be recognized on the income statemeni ofthe City. The
recognition ofthe Net Pension Liability and the Pension Expense do nol measure the manner in which a
Retirement Fund is funded and therefore do not confiict with the various manners of funding the
Retirement Funds described in this Appendix.
As stated above, GASB 67 was first applied with respect lo the Acluarial Valuation for the fiscal
year ended December 31, 2014 The City expects lhat the New GASB Standards may significantly alter
thefinancialsialements produced by the City. For example, the Retirement Funds disclosed a combined
Net Pension Liability of $22 1 billion as of December 31, 2014, which will impaci the City's balance
sheet in future years. However, because the City contributes to the Retirement Funds pursuanl to the
melhods eslablished in the Pension Code, the New GASB Sialements will not malerially impaci the
contribulions made by the City without legislative aclion.
City "s Contributions Not Related to GASB Standards
The Cily's contributions to the Retirement Funds are not based on the contribution calculations
promulgated by GASB for reporting purpo.ses. Instead, the City's contributions are calculaled pursuant to
the formulas established m the Pension Code. Sec "— Delerminalion ofCity's Contributions" above.
'The methods for conlribuiing lo the Rciircmenl Funds set forth in the Pension Code do nol
conform lo the manner of funding established by the Prior GASB Standards which funding was based on
the Actuarially Required Conlribution. The difference between the City's actual contributions and the
Actuarially Required Contribution (as calculated by the Retirement Funds' actuaries) for fiscal years
2005-2014 IS shown in 'TABLE 4—"Information Regarding Cily's Contributions—Aggregated" below
Each Retirement Fund's Actuarially Required Contribution is equal to its Normal Cost plus an
amortization of the Retirement Funds' UAAL over a 30-year period MEABF, LABF and FABF
amortize the UAAL on a level dollar basis, whereas PABF amortizes the UAAL on a level percent of
payroll basis. P.A. 98-641 requires amortization for LABF and MEABF on a level percent of payroll
basis. Both methods of calculating the Actuarially Required Contribution were acceptable under the Prior
GASB Standards
Furthermore, beginning in 2016 with respect to PABF and FABF under the P.A 96-1495
Funding Plan and not later than 2021 wilh respect lo MEABF and LABF under the P A 98-641 Funding
Plan, the City will conlnbule an actuarially determined amount, as opposed lo Ihe current, non-acluarial,
multiplier-based approach, as set forth in the Pension Code. The P.A. 96-1495 Funding Plan and the P A.
98-641 Funding Plan differ from the manner of calculation required by the Prior GASB Standards for
financial reporting purposes, primarily because ihe goal ofsuch funding plans is to reach a Funded Ralio
in the respective Retirement Funds of 90 percenl whereas the Prior GASB Standards required the
Retirement Funds to amortize the UAAL towards attainment of a 100 percenl Funded Ratio.
'fhe New GASB Standards do not require calculation of an Actuarially Required Contribution
Actuarial Methods
fhe Retirement Funds" actuaries employ a variely of actuarial melhods lo arrive al the pension
Statistics required by the Prior GASB Standards and the New GASB Standards Ccrlain of these methods
arc discussed in the follDwinii sections

E-13

 Actuarial Value of Assets
Under the Prior GASB Standards, the Retirement Funds calculate their respective Acluarial Value
of Assels by smooihing invesimenl gams and losses over a period of five years, a method of valuation
referred to as the "Asset Smoothing Method." Under the Asset Smooihing Method, the Retirement Funds
recognize in the currenl year 20 percent ofthe investmeni gain or loss realized in that year and each ofthe
previous four years. The A.sset Smoothing Method was an allowable method of calculating the Acluarial
Value of Assets under the Prior GASB Standards.
'The Asset Smoothing Method lessens the immediate impaci of market fiuctualions on the
Actuarial Value of Assets, which is used to calculate the UAAL and the Funded Ratio, that may otherwise
occur as a result of market volatility. However, asset smoothing delays recognition of gains and losses,
thereby providing an Actuarial Value of Assels lhal differs from the market value of pension plan assets
at the time of measurement. As a result, presenting the Actuarial Value of Assets as determined under the
Asset Smoothing Method might provide a more or less favorable presentation of the current financial
position of a pension plan than would a method lhal recognizes investment gains and losses annually.
As described above, under the New GASB Standards, the Fiduciary' Nel Position is equal lo the
fair market value of a pension plan's assets as ofthe date of determination. As such, the As.set Smoothing
Method docs not apply to the determination of the Fiduciary Net Position under the New GASB
Standards
Table 3 provides a comparison ofthe assets oflhe Retirement Funds (as aggregated) on a fair
value basis and after application ofthe Asset Smoothing Method.
TABLE 3 - ACTUARIAL VALUE OF ASSETS VS. FAIR VALUE OF NET ASSE I S AGGREGATED'"
Fiscal
Year
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Source

(1)
(2)

Actuarial Value
of Assets'^'
$13,086,060
13,435,692
14,254,816
13,797,344
13,051,349
12,449,863
11,521,138
10,531,447
10,513,564
10,339,208

Fair Value of
Net Assets
$13,245,445
14,164,347
14,595,514
9,844,339
10,876,846
11,408,555
10,536,135
10,799,603
11,261,254
10,665,597

Actuarial Value as
a Percentage of
Fair Value
98 80%
94 86
97.67
140.16
119 99
109.13
109.35
97.52
93.36
96 94

2005 ihrough 2010 dala is fioiii the Actuarial V.ilujlions oflhe Retiremenl Funds as of Occcnihcr 31, 2010, and from
Ihe Fund CAFRs for Ihe llscal year ended December 31, 2010 Data from 2UI I through 2014 is from the Acluarial
Vakialions oflhe Retiremenl funds I'or the fiscal yeais 201 1 ihrough 2014
In thousands ofdollars Data is presented in the aggregate for the Retirement Funds
The Actuarial Value of Assets is calcultiled thiough use of the Asset Smoothing Method

Acluarial Accrued Liability
As the I'lnal slep in the calculation of actuarial liabilities, the actuary applies a cosl method to
allocate the total value of benefits lo past, present and lulure periods ol employee service 'fhis allocation

E-14

 IS accomplished by the development oflhe Actuarial Accrued Liabilily and Ihe Normal Cosl under the
Prior GASB Standards and the Pension Code and the fotal Pension Liability under the New GASB
Standards Currently, all of the Retirement Funds use the entry age normal actuarial co.sl method (the
"EAN Method") with cosls allocated on the basis of earnings fhe EAN Method was an approved
actuarial cosl method under the Prior GASB Standards and is the only allowable actuarial cosl method
under the New GASB Standards
Under the EAN Method, the present value of each employee's projected pension is assumed lo be
funded by annual installments equal to a level percentage of the employee's earnings for each year
between entry age and assumed exit age. Each employee's Normal Cosl, as calculated pursuant lo the
Prior GASB Standards, for the current year is equal to Ihe portion of the value so delermined, assigned to
the current year Therefore, the Normal Cost for the plan for the year is the sum of the Normal Costs of
all employees.
P.A. 96-1495 requires that, beginning in 2016, PABF and FABF calculate the Actuanal Accrued
Liability pursuant lo the projected unit credit actuarial cost method (the "PUC Method"). Under the PUC
Method, Normal Cost represents the actuarial preseni value ofthal portion of an employee's projected
benefit lhal is attributable to service in the current year, based on future compensation projected to
retirement. Under this method, the Actuarial Accrued Liability equals the acluarial preseni value of that
portion of a member's projected benefit that is attributable to service to date, again, on the basis of future
compensation projected lo retirement.
Under either cost method, the Actuarial Accrued Liability is the portion of the present value of
benefits assigned by the cosl method lo years of service up lo the valuation dale, i.e., for pasl service
This value changes as the employee's salary changes and years of service increase, and as some
employees leave and new employees are hired. Future Normal Cost is the portion ofthe present value of
benefits assigned to future years of service and is assumed lo be funded annually.
As compared lo the EAN Method, the PUC Method will produce a more back-loaded growlh in
liabilities because the PUC Method allocates a higher portion of relirement costs closer to the time of
retirement. Therefore, the PUC Method results in a slower accumulation of assets, which in turn requires
smaller initial, and larger future, contributions (assuming funding is actuarially based, as under the PA.
96-1495 Funding Plan and under P.A 98-641). Deferring contributions in this manner increases the cosl
ofthe liabilities and the associated financial risks for PABF and FABF
Actuarial Assumptions
The Actuarial Valuations of the Retirement Funds use a variely of assumplions in order lo
calculate the .statistics required by the Prior GASB Standards and the New GASB Standards Although
several of Ihe assumptions arc Ihc same across all of the Retirement Funds, each Retirement Fund
determines, within actuarial standards, the assumptions to be used in ils Actuarial Valuation unless a
specific assumplion is fixed by Ihe Pension Code No assurance can be given that any ofthe assumptions
underlying the Actuarial Valuations will refiecl ihe aclual results experienced by the Retiremenl Funds
Variances between the assumplions and actual results may cause increases or decreases in the staiislics
calculated pursuant to the Prior GASB Standards or the New GASB Standards Additional information
on each Retirement Fund's actuarial a.ssumptions is available in Ihc respective 2014 .Actuarial Valuations
oflhe Retirement Funds See "—Source Informafion" above
The actuarial assumplions used by the Retirement Fund^ are determined by the individual
Retirement Fund Boards upon the advice oflhe acluary for each Relirement Fund Board Jhe Retiremenl
Funds periodically perform experience studies lo evaluate the actuarial assumplions in u.se 'The purpcsc

E-15

 of an experience study is lo validate lhal the actuarial assumptions used in the Acluarial Valuation
conlinue to reasonably estimate the actual experience of the pension plan or, if necessary, to develop
recommendations for modifications to the actuarial assumplions to ensure their continuing
appropriateness.
Assumed Investment Rate of Return
The Actuarial Valuations assume an investment rate of relurn on the assets in each Retirement
Fund. The average long-term investment rates of return currenlly assumed by the Retirement Funds are
described in Table 2 above. Due lo the volalilily oflhe marketplace, however, the aclual rale of return
earned by the Retirement Funds on their assets in any year may be higher or lower than the assumed rate.
Changes in the Relirement Funds' assets as a result of market performance will lead to an increase or
decrease in the UAAL and the Funded Ratio As a resull of the Retirement Funds' use of the A.sset
Smoothing Method, however, only a portion of these increases or decreases will be recognized in the
currenl year, with the remaining gain or loss spread over the remaining four years See "—Actuarial
Methods—Actuarial Value of Assets" above.
The assumed investment rate of return is used by each Relirement Fund's actuary as the discount
rate to determine the present value of fijture payments to such Retirement Fund's members. Such a
determination is part of the actuary's process to develop the Actuarial Accrued Liability under the Prior
GASB Standards. Reducing the assumed investment rate of return will, laken independently of other
changes, produce a larger Actuarial Accrued Liability for each Retirement Fund. Furthermore, as
discussed above, an increase in the Actuarial Accrued Liability will, taken independenlly, increase the
UAAL, decrease the Funded Ratio and increa.se the Actuarially Required Conlnbution.
Under the New GASB Standards, each Relirement Fund's actuary will calculate the Discount
Rate, as described under "—Actuarial Valuation" above, a reduction in which will, laken independently
of olher factors, produce a larger Total Pension Liability for each Retirement Fund. Information
regarding the DLscounl Rate and the sensitivity of the Tolal Pension Liabilily to changes in the Discount
Rate is provided below in Table 12
Beginning with calendar year 2012, the Relirement Fund Boards ofMEABF, LABF and PABF
reduced the assumed investment rale of relurn lo be used by their respective actuaries in preparing future
actuarial valuations. For MEABF and LABF, the assumed investment rate of relurn has been decreased
lo 7 50 percenl beginning wilh calendar year 2012 For PABF, the assumed investment rate of return was
decreased to 7.75 percent for calendar year 2012 and to 7 50 percent for calendar year 2014. FABF
continues lo assume an investment rate of relurn of 8.0 percent. For a discussion oflhe rate lo be used by
Moody's in analyzing public pension plans, see "—Impact of Retirement Funds' Unfunded Liability on
the Cily's Bond Ratings" below.
These changes lo the assumed invesimenl rate of relurn will nol impact conlnbutions by the City
to Relirement Funds when such coninbuiions are delermined pursuanl lo ihc Multiplier Funding Syslem.
However, beginning in 2016 with respect to PABF and no later than 2021 with respect lo MEABF and
LABF, when P.A 96-1495 and PA 98-641, respectively, become effective and the City contributes lo
the Retirement Funds un an actuarial basis, such changes in the assumed investment rale of return will,
laken independently of olher fads, increase the Cily"s coninbuiions lo such Rciircmenl Funds because ihe
respective UAALs of PABF, LABF and MEABF will increase as described above and the P A 96-1495
Funding Plan and the PA. 98-641 Funding Plan require an amortization of llie UAAl. to reach a 90
percenl funding target by 2040 and 2054, respeclively

E-16

 Funded Status ofthe Retirement Funds
In recent years, the Cily has coniributed to the Relirement Funds the full amounl of Multiplier
Funding and certain other amounts determined by the City lo be required by the Pension Code Ihrough a
combination of property tax revenues (through the Pension Levy) and PPRT funds. However, these
amounis have not been sufficient to fully fund the Relirement Funds' Actuarially Required Contributions
Moreover, expenses related to the Health Plan (as defined below) arc paid from the Cily's contributions,
which has the effect of reducing the Actuarial Value of Assets and decreasing the Funded Ratio.
Furthermore, the income from all sources (including employee contributions. City contributions
and investment earnings) to the Retirement Funds has been lower than the cash outlays ofthe Retirement
Funds in some recent years. As a result, the Retiremenl Funds have liquidated inveslments and used
assets ofthe Retiremenl Funds lo satisfy these cash outlays. The use of investmeni earnings or assels of
the Retirement Funds for these purposes reduces the amount of assets on hand to pay benefits in the future
and prevents the Retirement Funds from recognizing the full benefits of compounding investment returns
Table 4 provides information on the Actuarially Required Contribution, the Cily's actual
contributions in accordance wilh the Pension Code and the percenlage of ihe Acluarially Required
Contnbution made in each year.

As discussed under"— UelermmalKm of Cily's Conlribiilion.s ' above, ihc Citv and I'Alil- ha\ e disagreed ovci whether cerliun
amoimt'; are reijuired under the Pension Code
In addition, puisuanl lo the I'ciiMon Code ihe Cily did not make any
contnbtiiioiis to LABF in fiscal years 2001 Ihrough 200ft because LABF had funds on hand in excess of lis liabilities
flie
Pension Code piovides lhat Ihe Cilv u i l l cease to make coninbuiions to LABI" in such a situation fhe Ciiy continued to make
conlnbuliun.s lo the nlher Reliiemenl funds dui ini; Ihose veais

i;-i7

 TABLE 4 - INFOR.VIATION REGARDING CITY'S C O M RIBU I IONS'"-AGGREGATED

Fiscal
Year
2005
2006
2007"'
2008'"''
2009''"
2010''"
2011'""
2012''"
2013'""
2014'-'*
Sources

(1)

(2)
(3)

(4)

Actuarially
Required
Contribution
$ 698,185
785,111
865,776
886,215
990,381
1,112,626
1,321,823
1,470,905
1,695,278
1,740,973

Actual Employer
Contribution'^'
$423,515
394,899
395,483
416,130
423,929
425,552
416,693
440,120
442,970
447,400

Percentage of
Actuarially
Required
Contribution
Contributed''
60.7%
50 3
45 7
47.0
42 8
38 2
31 5
29 9
26.1
25 7

Actuarial Valuations o f t h e Relirement Funds as o f December 3 1 , 2010, December 3 1 , 2011, December 3 1 , 2012,
December 3 1 , 2013. and December 31, 2014. the Fund CAFRs for the llscal year ended December 3 1 , 2010, and the
City CAFRs for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2011, December 31, 2012 and December 31. 2013
In ihousands ofdollars Data is presented in the aggregate for ihc Retirement Funds and u.ses a.ssumptions and melhods
employed by each o f t h e Retirement l-'unds For the dala presented as o f December 31. 2005 and December 3 1 , 2006,
contribution mformalion includes amounts related to olher post-employment benefits Beginning in 2007, as a result o f
a change in GASB standards, contribution information is presented exclusive o f amounts related lo olher postemployment benefits.
Includes the portion of Ihe PPR T contributed to the Retiremenl P'unds in each year
The estimated multipliers lhal would have been necessary for FABF, L A B I ' and PABF to make the full Actuarially
Required Conlribution in 2014 were as follows 7 98 for FABF. 4 ((7 for L A B F . and 7 94 lor PABF The estimated
multiplier that would have been necessary for M E A B F to make the full Actuarially Required Contribution in 2014 has
nol been publicly disclosed, however the necessary contribution multiple for 2013 was 4 52 Beginning in 2016, the
City's conlnbutions to PABF and FABF will nol be calculaled in accordance with the Multiplier Funding syslem
Pur.suant to P A 98-641, the City's contributions to L A B F and MIZABF will nol be calculaled in accordance with ihe
Multiplier Funding syslem beginning in 2021 See "—Delerminalion o f C i t y s Contributions" above
Beginning in 2006, as a result o f a change in GASB .standards, the mformalion in ihis Table 4 does nol include olher
post-employment benefits, which the Cily's Compiehensive Annual I'lnancial Repoit presents separately

PABF changed certain actuarial a.ssumptions beginning wilh the fiscal year ended December 31,
2014 Specifically, PABF reduced its assumed investment rate of relurn from 7.75 percent lo 7.50 percent
and changed the mortality table used by its actuary to RP-2014, which projects longer lives for PABF
members Considered independently of olher factors, these changes increased the GASB 25 Actuarial
Accrued Liability, and, as a result, increased PABF's U A A L and Actuarially Required Conlribulion
With respect lo the City's 2017 contribution to PABF', these changes arc expected to result in an
addilional contribution of $62 million.
The continued decline m the percentage oflhe Acluarially
the City, as shown in 'Table 4 above, results, in pari, from the fact
grow due lo Ihc delayed recognition of gains and losses resulting
Asset Smoothing Method for financial reporting purposes under
Actuanal Methods—Value of Assets'' above.

Required Contribution contributed by
that the acluarial liabilily continues lo
from the Rciircmenl Funds' use ofthe
the Prior GASB Standards Sec " —

'The following tables summarize the financial condition and the I'undmg trends uflhe Retiieincnt
Funds

E-18

 (-si oo
r-

cr
r-i
—

r-\
r'^
tn

oc
*f-\
—

f^r
>3
n
I-l
oc
r-l

rl
o
r~r-~- r-l

r-l
cr\

O
r-*

<r\

r\

oo

tr
rr

—

30
rj
oo

C3

T
—
r-

o

-£3

vo

r~-

m
n-

'n

r-l
C7\

<n

f*^

—
C^

O

. ^.

rr
—

— —

m

oo

O
ri

f-;
I— t--

^,
TT

3>
-r

ri

o

c:

f-^. ^

•£

(-1 r*,

—
—

ri
O
cc

—
oo
sD

0\
t^i
Cri

rr-.
<N

O
-t
r--

o

m

vC

oo
r-l
oo

m
cr>
rr-,

^

O

—

C

f3 C3

is c
O

O

\0

o

n*

r4

o

D

3o

-

<

a.
^

LU

c ^

c

9- 3
-3

— oo (N
sO

OS

o'
TT

O <n
—I
o
i~i a

cfl

ri U <

OO CT^ 'vO

o" 1^' oo'
*r\
tr— — r-

-t'

r*^

rM
\G

oo
O'

II

^

U

T '

; .? 2-

o

r.

G <M <
Q (/) c/D

^

O < o
U >- H

r~-.

1^

rn

—

ro

^

—
rr

r-l
rO

O".
rn

-o

r-l CO
O
I/-. —
o\ rn
. , v o =0
r-\c

^

—
^
'n
ri
1"
•£>

rn
—
t~-

o

-T

c
if

r~
''^

n
^

u
'J
I

^

UU

n "
. r-

^ U 52,

\0
•rr

_

'n
oo

oo

t
^
r--. r-;

^
ri

oo' 'A oc

vo
C7^

r~
Gv^ 0 _

CO
—

—
(7^

Ov r*r *'->

I

•as
<?
NC

O l -i3
'•'^ <~sl

n

TT

n

—
—
crv" o" V VC
-r

r-

—• — r-

^,

-5

K
-

S -il >.
< 3
i

--'

•5
ri

r-l

n

o

r-l

O

^

z
LJJ U

J=

^:

>>_
> < s ;i
CO

o

1^ <

I i - <<

a

tJ

-5 -3
tr,

-J

?^

L.

-.5
g
..
^ iC ^
= "S
— .< j2 o _i

rn

O

3 ^ ^
U -5 -

J3

'-'

<

_

o

 vo

—

O

— o^ oo oo s i

m
O-

Cv
r-l
rn

rJ

oo

=C

*0

r-

TT

Ol O^ c
oc r i '•'^
oe
—

ov -f.
o c O^
OO rv)

=o

r-

'—

V V r-i o JT;

'/•i r n r-- oo OJ

rn

ao o-

O oi^ p
rn o "

oi_
r-'

O

oo - o

m
OV

^

Ol
oo

C7-. (jv
r^. CO J!^

m
1^

oo' —' o ' oi"
-rr
—

r i

ri
r^_
oo"
Ov

r-l

vO

-rf

r i -r* o
"/^ vo —
m' r n
oo m

O

*"n
oo

O
0\_

m" o

v£> vo'

O
ov

'/^
O-

v D >/l
OO O

T
TT

Ol
Ol

TT

^0

Tt
—

Ol
vo

° s s

t-^
O-

T - '^'r '"\ *-!.
r n Ov vO O

<

oo ' / ^
oo m o*
TT

m ^
•n
o o

r- —
oo o
rn —

30
—
r-

O"
O-

O'
—
Ol

- C CJ CO

a> a e

3 5* Q.

—
Ov
"T

E ^ «
00
Ti-

o
o

^

'/^

ce

ov

OJ

r- o

Ol

5o

<

Ol

a
•=
0
•2
c

r n oc «jn Tf

o

Z

Q

z
o
u
<
u
z
<
z

vo o . o
o r t o vo
rg 'r% o —

3

0 TT so •rr
01 r - r~-

1§ a

o

X
EZ

rr

oc

-a =
c J!
•£ E
S <2
2 I

UJ

.1 I .i

^

'•a £
o
o

oo

~

oo
rl

r n oo O
Ov r - -rr

<—I

— o

r-- oo

m
Ol
-r'

oo
oo
r^

Ol
Ol
oc

oo
ov_
rn

Q

S

H -o .2
c " E

-

!"§ 2

I

•-o

—
^

"n r7>
o
\ 0 oo r- r-^

Ui

-1

—
<?

tr.
«

o

ao
r-l

tf

33 o

o- 5

5
< -s

i

Ov
Ov r n - T
ov_ o-^ r—^
r n r-' r n

o
—
—
a<"
oo

—
—
cv
r-'
r—

0\
oo
'n
—
vo

Ol
rn

rrn

Tt
—
Ov
rn

ri
Ol
Or-

O
o
vo
rn

I-

5 -   -a
-5 v5 S
c 5J o
2 S >.
'O
O

r-j
_

t—
_

so
O
oo
rn

li

—

~

"

2

is

O LA.

^

^

< ~ -2
a £
y < i 5-5.3
!= T;
«i
v.

3 -S

-

>
5

<

C , ^ ?=

p

(5 -s
ci. >.. i i

y

c

~

\^
of)
c

^ ^

c F ^" i

>

E
^

3
i-ll

P

"

<

X:"

T=

<

<* S E

7^ ^.

^'

^5 c

:^ H

=2

3
J

 vc

oc

'n

o

VC

O

oc

CO
oc

0
01
rf

o
ri
ri_
vo

o
rn
o
' n •—•
o*

oc

TT

'1

•/n

O

oo

Ol

ri

o

oo
Ol

Ol
—

r'n

r-l —.
f-n o "
C3v r i
^. O

rr-'
oc
ov

CO
vo'

ri

O

•'^

—
^
—
—'

—
*n
oo
rn

-r

rn

'o

—
o

oc

r-

r-

oc

vO

o

:i.
qO ,^
'1
cc

<jn
ac^
Ol*

r-^
rt

O

:

ri

A ^
oc '/^ oo \0
C.
-a- 'O,
—
—

UJ

UH

O
Z

o
a
z
o
u

•/^

o

_

o

Z

rJ

<

vo

o Tj- rn r~
oo -r Ov o
-a- r- o —

oc "~

O
X

y <z
z u

rr

oo oo

r-l
—
—'

-rr

Tj

o
oo
od

vTP
—

-r

I
rU)

vo_ tin
r n r^'

— oo T .
m n Ov

o

rl
Ov

iO
oo'

—
r-'

\C
Cv

—

m

OJ

Ol

•n Cv VO rr vO
Ov
vo
»rl
rn
m
—.'

o

vo
Ol
—'
—
fi
rn

or-'
Ov
fi
o)

r3 - O

rwn
'/^'
oo*
—'

Ov

TT ov -r o- oo

~. ^.
n

ri

r-

TT

5 c.'
oo

ca £
< -S

o

-CT'

OC

^C*

-£>

oc

o-

rn
r t

rfn
O^

oOl

CO
r-l

3

r:

^

E
o

d C ^ ^
c

E —^

^

•<
I £

o% Ol rr Ol
-T — vo vo^

<

E

: .0 J.

-T
Ol

Z -S 1=

IJ-

^

c c
5 n H

-£

_i3

o

."r

 $1,457,

o

vO'

rn
Ov
rn

Ol

</-)
Tt

rn
Ov

c

Tt
Tt
r n

o

,

Tt

o\
vo'

O
vO

-r

oc

Tt

o

rn

Oi

-r

r i

Tt

Os
vO"
*T

Ol

—'
TT
OI

r-'
o cv

Cv
O
rg^

»ri
Tf

•n vo
TT
OJ
r-_
Ol"
Tt

TT

m
r-"

Tt

T
m
-r
-r
o

oc'
oc

Ol
Tt

Ol

'

c

TT" m

•ri
rn

o-

vO
r j
oo

OC

Ti

OS
Ol

ri
Ov

Ov

r l

m

rn
vo* 'r^

Cv_
VO*
Ol

-r"

Ol

TT
Ov

ov

vo" r n
r-l

r*Ol

o"
T t

r<

rf

r- T t • J v O l «o
CO
rOl
-z> o^
scT 'rT o"
rn
so
rOl
n
Cs
m
oT

—' —

Ov
vo

•f,
Ov"

r-

of

oo

rn

O

Ol

rn

CC

m

m*

Tt

r n

rn
•n
oo^
rn

•n

r-*

r1

C
>C_
rn

o

TT
30

\6 -r or^'

rn

oc
m
o oo

ri
ri

rn
'n

SIO"

<n

Tt

o

•o

rn
m

TT

-*
Ol
Ol
Tt

—

TT

•oo
m
r 1*
•n

O
o
'<n rr
Ol

-+

rn

rn

c " o"
oo

of
1^
6*»

u.
ca
<

oc

o

Ol
Ov

OJ

OJ

^o

rn
n

OV
m

r-

vo

oo

rn C v

-r

Ov
OJ

TT

n"
Ov

Tt

vo

OJ

o^

Tt
VO

OO

ov r n

P-'
Ol

ri

rn
m

'-i

" S; E

ri

Tt

o

Tt
OS
04

Tt

vn
O l

Ol

00^
-o
o*
o Ol* o
rn
o '<n
o_ vo

o ^

C

Oj"

z
o

o

oo
>n
oo
oo

oo
m
un

o

Ol

,

cv O

o

r-

oo

oo
rn" r n

rn

p*-*
rn
Ol

'r>
vO

Ol

Kn

i A

Ol

OO
o l

oo
T t
P-"
Ol

Ol

m
m

>n
ri
O

c
-<T

'n'
oOv_

ri
oo
rj*
r t
SO

<

o-

Os

o

m
vo

un

1.782.

Tr_

ov*

r-' o '

1,739,660

CO

m

,

vo

-r

rn

r~-'

TT^

rn
r-l
O

rn

r-.
r-

oo

o"

oc
oo

OJ

•n

TT
OG

r-

O

o

Ol

•X

irT

ov
•r\

Ol

rl

vO

w->
m

Ol"

rn

Ov
Ov_
'il

OJ

Tt
Ol
r n

oo*

'jn

i n

•fee*'
O -5 S

r*-

rn

H-g I

m
~t

ov
oo^
r-^ vO*
vc"
Ol

e3
O

y v;

^

I

o 3

rs 

•n

oc
oo
ri
oc

Ov
OJ

r-"

( A

l A

o

r~
r-

E

Tt
OC

Tt
»r>
o  

O0_

r-

I

£ S £

'i s

so

T I-

^ I -2

V J

l/l

w»
U-1
Tt

r-

o

Ov
rn
rt'

bO

oo
oo

u.

r-i

r j

^" — —

o Z
r^ <

J Z
U < Z U ^

ov

90
Ov

o

r-

1.659.

<

f-

vo

vo
i-n
1.637.

u

\o
o

CO

r-

TT
vO*

,

•n
-It

r- o
OI_

v3

•'^

oo
r-'

t

m
m
-r
rn
c^

m
O
O

o"

m
OO

•n-

c

oe_

Ol

rj"

vo
ov

rn

oo

•r^
O.

Tt'
s o

Ol

oc
vq
vo

r-l
Ol

r-t

oo'
Ol

rn

o

s E a

Ol

•<n

o

•/-I

cv'

oi

-*

oc
M-*
r n

o

cv
r n
Ol'

o

i

Cv'
'O,

•n o
o- o
rn
""I
•n O l
m
•Ci

-rt

ov
'n

'n
O

1^1

c^

Ol^

o3

O

r~

>
=

•-_ "XT >

o _
— n

<

_J

— o

^ a: <
> <

"2
L.1 O —

i s

g- CC < '

-a

S < <

— w

o

^

CO : ~

o

 m
sO
c:

w,
r 1

iC

v

rr,

oc

t~^_

o

Tt

o

Cv
T

S>

vC
r 1

-r r- O J
-r - T "<n

X

m

ot

r-'

'J6

zo

O
o-_

rov
'O,

•o'
>C

*/>
T

.799,

rn
oc
r 1

>n
o^.

vO
T
TT_^

Os

-t

rf

'/I

•3c"
Tt
Tf

-

~

'n

<>•O

Ol

od

Ov

c"

Ov'

Ov
r-i^

CO

r^'
m
oc

of

—

—

ZiO

•r,
OI

•o
r n
•T,

r l

Ov
OJ

•n
o'

Q
W
Z

OO
vO

ov - t

VO
TT

r-

rn

o_

m

>ri
Ol^

vo
ot

3

'n
od'

OJ

•r>

ro_
'rC

rr
•ri

<n o

r n

o_

Ol

—

'n

•n
cv
rvj

OJ

r-l

1
O

oo"

o~

—

O l
•r\
- t

Tt
T
'O

Ov

O

Oo"

rn

rn

TT

~

'0

Cs

r-'
oc r i

o
o

-T

rn
Cv
Tr_

r^.

oc
TT
r~cv

rn

r 1

rn
Ol
vC

Ol

Cv

o*

-

fl

r J
Cv

TT
oo
O

rn

^o o

oc
vq

rr
T,

0-.

IO

o

O

Ol

m
cc
oc
Ov'
Ol

rn
OO

ri'
•ri

cc v. rn
OV

vq

sO^

—

—

•n oe oo
m m
p
vo'
rn O J o*
Ol
'n i n oo
o'
r-*

—

rn

O
vO

rn

so*

> o
O C
CO

.c

Ov
oo r-l
Ol

r-'

vo*

Ol

(/I

r t

•n
o-^

VO
Tt

oe

••o

Ov"
cv
ri

r<
»

z

oo
sO
vO^

Tt

o*

Cs
-t

O-

rs"
rn

rn
-T
VO^

•-n

»n
•n
V)

m
oc r-

vo

ed

Ov'
Tt

VO
Ol
O-

Ol^

OO*

O

CV
Os'

rt.
Ol*

—

—

~

Ol

oo

vO

•ri
OO
Ol

-r

• « "•
9.844.3

— o
H ri

CAl

S
Q
=<§Z
M
3

<
CAI CA!

UH

-< O

o
Z=^

rn »n
r-_^ r 1

ov.

H
Z

•n

' O

rn
oc

•n
TT
rn

' A
Ol
»ri

OV

TT

rJ*

V*

Tt

' O

rn

•n
•n
ov

OO

VO

o*
cv

O i

'>1

OJ

•n

vO

r t

p
r-'
It

3"
r-» vo
vC
OJ

Ol

vo"
r j

rn

- t

rn

o

O;

Tt

o- oo
oc

r- o
Ol

ov

Tt__

vo
Tt
oc
vo
ooo

o'

</s

o-

1

rt
vO_
so"

o

OI

oo

<=r
CV

TT
Ol
TT

Ov
t
m
'O

p

rn

•rT m"
rri
o- m
'rl

vO
ol

TT'

TT
OO

OV

S O

30
O
OO

ri
OS

Ov
iri
T TT ,
T

O

r i

Ov

r- cv
Ov
p.
T'
ol

rn

r i

5TD

O

cv

-o

c

-B

c

5 I'

-r'

bO

c

rn

m

'O,
Ol

rn

r-'

ov
orn

rn

OJ*
ov

P_

CN

OC
Cs_

I

orr-" TT"
-r

ot_

Cv
Ol

-T

O

OJ

'.A

o*

Q
Z

un
o-

Tt
r n

Ol

wn r-"
oc o
r 1 Tt

-t*
s£;

o
u

CD
s o
Ov^

'/n
oc

o^

C^'

r*.

o

r-i_

d

oo O
o
•n
OJ
Orn

'O,
rn

rr

rr
VI

•ri
OS
•r.
Tt

tA

-r

OO

-T
Tt_
-t
XI
r J

-T
r I

<

rn

r--

t>n

oo
rn

f i

~~

<-o

,

o

-T
vO

Tt

>ri

Ol

rJ-'

r-^
vc'

Tt
r i_

Ol
r l

of

~

W

sO
Ov
r

r j

-r
•of

-r

'Z

I

dE

m
'n
oc O l r-; rr
r r r n r-' ->2
'/"l
>n
r _
i vq ov
Ol
'1
od oo'
-O

cs
vo

-^'

r

'Ol
>ri

cV
TO

-5 j5

i_

1

uO

un

u
z

D.

oi_ ov

rn
Ol

^^
•
.

C
oo

»o

wo

o

•r.

Cv

V»

><n
O
co_^
oo* O
-r
Os

'r\

Q
Z

rr
vC
'/-I

oc
oc

VC

ty^

oi

'r>

C/D

O

=

w>

o
u

Os'
rf.

r i

(/*
*<n
m

o

vO
O
vO_

m"
vo

1

•n

Ov

r-r
r n
r J
T

n i
O
'ri^
rn"
Ov
CO

r t
Ol
OO

c-

ro_
oo

OTt
Tt
vO

Ol

'fi

ov oc
vq rr
•jn

m
rr_

rn
Cv

r-'
o

»n
m
oo
so

r-i

ol

r f

oc
rn

oc

•s o

Ol
W>

,

oTt
OI_

•iO

-T

'1

ori

O
rn

iri
-T

oc
r1

>o'
r i oo
p
rn

rr_

r 1

•a-

t/(

«n o
-r
oc r-

c

Ol'

n
r t"

r n

cc c c

<

S 5 g E •

0^

•> - 3

rt

~

H

ri

£ S S

C

c

ri ri
1»

ir.

O
C

C

3

C

^ — •^
— — o

t3

S

-*
CO
>

o

E

-.i

._,

c

^^^x:^ = y ^ .

=> .5
> —5
n
-.J i _
S > < B "

—

7

E
r j

-

V)

DO

OJJ
CJ

^

^

<

j ; v . r-

^ S ^

_

^

 O

— tn o

O

'/"I

oo r n o
o< o v£)
ov o r v j

fN

— o

o oo --^r'

o

o

Q

«
a.

z

(Act

<

o v r-l r- rrn 'n
>o
<J\ oo oo r v  
o l C ) CN r n r n

—'.

O O O N O O T t v O O v —

—

Ov

0 3 C - ^

t n r ^ o o o o — rn^v^^vJ»nrr*-l -Tt r n Tj- r— r~- o
'o —
o ' ' n o'^ o f Ov" —" r n o f o "
o o s O o o o o r - o o v o r N — •'-i>3
—^ —_^ —^ —_ r-\ c-\ r-i^ rn^
r-irnrnrnmmrnrnrnrn

z
U)

H

,0

CJJ-,

U.

2 CQ

Uj

8£
U

S-i 1.
ON cjv v£) r-.CTs^

m

H
OS

oc "jn

12

o

u o UJ

o I a:

t,
Q

"3 o .2

z 2

C

C/l

ii

O "

u

I
in
(A

O

K

= tsi
b.

»

=
u

^ ju 5
U. J3 •£
< n O
so m
o o

rn rn o

vO

vO

o

CO

vo

OJ

vO
Td-

»o

r i r n Tl>n
rn m rn

< o
. a

oi

m •n
r-

—
—

H
Z

«o r n r n
rsj O s " O

O
Z

<

Z

<

UH

Ol

r n •n"

Ov

sO"
ON

rn^

u-r v O "

Os.
OC
Os

o

ON ON
r n ON
ON

rn of
oc NO

Ol

Ov

cO

o

o

rn

ON

—r

—^

—"

•'^

c; m -i-

Ol

W
-J

rn O

vo" CJN

ON

^

•^^

Ol

<
—

rt

Ol

rr,

oc

OO —
O v r-~
'/^ Ol

rn
—
OJ

Ol
Ov
O

o

Ol

,564

rn
•n
o o

—'

P >, g I <
T3

CO

3.2 H

!!!

2

O

^

o -o V
S ^ i5

rn

i I
rt

>

C

O

— n

5 s s t " l "5

— ^^•
X —

c3

1»

(J
U
^

3

o

^

2 o
e3

>

C

5

—

^

o

rri

p

^

-

—
• "C
p ^

t/i

—

o
<

t--'

OV" C "

O

01

Ol

oc

Ov

O

—

r 1 rr,

r i

Ol

Ol

rs

oi

o o o o o
0 o o o o
r-t

—
o o

O"

— —
-cz- o
o
oi

ol

c;
Ll.

;5 =

(—

oo Ol oc

NC

^

§ ^t -oo— —1 ^>

E ^- g.
'/-I

^

-C
O
O

oo oo \C o

Ov

CJ)

Ol

oo r i r n v c
Os r n ON CN
O '/^
'n
rn O
Ol
"
ri

r-l

3 S

oo

,339,

r n og
r n rrj"
rn rn

oo oc
m

,513,

rt

> <

2

Ov
rvi vO
T3- NO
ov
vO^ oq r n r n oo
0
"
•o" T t ' O v
VI

,449,

3

o
sO
o

,051,

-H

' n r n Tj- r-

rj- ' n

rt" so' oo

rt"

.086.

of

rial

f

I

rj- Ov NO
rj- — m

"^t^ m 1/1 m oo 'n — vo OJ

•^NOON-^rr^ornovvovo
— ''^ ^ oc -rt^
r-^ oi^ vo^
Tj-" Tt" Ov" o " —" o o " — o "

Q
U

o

&0

o

_J

u

5a•

—

-d- ov. o o

•/-> o^^ ON

UH

J

u

NO

o l oo
oc ON^
rn
o_
(N
oo" -rr ov" rn oo' o f O v " oo"
ON
r n *n O v
r«o o
» 0 0O_ ON
Ov O l ^ O J r n
£ C oo* oo'
NO'ON o ON"

r-^

Q

oo

ON O s
OO v o
NO O l
ON Ov^ O J ^ OO

'n o
rn
co" oo' oo

o < as t/3 ^
a.

o

Is I
i 'i'

T *

>
J

= -o .2

 A variety of factors impact the Retirement Funds^ UAAL and Funded Ratio A lower return on
investment lhan that a.s.sumed by the Retirement Fund.s, and insufficient contributions when compared to
the Normal Cost plus interest will all cause an increase in the UAAL and a decrease in the Funded Ratio.
Conversely, higher returns on investment than assumed, and contributions in e.xcess of Normal Cost plus
inlerest will decrea.se the UAAL and increase the Funded Ratio. In addition, legislative amendment.s,
changes in acluarial assumptions and certain other factors (including, but not limited to, higher or lower
incidences of retirement, disability, in-service mortality, retiree niortality or terminations lhan assumed)
will have an impact on the UAAL and the Funded Ratio
Net Pension Liability and Discount Kate
As described in "—Actuarial Valuation—New GASB Standards" above, the New GASB Standards
require the calculation ofthe Net Pension Liability, which is the difference between the Total Pension
Liability and the Fiduciary Net Position. Furthermore, the Discount Rate is the blended rate at which the
actuaries oflhe Retirement Funds discount projected benefit payments to their acluarial present values.
The following tables present information on the Net Pension Liabilit>' and the components thereof and the
Discount Rale and the sensitivity of the Net Pension Liability to changes in the Discount Rate As
described m this Appendix, the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014 is the first fiscal year for which
GASB 67 IS effective and, as such, comparative historical information is not yet available wilh respect to
the information provided in these tables.
TABLE 11-NET PENSION LIABILITY
(S IN THOUSANDS)
Total Pension
Liiibility
MEABF
LABF
PABF
FABF
Total

$12,307,094
2,162,906
11,773,431
4,.512.760
.$30,756,191

Plan Net
Position
$5,179,486
1.388,093
3,062.014
1.036.008
$10,665,601

Net Pension
Liability
$7,127,608
774,813
8.711,417
3,476,752
$20,090,590

Plan Net Position as a
Percentage of Total
Pension Liability
42.09%
64.18
26.01
22.96
34.68%

.Source T I K Acliiaruil Valualions oTlln; Relirenieni I'unds Ibr ihe llse;il vear ended .kmc IVccmbei 31, 2014

 TABLE 12- SENSITIVITY OF NET PENSION LIABILITY TO CHANGES IN THE DISCOUNT
RATE(I)
1% Dccrea.se
MEABF
Discount Rate
Net Pension Liability
LABF
Discount Rale
Net Pension Liability
PABF
Discount Rate
Net Pension Liability
FABF
Discount Rate
Net Pen.sion Liability

Current

1 % Increase

6.50%
$8,511,386

7.50%
$7,127,608

8.50%
$5,955,121

6.24%
$1,013,951

7.24%
$774,813

8.24%
$572,792

6.15%
$10,123,094

7.15%
$8,711,416

8.15%
$7,524,224

6.60%
$3,963,803

7.60%
$3,476,752

8.60%
$3,060,757

Source Hie Actuarial Valualions oflhe Rctircmcnl Funds lor the I'l.scal year ended Oeccmbcr .11, 2014
(I) In thous.ands

Projection of Funded Status
The r<etirement Funds' funding level has decreased in recent years due to a combination of
factors, including, adverse market conditions and investment returns as a result of the financial
downturns experienced in 2001 and in 2008 and beyond, and contributions that are lower than ihe
Actuarially Required Contribution. With respect to MEABF and LABF, the funding level mcreased for
fiscal year 2014 as a result of the implementation of P.A 98-641.
The following projections (collectively, the "Projections") arc based upon numerous variables
that are subject to change. The Projections are forward-looking statements regarding future events based
on the Retirement Funds' actuarial assumplions and assumptions made regarding such future evenls,
including that there are no changes to the current legislative .structure and that all projccled contributions
to the Retirement Funds are made as required. No assurance can be given lhat these assumptions will be
realized or that actual events will not cause material changes to the data presented in this subsection
The Projections are based on dala as of December 31, 2014, and are provided lo indicate expected
trends in the funded status oflhe Retiremenl Funds under the applicable law. The Projections provided in
this section with rcspccl to MEABF combine pension and OPEB liabilities together in a single projection,
whereas the Projections included with rcspccl to the other Rciircmenl Funds exclude OPEB liabilities.
The Projections reflect PA. 96-1495 and P.A. 98-641. As described herein, P.A. 98-641 is presently
subject to legal challenge as to its constitutionality. For projections regarding MEABF and I.ABF under
the law in effect prior to the enactment of P A. 98-641, see "—Effect on MEABF and LABI- if P.A 98641 Found Unconstitutional" herein.

E-26

 l ABLE 13- PRO.IEC riON OF FUTURE FUNDING S L M US - .MEABF*"

Fiscal
Year

Acluarial
Accrued
Liability
(S)
(a)

Market
As-scts
(S)
(b)

2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040

512,623,220
12,944.628
13,288,088
13.634,558
13,991.2.37
14.346,358
14,697.099
15,040,872
15.377,568
15,704,963
16,032,289
16,.345.527
16.643,231
16,926,173
17,194,166
17,446,425
17,682,375
17,903,431
18,111,649
18,309.447
18,510,692
18,708,637
18,906,845
19,109,525
19.320,602
19,529,562

$5,099,126
5,040,865
5,093,774
5,222,804
5,435,586
5.649,839
5,862,858
6,071,971
6,277,293
6.476,772
6,679.887
6.872,954
7,055,253
7,228,381
7,393,218
7,550,013
7.699.294
7.843.902
7,987,600
8,134,674
8,300,829
8,481,310
8,681,906
8,908.258
9.170,030
9,456,586

Market
Unfunded Accrued
Actuarial Liabilities
(UAAL)

Markel
Funded
Ratio

($)

(%)

(a-b)

(b/a)

$7,524,094
7,903,763
8,194,314
8,411,754
8,555,651
8,696,519
8.834,241
8,968,901
9,100,275
9.228,191
9.352,402
9.472.573
9,587.978
9,697,792
9,800,948
9,896,412
9.983,081
10.059,529
10.124,049
10,174,773
10,209.863
10.227.327
10,224,939
10,201.267
10,150.572
10,072,976

40.4%
38.9
38.3
38.3
38.8
39.4
39.9
40.4
40.8
41.2
41.7
42.0
42.4
42.7
43.0
43.3
43.5
43.8
44.1
44.4
44.8
45.3
45.9
46.6
47.5
48.4

Source Actuarial Valuation ofMEABF as of December 31. 2014
(1) In thousands ofdollars Projections calculated on a cash basts
(2) Represents contributions expected lo be made by tlic Cily during thefiscalyear

L-27

Employer
Contribution'
(S)
$156,091
242,700
275,248
381,424
464,616
542,585
554,376
565,732
576,324
586,751
596,887
606.555
615,840
625,322
635,022
645,219
655.655
666,177
677,231
689,120
701,813
715,218
729,451
744,700
760,983
778,333

 l A B L E 14- P R O J E C T I O N O F F U T U R E FUNDING STATUS - LABF*"

Fiscal
Year
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040

(«)

Market
Assets
(S)
(b)

Market
l.lnfunded Accrued
Actuarial
Liabililies
(UAAL)
(S)
(a-b)

$2,145,052
2,175,622
2,208,991
2,231,152
2,273,671
2,304,497
2,333,490
2.360,554
2,385,406
2,407,534
2,429.710
2,449,606
2,466,633
2,480,723
2,491,848
2,500,071
2,505,962
2,510,086
2,513,040
2,515,720
2,518,676
2,522,349
2,527.430
2,534,183
2,542,950
2,554,422

$1,363,097
1,342,036
1,325,498
1,314,693
1,311,023
1,313,146
1,324,203
1,333.970
1,342,241
1,348,670
1,356,183
1,362,569
1,367,354
1,370,612
1,372,411
1,372,908
1,372,824
1,372,877
1,373,840
1,376.709
1,381,940
1,390,066
1,401.875
1,417,752
1,438,244
1,464,246

$781,955
833,586
883,493
916,459
962.648
991,351
1,009.287
1,026,584
1,043,165
1,058,864
1,073,527
1,087,037
1,099,279
1,110,111
1,119,437
1,127,163
1,133,138
1,137,209
1,139,200
1,139,011
1,136,736
1,132,283
1,125,555
1,116,431
1,104,706
1,090,176

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
(S)

Market
Funded
Ratio

(%)
(b/a)
63 5%
61.7
60 0
58 9
57 7
57 0
56.7
56.5
.56 3
56.0
55 8
55.6
55.4
55 3
55 1
54 9
54 8
54 7
.54 7
54 7
54.9
55.1
55 5
55.9
56 6
57 3

Source Actuarial Valuation ofLABF as of December 3 I , 2014
{1) In thousands ofdollars Projections calculated on a cash basis.
(2) Represents contributions expected to be made by the City during the fiscal year.

E-28

Employer
Contribution a)
(S)
$ 14,472
24,019
28,5.36
37,768
46.280
56.096
68,520
70,398
72,308
74,296
76,371
78,462
80.560
82,695
84,830
86,915
89,060
91,245
93,475
95,647
97,562
99,442
101,274
103,084
104.922
106,793

 ;rll)
TABLE 15— PROJECTION OF FUTURE FUNDING STATUS - FABI

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
Fiscal
Year

($)
(a)

Market
Assets
(S)
(b)

2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040

.$4,434,859
4,577,294
4,722,294
4,866.705
5,009.665
5,150,374
5,288,603
5,423,461
5,555,176
5,682,352
5,804,282
5,920.962
6,033,745
6,144,159
6,253,408
6,362.319
6,469.132
6,573,937
6,676,785
6,777,422
6,877,220
6.976,596
7,077,715
7,181.432
7,288,756
7.401,532

$1,109,401
1,2)7,224
1.331,697
1,451.676
1.577.203
1.708,420
1,845,600
1,989,064
2,141,193
2,301,929
2,471,585
2,650.813
2,840,666
3,043,394
3.259,857
3,491,000
3,734,518
3,990,843
4.261.086
4,545,008
4,844,498
5,160,943
5,497,989
5.858.397
6.244,911
6.661,361

Market
Unfunded Accrued
Actuarial Liabilities
(UAAL)
(S)
(a-b)
$3,325,458
3,360,070
3,390.597
3,415.029
3,432.462
3.441,954
3,443,003
3.434,397
3,413,983
3,380,423
3,332.697
3,270.149
3,193,079
3,100,765
2,993,551
2,871,319
2,7.34,614
2,583,094
2,415,699
2,232,414
2,032,722
1,815,653
1,579,726
1,323,035
1,043,845
740.171

Markel
I'undcd
Ratio

(%)
(b/a)
25.0%
26.6
28.2
29.8
31.5
33.2
34.9
36.7
38.5
40.5
42.6
44.8
47.1
49.5
52.1
54.9.
57.7
60.7
63.8
67.1
70.4
74.0
77.7
81.6
85.7
90.0

limployer
Contribution'^'
(S)
$109,813(3)
246.132
184,086
292.439
301.752
311.205
320.955
330,536
340.547
351.861
363.224
374.623
385,647
395,621
405,505
414,140
421,833
427,568
4.32.905
438,176
442,417
446,354
450,005
454.185
458.737
463,527

Source: The Actuarial Valuation of FABF as of December 31. 2014.

(-•)!

(I) In thousands of dollars Projections are calculated by GRS on an accrual basis Mowever. with respect to the
Employer Contribution column, the City has presented the dala based on the year the employer contribution is
actually made, rather lhan the preceding budget year
(2) Represents contributions expected to be made by the City during the fiscal year
The Cit>''s budaetod contribution for 2015 is $96,300 (rounded to thousands ofdollars)

E-2 9

 T A B L E 1 6 - PRO.IECTION O F F U T U R E FUNDING STATUS - P A B F ' "

Fiscal
Year

Actuarial
.Accrued
Liability
(S)
(a)

2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
203!
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040

$11.411,836
11,781,145
12,16.3,551
12,548,773
12.933.725
13,316.644
13,696.272
14,071,381
14,439,986
14,799.878
15,148.088
15,481.802
15,799.359
16.100,434
16.385,906
16,656.508
16.913.448
I7.L57,.54I
17,389,628
17,611,490
17,826,154
18,036,195
18,244,281
18,452.509
18.662.552
18,875.443

Market
Assels
(S)
(b)

Market
Unfunded Accrued
Acluarial Liabililies
(UAAL)
(S)
(a-b)

Market
Funded
Ratio
(%)
(h/a)

Employer
Contribution'^'
($)

.$3,278,525
3,572,979
3.889,364
4,219,011
4,560,317
4.914,566
5,281.951
5,663,586
6,059,763
6,470,260
6,895.984
7,337,188
7.795,756
8,273.986
8,777,064
9,311,291
9,882,460
10,492,841
11,140.748
11,825,203
12.551,460
13,323,888
14,148.326
15.030.205
15.974.830
16,987,488

$8,133,311
8,208,166
8,274,187
8,329,762
8,373.408
8,402,078
8,414,321
8,407,795
8,380,223
8,329,618
8,252,104
8,144,614
8,003,603
7,826,448
7,608.842
7,345,217
7.030.988
6.664.700
6.248,880
5,786,287
5,274,694
4,712,307
4,095,955
3,422,304
2,687,722
1,887,955

28.79
30.3
32.0
33.6
35.3
36.9
38.6
40.2
42.0
43.7
45.5
47.4
49.3
51.4
53.6
55.9
58.4
61.2
64.1
67.1
70.4
73.9
77.5
81.5
85.6
90.0

$187,815(3)
592,863
675,826
695,124
713,810
732,200
752,090
772,004
792,595
813,531
834.435
856,465
878,925
902,286
925,836
951,072
978.674
1,007.732
1,034.971
1,056,933
1,073,628
1,089,551
1.104,206
1,118,732
1,132.916
1,146,889

Source The Actuarial Valuation ofPABF as of December 31, 2014.
(1) In thousands ofdollars Projections are calculated by GRS on an accrual basis However, with respect to the
Hmployer Contribution column, the Cily has presented the data based on the year the employer contribution is
actually made, rather than Ihe preceding budget year
(2) Represents conlributionb expected to be made by the City during the llscal year
(3) The City's budgeted contribution for 2015 is $194,122 (rounded to thousands ofdollars)

E-30

  l)(2)

T A B L E 1 7 - P R O J E C T I O N OF F U I URE FUNDING S T A T U S - A G G R E G A T E '

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability

tVIarket
Assels

Fiscal
Year

($)

($)

(a)

(b)

Market
Unfunded .Accrued
Acluarial
Liabilities
(UAAL)
(S)
(a-b)

2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040

$30,614,967
31,478,689
32,382.924
33.281.188
34,208.298
35,117,873
36,015,464
36,896,268
37,758,136
38,594,727
39.414,369
40,197,897
40,942,968
41,651,489
42,325,328
42,965,323
43.570.917
44,144,995
44.691,102
45,214,079
45,732,742
46,243,777
46.756.271
47,277,649
47,814,860
48,360.959

$10,850,149
11,173,104
11,640,333
12,208,184
12,884,129
13,585.971
14,314,612
15,058,591
15,820,490
16,597,631
17,403,639
18,223,524
19,059,029
19,916,373
20,802,550
21.725,212
22,689,096
23,700,463
24,763,274
25,881,594
27,078,727
28,356,207
29,730,096
31,214,612
32,828.015
34,569,681

$19,764,818
20.305,585
20,742.591
21.073.004
21..324,169
21,531,902
21,700,852
21,837,677
21,937,646
21,997,096
22,010,730
21,974,373
21,883,939
21,735,116
21.522,778
21,240.111
20,881.821
20,444,532
19,927,828
19,332,485
18,654.015
17,887.570
17.026,175
16,063,037
14,986,845
13.791,278

iVIarkcl
Funded
Ralio
(b/a)

Employer
Contribution'
(S)

35.4%
35.5
35.9
36.7
.37.7
38.7
39.7
40.8
41.9
43.0
44.2
45.3
46.6
47.8
49.1
50.6
52.1
53.7
55.4
57.2
59.2
61.3
63.6
66.0
68.7
71.5

$468,191
1.105,714
1,163,696
1,406,755
1,526,458
1,642,086
1,695,941
1.738,670
1,781,774
1,826.439
1,870.917
1.916.105
1,960,972
2,005,924
2,051,193
2,097,346
2,145,222
2,192,722
2,238.582
2,279,876
2,315,420
2,350,565
2,384,936
2,420.701
2.4.57,558
2,495,542

(%)

Source The aggregated information presented in ihis table is derived from the pro CCltons presented in Tables 1316 Please refer lo fables 13-16 for source information
(1) In thousands ofdollars Projections for MCABF and LABF are calculated on a cash basis r^rojeclions for
PAliF and I'ADF are calculated on an accrual basis, however, with respect to the Employer Contribution
column, the City has presented the data based on the year the employer conlnbution is actually made, rather
lhan Ihe preceding budget year
(2) Aggregate data presented m this lable includes data for all four Retirement Funds
(3) Represents contributions expected to be made by the City dunng the fiscal year
The projections in Tables 15 and 16 show lhal Ihe assets of both FARF and PABF will, under
current law, begin to increase in 2016 This increase u.ssumes the implementation o f t h e PA 96-1495
Funding Plan. This projection does not consider the impact of any bill delaying the impaci of P A 961495, such as SB 777 See "—Delerminalion o f C i t y ' s Coninbuiions—City's Required Coninbuiions to
PABF and FABF Beginning in 2016" herein The City projects that, should such a delay bill he enacled,
the purpose ofsuch bill would be to alleviate the strain ofthe contributions currently projected lo occur
pursuant to P A 96-1495, which would most likely have the effect of delaying the increases in the

 Funded Ratio with respect lo such Retirement Funds during the period in which the contribulions
established pursuant to such delay bill are lower than those under P A. 96-1495 Sec "—Determination of
City's Contributions—Cilys Required Contribulions lo PABF' and FABF Beginning in 2016" herein
The statements iiiade in this subsection are based on projcclions, are forward-looking in nature
and are developed using assumptions and information currently available. Such statements are subject to
certain risks and uncertainties. The projections set forth in (his Appendix rely on information produced
by the Retirement Funds' independent actuaries (except where specifically noted otherwise) and were not
prepared with a view toward complying with the guidelines established by the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants with respect to prospective financial information, 'fhis information is not
fact and should not be relied upon as being necessarily indicative of future results Readers of this
Appendix arc cautioned not to place undue reliance on the prospective financial information. Neither the
Cily, the City's independenl auditors, nor any other independent accountants have compiled, examined, or
performed any procedures with respect lo the prospective financial information contained herein, nor have
Ihey expressed any opinion or any other form of assurance on such information or its achievabilily, and
assume no responsibility for, and disclaim any association with, the prospective financial information
Legislative Changes
P.A. 96-0889
On April 14, 2010, then Governor Quinn signed Public Act 96-0889 (the "Pension Reform Act")
inlo law. The Pension Reform Act establishes a "two-tier" benefit system with less generous benefits for
employees who become members ofMEABF and LABF on or afler January I , 2011 ("Tier II Members")
as compared to those provided to employees prior to such date ("Tier 1 Members") The Pension Reform
Acl does not impact persons who first became employees prior to its effective date of .lanuary 1, 2011
Among other changes, the Pension Reform Act (!) increa.ses the minimum age at which an
employee may retire wilh unreduced benefits lo age 67 from age 60 or younger based on a formula
combining the age ofthe employee and the number of years of service; (ii) increases the mininium age at
which an active employee may retire with reduced benefits to age 62 from age 50; (iii) provides that final
average salary is based on 96 consecutive months within the last 120 months of employment (instead of
48 months oflhe last 120 months); (iv) reduces Ihc annual cost of living adjustmenl lo the lower of 3
percent or 50 percent of the change in the consumer price index for all urban consumers, whichever is
lower, and eliminates compounding for employees hired alter .lanuary 1, 2011, compared with a cost of
living adjustment of 3 percent, compounded, under prior law, and (v) caps the salary on which a pension
may be calculated at $106,800 (subjecl lo certain adjuslmenis for infialion)
I he Pension Reform Act as described in thi.s subsection, taken independently of any olher
legislative or market effects, is expected to reduce benefits afforded new hires and therefore reduce over
time the growlh in the Acluarial Accrued Liability, the UAAL and the Actuarially Required Contribution
for MEABF and LABF In calculating the Actuarial Accrued Liability, the actuaries make assumptions
about future benefit levels As the value of future benefits decreases over time, and as a greater
percentage ofthe City's workforce is covered by the Pension Reform Acl, the Actuarial Accrued Liability
IS expected to decrease compared to what it would have been under previous law Consequently, the
UAAL IS expected to grow more slowly and the Funded Ratio to increase As the growth in the UAAL
slo\\s, the Acluanally Required Contribution is expected to be reduced as the amount of UAAL to be
amortized decreases However, no assurance can be given that these expectations will be the actual
experience going forward

E-32

 P.A. 96-1495
P A 96-1495 has a significant impact on PABF and FABF. Certain provisions of P A. 96-1495
are discussed above in "—Delerminalion ofCity's Contributions—Citys Required Conlributions to
PABF and FABF Beginning m 2016" The PA. 96-1495 Funding Plan will have the effect of
significantly increasing the City's contributions to PABF and FABF because, among other things, such
contribulions will no longer be determined pursuant lo the Multiplier Funding system and because the
PA. 96-1495 Funding Plan is designed to require larger contributions by the City, 'fhe greater
contributions projected to be required under the P.A 96-1495 Funding Plan are expected to pose a
substantial burden for the City's financial condition beginning in 2016 See "—Projection of Funded
Stalu.s'" above
In addition, P.A. 96-1495 makes changes to benefits for police officers and firefighters first
participating in PABF and FABF on or after January 1, 2011. Among other changes, P A 96-1495. (i)
increases the minimum eligibility age for unreduced retirement benefits from 50 (with len years of
service) to 55 (wilh ten years of service); (ii) provides for retirement at age 50 (with ten years of service)
with the annuity reduced by 0 5 percent per month, (iii) provides that final average salary is based on 96
consecutive months within the last 120 months of employment (instead of 48 months of the last 120
monlhs); (iv) reduces the cost of living adjustment to the lower of 3 percent or 50 percent ofthe change m
the consumer price index for all urban consumers ("CPI-u"), whichever is lower, commencing al age 60;
(v) provides that widow benefits are 66 2/3 percent ofthe employee's annuity at the date of death; and
(vi) caps Ihe salary on which a pension may be calculaled al $106,800 (subject to certain adjuslmenis for
inflation)
While the reforms discussed in this sub-section are expected lo contribute to a reduction in the
respective UAALs of PABF and FABF over time, such reforms are not expected to malerially reduce
such UAALs in the near future
P.A. 98-641
P A 98-641 makes significant changes to LABF and MEABF Certain provisions relating to the
City's contributions to LABF and MEABF under PA 98-641 are discussed above in "—Deterniinalion
ofCity's Contributions—City's Required Contributions to LABF and MEABF Pursuant to P.A. 98-641 "
'Fhe P A. 98-641 Funding Plan will have the effect of significantly increasing the City's contributions to
LABF and MEABF
In addition, with respect to LABF and MEABF, P A 98-641.
•

Skips automatic annual increases ("AAI") in 2017, 2019 and 2025 for retired members
that would otherwise be entitled to receive them and who have an annuity greater lhan
$22,000,

•

Provides lhat members who retire after the effective date of P A. 98-641 are not eligible
to receive an AAI until one full year aller (hey odierwise would have,

•

Reduces the AAI rate for Tier 1 Members to the lesser of 3 0 percent or 50 percent ofthe
CPI-u, except lhat retirees with an annual annuity of less than $22,000 will receive al
least a 1 percent AAI in each year, including in the AAI skip years described above;

lv33

 •

Reduces for 'fier 11 Members Ihe minimum eligibility age for unreduced relirement
benel'ils to 65 with 10 years of service and, for reduced retirement benefits, to age 60 with
U) years of .service;

•

Increases employee contribution rales for bolh ficr 1 Members and 'fier 11 Members lo
9.0 percenl m calendar year 2015, 9.5 percent in calendar year 2016, 10 0 percent in
calendar year 2017, 10 5 percenl in calendar year 2018 and 11 0 percent for calendar year
2019 and after until the respective Retirement Fund reaches a 90 percent Funded Ratio, at
which point the employee contribution rate is reduced to 9 75 percent and

•

Institutes the Recapture Provisions with respect to MEABF and LABF.

Gabriel Roeder Smith & Company ("GRS") has prepared projections of City contributions and
funded status ofLABF and MEABF based on the enactment of P.A. 98-641 Such projections are based
on the data, assumptions and methods used in the actuarial valuations for LABF and MEABF as of
December 1, 2013. Tables 18 and 19 provide such projections as compared to projccled results under
current Pension Code provisions.

R-34

 di

TABLE 18- PROJECTED CONTRIBUTIONS: MEABF AND LABF'
LABI'

Conlribution
Year

Contribulions
to LABF
Before P.A.
98-641

Contribulions
to LABF
Under P.A.
98-641

2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2030
2040
2050
2055

$ 14 5
14.4
15.4
157
16.2
16.7
17.2
17.8
232.6
244 8
217 1
218 1

$ 14 5
24.0
30.5
38.2
47 1
57.3
67.7
69.6
86.2
105.5
124.3
135 3

MEABF
Increase in
Contribulions
to LABF
Under P.A.
98-641

Contribulions
tn MF.ABF
Before P.A.
98-641

Contributions
to MEABF
Under P.A.
98-641

$ 156.1
1574
161 9
167.1
172.6
178 2
184 0
189 9
1,325.3
1,598.9
1,530 1
L519 9

$ 156 1
242 7
290.1
361 2
442 1
533 0
585 6
6003
724.7
9174
1,184.5
1,332 2

$

00
96
15 1
22.5
30 9
40 6
50.5
51.8
(146.4)
(139.3)
(92.8)
(82.8)

Increase in
Contributions
to MEABF
Under P.A.
98-641
$

00
85 3
1282
194 1
269 3
354 8
401 6
4104
(600.6)
(681 5)
(345.6)
(187 7)

SourcL- GKS Projection derived from actuarial data as of December 31, 2013
(1) In nitlltons ofdollars. Projections are calculated on a cash basts
T A B L E 1 9 - P R O J E C T E D FUNDED RATIOS: M E A B F AND L A B F ' "

Contribution
Year
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2030
2040
2050
2055
Source
(I)

LABF
Funded Ratio
Funded
Before P.A.
Ratio Under
98-641
P.A. 98-641
53.9%
52 8
50 9
48 0
44 9
41 6
38.1
34 3
00
00
0.0
00

MEABF
Funded
Funded
Ratio Before
Ratio Under
P.A. 98-641
P.A. 98-641

62.5%
62 3
61 7
60 5
59 5
59.0
58.7
58 5
57 2
60 2
76 5
90 0

33 1%
31 3
29 1
26 3
23.3
20 1
166
12 9
00
00
00
00

38.5%
37 6
36 S
35 8
35 4
35 6
35 9
.36 2
38 8
45 0
68.7
90 0

GKS Proieclion derived Irotn actuarial dala as oriDeceniber 31, 2013
In niilltuns ol'dollars Projeclioiis arc ealctilaled on a cash basi.s

P A 98-641 also provides that, beginning on January I , 2015, the Retirement Board ofLABF or
MFABF may bring a mandamus action lo compel the City to make the conlnbutions required by the
Pension Code, in addition to other remedies that may be available by hnv P A 98-641 further provides
that the court may order a reasonable payment schedule to enable the City to make payments without
itiipenling the City's public health, safely, or welfare

E-35

 Under PA 98-641, such payments are expressly subordinated lo ihe paymenl ofthe principal,
interest, premium, if any, and other payments on or related to any bonded debl obligation ofthe City,
either currently outstanding or to be issued, for which the source of repayment or security thereon is
derived directly or indirectly from any funds collected or received by the City or collected or received on
behalf of Ihe City. Per P A. 98-641, such paymenis on bonded debl obligations include any statutory fund
transfers or other prefunding mechanisms or formulas set forth, now or hereafter, in Stale law. City
ordinance, or bond indentures, into debt service funds or accounts of the Cily related to such bonded debt
obligations, consistent wilh the paymcni schedules associated wilh such obligations
In December 2014, shortly before P A. 98-641 was to take effect, two lawsuits were filed in the
Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois (the "Circuil Court") challenging Ihe constitutionality of P.A 98641. Plaintiffs argue that P.A. 98-641 violates the Pension Clause and seek a preliminary and permanent
injunction prohibiting its enforcement. The City was allowed to intervene in both lawsuits to defend the
con.stitutionalily of P A. 98-641. On February 19, 2015, the Circuil Court entered an order staying the
preliminary injunction proceedings pending further court order and pending the outconie of the Illinois
Supreme Court's review ofthe State Pension Reform Act. On July 9, 2015, a hearing was held in the
Circuit Court on the parties' cross motions for summary judgment. At the conclusion ofthe hearing, the
Circuit Court staled that its judgment on the motions would be delivered on July 24, 2015. The City
expects that whatever decision is entered by the Circuit Court in this lawsuit, the decision will be
appealed and the constitutionality of P.A. 98-641 will ultimately be decided on appeal, 'fhe City has been
defending and will continue to defend this matter vigorously. The City can give no assurance as to the
ultimate outcome ofthe lawsuit.
Should P.A. 98-641 be delermined by a court to be unconstitutional and the provisions ofthe
Pension Code in effect prior lo P.A 98-641 become effective again, MEABF and LABF have been
projected to become insolvent beginning in 2026 and 2029, respectively. See "—Effect on MEABF and
LABF if P A 98-641 Found Unconslilulional" herein below for additional mfornialion Should P A. 98641 be found unconstitutional, it is not clear whether or how the unfunded status or insolvency of
MEABF and LABF might be resolved or what, if any, irnpact such a resolution may have on the City.
Diversion of Grant Money to the Retirement Funds Under P.A. 96-1495 and P.A. 98-641
P A 96-1495 and P.A. 98-641 allow the State Comptroller to divert State grant money intended
for the Cily lo the Retirement Funds to satisfy contribution shortfalls by the Cily (the 'Recapture
Provisions"). Ifthe City fails to contribute to the Retirement Funds as required by the Pension Code, the
C\ty will be subject to a reallocation of grants of State funds to the City if (i) the City fails to make the
required payment for 90 days past the due date, (ii) the subject Retirement Fund gives nolice oflhe failure
to the City, and (lii) such Retirement Fund certifies to the Slate Comptroller thai such payment has nol
been made Upon the occurrence of these events, the State Compiroller will withhold grants of State
fiinds from the City in an amount not in excess of the delinquenl payment amount in the following
proportions (i) infi.scalyear 2016, one-third of the City's Stale grant money, (ii) in fiscal year 2017,
Iwtvthirds ofthe City's Stale grant money, and (iii) in fiscal year 2018 and in each fiscal year thereafter,
100 percent ofthe City's State grant money. Should the Recapture Provisions in either of P A 96-1495
or P A 98-641 be invoked as a result of the Cily's failure lo contribute all or a portion of its required
contribution, a reduction in State granl money may have a significant adverse impaci on the Cily's
finances
Effect on iVIEABFand LABF If P.A. 98-641 Found Unconstitulional
As descnbed in "—Legislative Changes—P.A. 98-641" above, P A 98-641 is currently subject lo
legal challenge as to its constitutionality If P.A. 98-641 is not upheld upon a legal challenge to its

E-36

 validity and the law in effect prior lo the enaclmenl of P.A 98-641 is again effective, the Cily's
consulting actuaries project that MEABF and LABF will not have assets on hand to make payments to
beneficiaries beginning in 2026 and 2029, respectively The following tables provide current projections
of the Actuarial Accrued Liability, Market Value of Assets, UAAL, Funded Ratio and Employer
Contribution with respect to MEABF and LABF in the absence of P.A. 98-641.
Certain statements made in this Appendix are based on projections, are forward-looking in nature
and arc developed using assumptions and information currently available. Such statements are subject to
certain risks and uncertainties. The projections set forth in this Appendix rely on information produced
by the Retirement Funds' independent actuaries (except where specifically noted otherwise) and were not
prepared with a view toward complying with the guidelines established by the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants wilh respect to prospective financial information. This information is not
fact and should not be relied upon as being necessarily indicative of future results Readers of this
Appendix are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the prospective financial information. Neither the
City, the Cily's independent auditors, nor any other independent accountants have compiled, examined, or
performed any procedures with respect to the prospectivefinancialinformation contained herein, nor have
they expressed any opinion or any other form of assurance on such information or its aehicvability, and
assume no responsibility for, and disclaim any association with, the prospeclivefinancialinformation.

I--37

 I ABLE 20 - PROJECTION OF FUTURE FUNDING STATUS .Actuarial
Accrued
Liability

Source

Fiscal
Year

($)

2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040

$ 14,322,312
14,788,983
15,257,262
15,736,491
16,213,945
16,686,091
17,149,388
17,600,400
18,038,164
18,459,401
18,874,417
19,269,819
19,644,224
19,996,084
20,324.749
20,628,151
20,904,445
21,153,680
21,376,674
21,574,935
21,750,671
21,906,148
22,043,770
22,166,160
22,275,941
22,376,201
22,470,299

(a)

.Market
Assets
(S)
(b)
$ 5,277,156
5,088,720
4,855,643
4,585,770
4,264,599
3,885,513
3,441.412
2,925,154
2,331,452
1,652,472
893,662
36,495

-

Market
Unfunded Accrued
Actuarial Liabilities
(UAAL)
(S)
(a-b)
$ 9,045,156
9,700,263
10,401,619
11,150,721
11,949,346
12,800,578
13,707,976
14,675,246
15,706.712
16,806,929
17,980,755
19,233,324
19,644,224
19,996,084
20,324.749
20,628,151
20,904,445
21,153,680
21,376,674
21,574,935
21,750.671
21,906,148
22,043,770
22,166,160
22,275,941
22,376,201
22,470,299

Market
Funded
Ratio

MEABF"^

(b/a)

Employer
Contribution
(S)

35.3%
33 1
31.3
29 1
26 3
23 3
20.1
16.6
12.9
9.0
4.7
0.2
0.0
00
0.0
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
0.0
00
00
00

$ 156,234
156,091
157,427
161,916
167,069
172,600
178,248
184,018
189,873
195,848
201,863
208,088
214,489
220,984
227,654
234,442
241,387
248,481
255,727
263,007
270,436
278,088
285,948
293.986
302,297
310,857
319,656

(%)

GRS Proieelions derived lioin actuarial data as of" Decettiber 31. 2013. Such projeclions assume lhat the Cily ui
continue to conlribule lo MEABF pursuant lo the Mulliplter Funding system upon Ihe insolvency ofMEABF

(1) In lhou.sands of dollars Projections calculated on a cash basts
(2) Kcpresenls coninbuiions expected lo be made by the Ctty during the tlscal year

E-38

 TABLE 21 - PROJECTION OF FUTURE FUNDING S J ATUS - LABI.(I)

Source
(1)
(2)

Fiscal
Year

Acluarial
Accrued
Liability
(S)
(a)

2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040

$ 2,448,874
2,504,477
2,558,009
2,612,627
2,665,643
2,716,750
2,765,274
2,811,041
2,853,770
2,892,919
2,929,006
2,961,105
2,988,935
3,012,165
3,030,629
3,044,169
3,052,779
3,056,992
3,057,367
3,054,510
3,049,319
3,042,417
3.034,418
3,026,025
3,017,590
3,009,528
3,002,648

Market
Assets

($)
(b)
S 1,436,908
1,408,178
1,371,220
1,329,444
1.279,237
1,219,905
1,150,320
1,069,824
977,541
872,303
753,999
620,990
472,234
306,567
122,928

-

Market
Unfunded .\ccrued
Acluarial Liabililies
(UAAL)
(S)
(a-b)
$ 1,011,966
1,096,299
1,186,789
1,283,183
1.386,406
1,496,845
1,614,954
1,741,217
1,876,229
2,020,616
2,175,007
2,340,115
2,516,701
2,705,598
2,907,701
3,044,169
3,052,779
3,056,992
3,057,367
3,054,510
3,049,319
3,042,417
3,034,418
3,026,025
3,017,590
3,009,528
3,002,648

Market
Funded
Ratio

(%)
(b/a)
55.7%
53 9
52.8
50.9
48 0
44.9
41 6
38 1
34 3
30 2
25.7
21.0
15 8
102
4 1
0.0
00
0.0
0.0
00
00
0.0
0.0
00
0.0
00
00

Employer
Contribution'
(S)
$ 14,032
14,472
14,411
15,387
15,722
16,168
16,675
17,228
17,813
18,431
19,075
19,752
20.462
21,185
21,941
22,725
23,521
24,337
25,179
26,018
26,845
27,688
28.540
29,395
30,184
30,909
31,610

GRS Projeclions derived tioni actuarial data as o f December 31. 2013 Such proieelions assume lhat the City will
conlinue lo contribute to LABI- pursuant lo the Mulliplter Funding ivsteni upon the insolvency o f L A B F

In lhou.sands ofdollars Projeclions calcultiled on a cash btisis
Represents cotitnbuliiins expected lo be made by the City during the llscal year

The City cannot predict the impact that the insolvency o f M E A B F or LABF would have on its
contributions to these Retirement Funds. Under the current provisions of the Pension Code, the City
would revert to contributing the Multiplier Funding amount to MEABF and LABF fhe contributions
calculated pursuanl lo Multiplier Funding most likely would be insufficient to make all necessary
payments to beneficiaries One po.ssibility upon insolvency o f M E A B F or L A \ B F would be changes in the
Pension Code lo provide for pay-as-you-go funding
Under pay-a.s-you-go funding, the employer
contribution equals the amount necessary, when added to other inconie, specifically employee
contributions, to fund the current year benefits to be paid by the retirement fund GRS projects that,
should the City be required to adopt pay-a.s-you-go funding to ensure lhat pa\ nients to beneficiaries arc
made to MLABF and LABF beneficiaries following the insolvency ofsuch Retirement Funds, the City's
contributions to such Retirement Funds would increase subslanlially. With respect to MEABF. GRS

E-3 9

 projects lhal pay-as-you-go funding would increase the City's contribution from approximalely $208
million m 2025 to $1,107 billion in 2026, $1 607 billion in 2042 and $1 581 billion m 2060 With respect
to LABF. GRS projects that pay-a.s-you-go funding would increase the City's contribution from
approximately $21.9 million in 2028 to $99.6 million in 2029, $248 million in 2036 and $231 million in
2060 Such large increases in the City's contributions would likely have a material adverse impact on the
City's financial condition.
Additionally, the City cannot predict if or when changes to the Pension Code or judicial decisions
relevant to its contributions will be enacted or decided, respectively, and the impact any such legislation
or judicial decisions would have on the manner in which it contributes lo the Retirement Funds.
Contributing pursuanl to Multiplier Funding or pay-as-you-go funding, as discussed in this subsection,
represent two possible outcomes; however, the City can make no representation that some other method
of determining contributions, including payments that are possibly even larger than pay-as-you-go
funding, would not be required
Pension Reform
The City continues to believe that significant legislative changes, such as those applicable to
MEABF and LABF under P.A. 98-641, are required to properly fund the Relirement Funds and continues
lo consider the options available to address the unfunded liabilities of FABF and PABF. See "—
Determination ofCity's Contributions—City's Required Conlributions to PABF and FABF Beginning in
2016" herein Based on its work in developing pension reform proposals and other analysis, the City
believes that the unfunded liabilities of FABF and PABF and, if P.A. 98-641 is found unconstitufional,
MEABF and LABF, cannot be adequately and practically addressed Ihrough increases in Ihe City's
contributions alone. If the City attempted to fund such increased contributions through an increase in
taxes, the increase would be larger than any increa.se in recent hi.story, politically difficult to enact, and
harmful to the City's finaneial condition and, likely, ils economy. Ifthe City attempted lo fund such
increased contributions through expenditure cuts, essential City services, including, but not limited to,
public health and safely, would be jeopardized. Furthermore, the amount lhal could be derived from the
sale of City assets would be inconsequential when compared to the Retirement Funds' unfunded
liabilities. Finally, a coinbinalion of revenue increases and expenditure cuts likely would nol be practical
to address the unfunded liabilities, given Iheir magnitude. This is true both when considering the
Retirement Funds on their own, and when viewed collectively with the unfunded liabilities ofthe Other
Retirement Funds, whose sponsoring Governmental Units have tax bases that overlap wilh the City's tax
base See —Overlapping Tax Bodies."
No assurance can be given that further legislation addressing the needs of FABF and PABF, and
if P A. 98-641 IS found unconstitutional, MEABF and LABF, will be enacted and no assurance can be
given that such legislation, if adopted, will be upheld upon a legal challenge
Report and Recommendations ofthe Commission to Strengthen Chicago's Pension Funds
•fhe information contained in Ihis subsection dcscnbing the CSCP and the Final Report (each as
defined herein) relies on information produced by the CSCP, including the Final Report fhe Final
Report is available at http //www chipabf org/ChicagoPolicePension/PDF/Financials/pension ciimnnssio
ii/CSCP_Fiiial_Report_Vol. 1_4 30 2010 pdf, however, the content of the Final Report and such website
arc nol incorporated herein by such reference 'I'he City makes no representation nor expresses any
opinion as lo the accuracy oflhe Final Report, the statements made or the information therein, some of
which may be conilicting Furthermore, mformation about the Final Report is being provided for
historical purposes only

E-40

 On January 11, 2008, then Mayor Richard M Daley announced the formation oflhe Commission
to Slrcnglhen Chicago's Pension Funds (Ihe "CSCP"), which was composed of a broad cross-section of
City officials, union leaders, pension fund executives, and business and civic professionals. The CSCP
was charged wilh exaniinmg Ihc Retirement Funds and recommending ways to improve the Funded Ratio
of each Retiremenl Fund, fhe CSCP met several times in 2008 through 2010. and at the CSCP's final
meeting on March 24, 2010, the CSCP endorsed its final report, with three commissioners dissenting
The CSCP's final report, which included letters from the dissenting commissioners, was submitted to
Mayor Daley on April 30, 2010 (the "Final Report").
'fhe CSCP's approval of the Final Report occurred before the enaclmenl of the Pension Reform
Acl, P.A 96-0889, PA. 96-1495 and P.A. 98-641; the Final Report, accordingly, docs not consider the
impact of these acts on the Retirement Funds. See "—Determination of City's Contributions" above and
"—Legislative Changes" above for additional information on these acts. As described below, certain of
the CSCP'sfindingsand recommeiidations as conlained in the Final Report are addressed by these acls
The CSCP found that the financial health of the Retirement Funds had deteriorated due to a
combination of factors, including the following: increasing liabilities due to enhanced benefits (e.g., nonrecurring early retirement programs that were not properly funded); inadequate contributions, which were
based upon a fixed percentage of payroll and not actuarial need (i.e., the Multiplier Funding); and adverse
market conditions leading to fluctuating returns on investments (in 2000-2002 and 2007-2009) which
could not keep pace with growth in liabilities. P.A. 96-1495 and P.A. 98-641 address the CSCP's finding
of inadequate contributions to the Retirement Funds. See "—Determination of City's Contributions"
above for information on the significant increases to the City's contributions to PABF and FABF pursuant
to P.A 96-1495 and to MEABF and LABF pursuant to P.A. 98-641.
The CSCP found that due to the inadequate contributions, the Retirement Funds have had to use
assets to pay current benefits, which in turn put pressure on the asset bases and Funded Ratios of the
Retirement Funds
•fhe CSCP modeled a set of scenarios for the Retirement Funds and found that, based on the
actuarial assumptions in use by the Retirement Funds and the condition of the Retirement Funds at the
end of 2009, the Retirement Funds would, in the absence of substantial changes to the Retirement Funds'
funding policy and/or benefit structure, deplete all assets in each of the Retirement Funds at dilTerenl
dales but all within twenty years ofthe date ofthe Final Report. Ilowever, the CSCP's approval ofthe
Final Report occurred before the enaclmcnt ofthe Pension Reform Act, P.A 96-1495 and P.A. 98-641,
and the depletion dates as estimated in the Final Report would not have taken into account the impaci of
such legislation See "—Projection of Funded Status" above for the projections based upon the current
legislative structure applicable to the Retirement Funds.
I he CSCP suggested that the issues related to the Retirement Funds need to be addressed as soon
as possible and offered the following specific recommendations (i) the defined benefit structure used by
the Relirenieni Funds should remain (as opposed to a defined contribution structure); (ii) new employees
should continue to become members of the Retirement Funds, (iii) the Retirement Funds should be
funded on an acluarial basis, (iv) changes in Ihe Retiremenl Funds for new employees, while recognized
by the CSCP as undesirable, will probably be necessaiy, (v) contributions to the Reliiemenl Funds should
be increased and reventie sources identified; (vi) employee contributions should not exceed the value of
benefits on a caieer basis, (vii) any provisions in current law for refunds or for alternative benefit
calculations should be reviewed to ensure lhat the anticipated financial results of a reform program arc
actualK obtained, (viii) in general, no changes in the Retirement Funds should be made unless financially
neutial or advaniagcous to the Retirement Funds, now or in the future, (ix) a variely of olher reforms
should be considered, including reforming potential abuses, establishing sound reciprocity with other

i-:-41

 Illinois public pensions, implementing new slruclurcs to manage investments of ihe Retirement Funds,
and improving administration of disability claims and benefits; and (x) any reform legislaiion musl
comprehensively and simultaneously address all aspects ofthe pension funding program.
CSCP's recommendations were made prior to the enactment oflhe Pension Reform Act. P.A. 960889, PA 96-1495 and P.A 98-641. Certain of the CSCP's recommendations, including changes in the
Retirement Funds for new members, were part oflhe Pension Reform Act and P.A 98-641 (with regard
to MEABF and LABF) and P.A 96-1495 (with regard to PABF and FABF).
Special Revenue and Enterprise Fund Allocation of Retirement Fund Cnsts
The Cily allocates to its special revenue and enterprise funds their share of the City's annual
contribution lo the Retiremenl Funds based upon the amount of services provided by City employees to
the functions or enterprises related to or paid out of those funds. The special revenue and enterprise funds
account for their allocable share of the City's contributions to the Retirement Funds as operating and
maintenance expenses. For budgcl year 2015, the City has budgeted for the special revenue and
enterprise funds to reimburse the City approximately $74 million for their allocable share ofthe City's
pension contribution.
The allocations described in this subsection are not required by statute but represent the City's
current method of allocating its pension costs. The City may alter the manner in vvhich it allocates ils
pension costs to these funds at any lime.
Impact of Retirement Funds' Unfunded Liability on the City's Bond Ratings
Thefinancialhealth ofthe Retirement Funds and the projected impact ofthe Retirement Funds'
underfunding on future contributions to be made by the City have impacted the rating agencies'
determination of the City's credilworlhincss. On April 17, 2013, Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's")
issued a release (the "Release") announcing a new approach to analyzing state and local government
pensions The method of evaluating public pension plans established in the Release is intended to be a
method of standardizing information among public pension plans and does not impaci the City's required
contributions, Ihc value ofthe Retiremenl Funds' assets, or the liabililies owed by the Retirement Funds.
The City does not endorse the method of analysis adopted by Moody's in the Release.
Moody's new pension analysis appears to include, among other things, adjusting pension plan
Actuarial Accrued Liabilities by using certain common assumptions, such as the discount rate and
amortization period. Certain other actuarial assumptions, such as mortality and salaiy growlh rates, were
not standardized across governmental plans. To accomplish its review, Moody's sialed that il will use a
discount rate based on Citibank's Pension Liability Index discount rate as of a pension plan's valuation
date Such a discount rate will be lower than the discount rate currently used by the Retirement Funds
and is closer to the discount rate for a typical pension plan in the private sector The Cily estimates lhat
Moody's new method of analysis would result m the following Funded Ratios ofthe Retirement Funds
(based on projected December 31, 2014 as.sets and liabilities provided in the actuarial valuations ofthe
Retirement Funds as of December 31, 2013): 27.4 percent for MEABF, 43 5 percent for LABF, 18.8
percent for PABF. and 15 5 percent for FABF. See Tables 5 through 8 above for infonnalion on the
Retirement Ftinds" historical Funded Ratios For information regarding the Retirement ]-unds' discount
rale, see —Actuarial Assumptions—Assumed Investment Rate of Return" above. I'he Release can be
obtained from Moody's: provided, however, that the Release is nol incorporated herein by such reference
On Ma\ 12, 2015, Moody's issued a ratings action report (the "Rating Report") downgrading the
latings ofthe Citys general obligalion bonds and sales tax revenue bonds from "Baa2'" to "Bal,'" the

E-42

 City's water senior licn revenue bonds from "A2" lo "Baal," Ihe Cily's waslcwater senior licn revenue
bonds from "A3"' to "Baa2," the City's waler second lien revenue bonds from "A3" lo "Baa2," the Cily's
wastewater second lien revenue bonds from "Baal" to "'Baa3," and placed all such ratings on negative
outlook. This follows previous downgrades of the City's ratings by Moody's on February 27, 2015.
March 4. 2014, and July 17, 2013. Moody's indicated m the Rating Report that the May 12, 2015
downgrades rcHected the expected continued growth in the unfunded liabilities ofthe Relirement Funds
and the narrowing of the City's options for curbing such growth as a result of the Illinois Supreme
Court's decision finding the State Pension Reform Act unconstitutional Moody's indicated lhal furlher
downgrades could follow if, among other things, (i) P.A. 98-641 was found to be unconstitutional, or (ii)
the Retirement Funds' UAAL continues to grow. The Cily makes no prediction as to whether the
Moody's rating action described above will result in additional downgrades, or the impact that the
financial condition of the Retirement Funds will have on Moody's or any other rating agency's judgment
ofthe Cily's creditworthiness or on the City's futurefinancingcosts. The Rating Report can be obtained
from Moody's; provided, however, lhat the report is not incorporated herein by such reference.
On May 15. 2015, Fitch Ratings, Inc ("Fitch") downgraded the City's general obligation bond
and sales tax bond ratings from "A-" lo "BBB+" and placed each rating on negative watch. In
announcing these ratings downgrades. Fitch cited, among other things, increased fiscal pressures as a
resull of the Illinois Supreme Court decision finding the State Pension Reform Act unconstitutional.
Filch further indicated that a determination that P.A. 98-641 is unconstitutional would likely lead to
additional downgrades On July 3, 2015, Fitch removed the negalive watch from the City's general
obligation bond and sales tax bond ratings and placed such ratings on negative outlook
On July 8, 2015, Standard & Poor's Ratings Group ("S&P") downgraded the Cily's general
obligalion bond rating from "A-" lo "BBB+" with a negative outlook and removed the raling from
negative watch. In downgrading the City's general obligation bond rating, S&P cited, among other things,
the City's pension liabilities, the impact on the City's budget of scheduled future increa.ses in pension
contributions, and "the City's lack of progress in unveiling a sustainable funding mechanism" for PABF
and FABF.
On July 7, 2015. Kroll Bond Rating Agency ("Kroll") affirmed its long term rating of "A-" with a
stable outlook on the Cily's general obligation bonds. In its report affirming the City's rating, Kroll
indicated that the budgetaiy pressure exerted by the funding of the Retirement Funds and the future
increase in contributions to PABF and FABF under P.A. 96-1495 constitute key concerns with respect to
ils rating ofthe Cily's general obligation bonds.
In addition, olher raling agencies may have established, or may establish in the future, melhods
for evaluating thefinancialhealth ofthe Retirement Funds and their impact on the Cit>'"s creditworthiness
that arc different from the information provided in this Appendix. Furlher downgrades ofthe City's bond
ratings may have a material adverse impact on the City's finances. See "INVES'fMEN'l'
CONSIDERATIONS—Credit Ratine Downgrades" for additional information.

PAYiVIEN 1 FOR OTIIER POS l -EiVlPLOYMENT BENEFI fS
General
fhe City and the Retirement Funds share the cost of post-employment healthcare benefits
available lo City employees participating in Ihe Retirement Funds through a stiigle-eniployer, defined
benefit healthcare plan (the "Health Plan"), which is admini.stered by the Cily Prior lo .kmc 30, 2013, the

E-43

 cosls oflhe Jlcallh Plan were shared pursuanl to a seillemenl agreemenl (as amended, ihc "Seillemenl")
entered into belween the City and the Retirement Funds regarding the responsibility for payment of these
health benefits as described below under "—The Settlement."
MEABF and LABF participants older than 55 with at least 20 years of service and PABF and
FABF participants older than 50 with at least 10 years of service may become eligible for the Health Plan
if they eventually become an annuitant." The Flealth Plan provides basic health benefits to non-Medicare
eligible annuitants and provides supplemental health benefits to Medicare-eligible annuitants.
'fhe City contributes a percentage toward the cost of the Flealth Plan for each eligible annuitant.
The annuitants arc responsible for contributing the difference between the cost of their health benefits and
the sum ofthe subsidies provided by the City and the related Retirement Fund. Until June 30, 2013,
annuitants who retired prior to July 1, 2005 received a 55 percent subsidy from the City, whereas
annuitants retiring on or after such date received a subsidy equal to 50 percent, 45 percent, 40 percent or
zero percent based on the annuitant's length of actual employment with the City pursuant to the
Settiement The Retirement Funds contributed a fixed dollar amount monthly ($65 for each Medicareeligible annuitant and $95 for each non-Medicare eligible annuitant) for each of their annuitants For a
description of benefits after the expiration ofthe Settlement, see "—Status of Heallhcare Benefits After
the Settlement Period" herein.
The Retirement Funds' subsidies arc paid from the City contribution, as provided in the Pension
Code and described in "Retiremenl Funds—Determinauon of City's Contributions" above. These
payments therefore reduce the amounts available in the Retirement Funds to make paynients on pension
liabilities See Tables 5-9 in "Relirement Fund.s—Funded Status of Relirenieni Fund.s" above for
Retirement Funds' statement of net assets, which incorporates the expense related to the Flealth Plan cis
part ofthe "Administration" line item.
The Settlement
In 1987, the City sued the Retirement Funds asserting, among other things, that the City was not
obligated lo provide healthcare benefits to certain retired City employees Certain retired employees
intervened as a class in the litigation, and the Retirement Funds countersued the City. To avoid the risk
and expense of protracted litigation, the City and the olher parlies entered into the Settlement, the terms of
which have been renegotiated over time The City contributed to the Health Plan as a result of the
obligation established by the Settlement during the term of the Settlement (the "Settlement Period") The
Settlement expired on June 30, 2013 For the status ofthe Health Plan after the Settlement Period, see
"—Status of 1-leallhcare Benefits Afler the Settlement Period" below.
Cily Financing of the Health Plan
The City funds its share of the Health Plan's costs on a pay-as-you-go basis. Pay-a.s-you-go
funding refers lo the fact lhal assels arc nol accuniulalcd or dcdicalcd lo funding the 1 lealth Plan. In.stcad,
the City contributes the amount necessary to fund its share ofthe current year cosls ofthe Health Plan.
Sec Table 23 below for a schedule of historical contributions made by the City to the Health Plan

t.'iidei then respective cullcclive baigjiinny agreements, which weic renegolialed in 2012. cerlam relired PAHI- and I A15Iparticipants are eligible lo enroll iheni.selvcs and their dependents in Ihe City's healthcare plan I'or active niembeis until ihey
le.ich the age ol'Medicare eligibility C'Special CBA Benelit") These members do nol conlriliule loutirds the cosl ol eovcLige
Ibr this plan I'AHF' contributes i95 per nionlli I'or ihese inembers, l-'AIJI' docs nol conlribute lot these members the .Special
CBA Beiiel'il e\piies in 2016. ai which time the City expects it will he phased out permanently

F-44

 Actuarial Considerations
Cuy Obligation
The City has an Actuarial Valuation completed for ils contribulions lo the Heallh Plan annually.
The purpose and process behind an Actuarial Valuation is described above in "Retirement Funds—
Acluarial Valuation —Actuaries and the .•iciuarial Process." In addition, the Relirenieni Funds produce
an Acluarial Valuaiion for the liabilit)' ofsuch Retirement Fund to its retirees for the benefits provided
under the Flealth Plan
Although these Actuarial Valuations all refer to the liability owed for the same benefits, the
results of the Retiremenl Funds' Actuarial Valuations differ significantly from the City's Acluarial
Valuation for two reasons. First, the City's Actuarial Valuation only reHccts the portion of liabilities Ihc
City owes under the Seillemenl. Second, the Actuarial Valuations ofthe City and the Retirement Funds
differ becau.se the actuarial methods and assumptions used for each purpose vary.
This Appendix addresses the funded status of the City's obligation to make payments for the
Health Plan For additional information on the amounts owed to members of the Retirement Funds for
retiree healthcare benefits, see the Acluarial Valuations of the Retirement Funds, which are available as
described in "Retirement Funds — Source Information" above, and Note 12 to ihc Cily's Basic Audited
Financial
Statements,
which
are
available
on
the
City's
website
at
http://www cilyofchicago org/city/en/depts/fin/supp_info/comprehensive_annualfinancialstatements html,
provided, however, that the contents oflhe City's website are not incorporated herein by such reference.
Actuarial Melhods and Assumplions
The Actuarial Valuation for the City's obligation to the Health Plan utilizes various actuarial
methods and assumptions similar to those described in "Retirement Funds" above with respect to the
Retirement Funds I'he City does not use an Acluarial Method to calculate the Actuarial Value of Assets
ofthe Health Plan because no assets are accumulated therein for paynient of future benefits. As such, the
Actuarial Value of A.ssets for the Flealth Plan is always zero.
The City's 2012 Actuarial Valuation ("'2012 Actuarial Valuation") amortizes the City's retiree
healthcare UAAL over a closed I-year period, in order to reflect the remainder ofthe Settlement Period
and the Special CBA Benefit thai was set lo expire in 2012 under collective bargaining agreemenls lhat
were in place at that tune The use of a closed, 1-year period has the effect of increasing the Actuarially
Required Contribution as compared to the typical 30-year open amortization period because (i) the period
of time over vvhich the UAAL will be amortized is sliorler, and (ii) the amortization period is one year as
opposed lo repealing 30-ycar periods The 2012 Acluarial Valuation employed the PUC Method to
allocate the Cily's reliree heallhcare obligations For more information on the PUC Method, see
"Retirement Funds—Actuarial Methods" above.
The City's 2013 Actuarial Valuation ("2013 Acluarial Valuation") and 2014 Actuarial Valuation
(Ihe "2014 Actuarial Valuation"') amortizes ihe City's reliree healthcare UAAL over a closed 10-year
period, in order lo relied (i) the City's extension of heallhcare coverage for members lhat had participated
111 the Settlement (with such coverage varying based on retiremenl dale), and (ii) the provision ofthe
Special CBA Benefit For details on the Flealth Plan after the Seillemenl Period, see "'— SUilus of
Healthcare Benel'ils Alter ihe Seillemenl Period" below fhe use of a clo.sed. 10-year period rather lhan a
closed, l-yeai penod has the effect of decreasing the Actuarially Required Coiitribiition because the
penod of lime over which the UAAL will be amortized is longer In addition, the 2013 Actuarial
Valuation and ihe 2014 Actuarial Valuation employed the EAN Method, rather lhan the PUC Method, to

E-45

 allocate the Cily's retiree healthcare obligations For more information on the EAN Method and the PUC
Method, see "Retirement Funds—Actuarial Methods" above.
Funded Status
fhe following tables provide information on the financial health ofthe Health Plan. The Flealth
Plan IS funded on a pay-as-you-go basis, which means no assels arc accumulated to pay for the liabilities
oflhe Health Plan As such, the Funded Ratio with respect to the Health Plan is perpetually zero.
Table 22 summarizes the currenlfinancialcondilion and the funding progress oflhe Health Plan.
TABLE 22-SCHEDULE OF FUNDING PROGRESS*"""^

Actuarial
Valuation
Dale
(Dec. 31)
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Actuarial
Value of
Assets
$0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
$1,062,864
787.395
533,387
390,611
470,952
997,281
964,626

Unfunded
Actuarial
Accrued
LiRbility
$1,062,864
787,395
533,387
390,611
470,952
997,281
964,626

Funded
Ratio
0%
0
0
0
0
0
0

Covered
Payroll
$2,562,007
2,475,107
2.546,961
2,475,000
2,518,735
2,385,198
2,425,000

UAAL as a
Percentage or
Payroll
41.5%
31.8
20.9
158
18 7
41.8
39 8

.Sources Comprehensive Annual l-inaiicial Report oflhe City for the llscal years ending December 31, 2010-2014.
In thousands ol'dollars
I he Cily, a.s required, adopted GASB .Siatemcnt No 4.S tn fiscal year 2007 I he inronnalion provided tn this tabic was produced
in 2007 or later

Table 23 shows the net expense to the City for providing benefits under the Health Plan.
TABLE 23 - HISTORY OF CITY'S CON TRJBU'I IONS*"

2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014

Actual City
Contribution
$ 98.065
98,000
107,431
99,091
97,531
97,500
79,300

Sources Comprehensive Annual Financitil Repoit ol'ihe City I'or the fiscal years ending 2008-2014
" ' In thousands ofdollars 2013 ami 2014 eontribiiiion amounts are appro.ximate

E-46

 Retiree Health Benefits Commission
'fhe Settlement provided for the creation of the Reliree Heallh Benefits Commission (the
"'RFIBC"). which was tasked with, among other things, making recommendations concerning retiree
health benefits after June 30, 2013 The RllBC's members were appointed by the Mayor for terms lhal
do nol expire. The Settlement required that the RHBC be composed of experts who will be objective and
fair-minded as to the interest of bolh retirees and taxpayers, and include a representalive ofthe Cily and a
representative ofthe Retirement Funds.
On January I I , 2013, the RHBC released its "Report to the Mayor's Office on the State of
Retiree Healthcare" (the "'RIIBC Report"). The RFIBC Report can be found on the City's website at
hltp://ww\v cilyofchicago org/city/en/depts/fin/provdrs/ben/alerts/2013/jan/retiree_healthcarebenefits
commissionreporttothemayor html; provided, however, that the contents ofthe RFIBC Report and of the
Cily's website are not incorporated herein by such reference.
'I'he RHBC Report concluded lhal maintaining the funding arrangement then in place for the
Health Plan was untenable, would prevent the City from continuing to provide the current level of
benefits to retirees in the future, and could result in olher financial consequences, such as changes to the
City's bond rating and its creditworthiness. The RHBC Report presented several options for the Mayor to
consider which would reduce the level of spending with respect to the Flealth Plan from approximately
$108 million annually to between $90 million and $12.5 million annually depending on the option.
Status of Healthcare Benefits After the Settlement Period
On May 15, 2013, the City announced plans to, among olher things: (i) provide a lifetime
heallhcare plan lo employees wlio retired before August 23, 1989 with a contribution from the Cily of up
to 55 percent ofthe cost ofthal plan; and (ii) beginning January 1, 2014, provide employees who relired
on or after August 23, 1989 with heallhcare benefits but with significant changes to the terms provided by
the Health Plan, including increases in premiums and deductibles, reduced benefits and the phase-out of
the entire Health Plan for such employees by the beginning of 2017. Ifthe City prevails in the Lawsuit
(defined belovv), it expects a reduction in expenses of approximately $90 to $95 million annually
beginning in 2017 as a result oflhe phase-out ofthe Health Plan.
On May 30, 2013, the General Assembly passed Senate Bill 1584, which was signed into law by
the Governor on June 28, 2013. Senate Bill 1584 extends Ihe Retirement Funds' subsidies for reliree
healthcare costs until such lime as the City no longer provides a heallh care plan for annuitants or
December 31, 2016, whichever conies firsl.
After the June 30, 2013 expiration of the Settlement, on July 5, 2013, certain participants in the
llealth Plan filed a motion to "re-activalc" the 1987 litigation covered by the Seillemcnt. On July 17.
2013, the Circuit Court denied that motion. On July 23, 2013, certain ofthe participants filed a new
lawsuit. Underwood v. Chicago (the "Lawsuit"), in the Circuit Court against the City and the Trustees of
each of (he ftuir Retirement Fund Boards, seeking to bring a class action on behalf of former and current
City employees who previously contributed or now contribute to one oflhe four Relirement Funds
•fhe complaint advanced slale law claims, including alleged violation oflhe Pension Clause, and
federal law claims fhe City removed (he case (o federal court based on the federal law claims fhe
federal district court dismissed the case in its entirety As to plaintiffs' claim that the planned changes
violate the l\"nsion Clause, the di.stricl court predicted lhal the Illinois Supreme Court would rule in a
separate case, Kanerva v. Weems ("Kanerva"), then pending before the Illinois Supreme Court lhat
healthcare benefits are not protected by the Pension Clau.se However, on July 3, 2014, the Supreme

E-47

 Court of Illinois issued an opinion in Kanerva determining lhal reliree heallhcare benefits provided to
State retirees are protected under the Pension Clause The City argued on appeal to the federal appellate
court that it should affirm the district court dismissal, including the state law claims, on an alternative
ground. On February 25, 2015, the federal appellate court affirmed the dismissal ofthe federal law
claims and declined to rule on the slate law claims on the ground that the slate law claims involved a
question of Stale law, which it ordered returned to the Illinois state court for decision. On June 22, 2015,
the City and certain ofthe defendants each filed a motion to dismiss the remaining state law claims in the
Circuil Courl of Cook County. Oral arguments on such motions are scheduled lo be heard on October 1,
2015. fhe Cily has been defending and will continue to defend this matter vigorously The City can give
no assurance as to the ultimate outcome ofthe Lawsuit.

E-4S

  

APPENDIX 

OPINIONS OF CO-BONI) COUNSEL

 

 PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

PKOPOSKI) FOKMS OF OPINIONS OI- CO-BOND COIINSKL

[SERIES

20I5A

BONDS)

  L E I rtRiiEAD OF CO-BOND COIJN.SEL]
ITO BE D.ATED CLOSING DATE]

City of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois

Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC,
as representative of the underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement
dated July 16,2015

Zions First National Bank, as trustee
Chicago, Illinois
Re

City of Chicago
General Obligation Bonds, Series 20ISA
•We hereby certify lhat we have examined a certified copy ofthe record ofthe proceedings (the
"Proceedings") ofthe City Council ofthe City of Chicago (the "City"), passed preliminary to the issue
by the City of its fully registered General Obligafion Bonds, Series 2015A, in the aggregate pnncipal
amounl of $345,530,000 (the '"Series 2015A Bonds'), dated the date hereof, due on January 1 ofthe years
and in the amounts and bearing interest as follows:
YEAR
(JANUARY 1)

2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2026

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT

INTFREST
RATli

YEAR
(JANUARY 1)

PRINCIPAL
AlVIOUNT

$ 4,965,000
7,380,000
7,870,000
8,320,000
8,845,000
5,415,000
19,390,000

5 00%
5.00
5 00
5 00
5.00
5.00
5.00

2027
2028
2029
2033
2034
2035
2039

$24,925,000
33,585,000
35,275,000
88,100,000
36,430,000
16,420,000
48,610,000

INTEREST
R/\TE

5 250%
5.250
5.375
5.500
5.500
5.500
5.500

The Series 20I5A Bonds are authorized and issued pursuant lo the provisions of Seclion 6 of
Article Vll oflhe Illinois Conslilution of 1970 and by virtue of an ordinance adopted by the Cily Council
oflhe Cily on the 17th day of June, 2015 (the "Bond Ordinance"), as supplemented by a Notification of
Sale dated July 16, 2015 (the "Notificalion of Sale"'), and a Trusl Indenlure dated as of July 1. 2015
(the "Sc'/vt'i 20ISA hideniiire ") between the City and Zions First National Bank, as trustee (the
"Trustee ") Capitalized terms used herein wtihout definition shall have the meanings assigned lo such
terms tn the Series 2015A Indenture.

 The Series 2015A Bonds maturing on or after January 1, 2026, are subject to redemption prior lo
maturity at the option ofthe City as a whole or in part, on January I , 2025, or on any date thereafter, at a
redemption price equal lo Ihe principal amount oflhe Series 2015A Bonds being redeemed plus accrued
interest, if any, to the date of redemption, in accordance with the Series 2015A Indenture.
The Series 20ISA Bonds due on January I , 2033, are subject to mandatory redemption, al a
redemption price equal lo the principal aniount thereof plus accrued interest to the date fixed for
redemption, selected as provided in the Series 20ISA Indenture, on January 1 ofthe years and m the
principal amounts as follows
YEAR

2031
2032
2033

PRINCIPAL AMOUNT

•

$ 6,205,000
8,275,000
73,620,000 (maturity)

'I'hc Series 2015A Bonds due on January 1, 2039, are subject to mandatory redemption, at a
redemption price equal to the principal amount thereof plus accrued interest to the date fixed for
redemption, selected as provided in the Series 2015A Indenture, on January 1 of the years and in the
principal amounts as follows.
YEAR
2036
2037
2038
2039

PRINCIPAL

AMOUNT

$16,135,000
12,620,000
15,875,000
3,980,000 (maturity)

In our capacity as bond counsel, we have examined, among other things, the following:
(a)
certified copies of the proceedings of the City Council adopting the Bond
Ordinance and authorizing, among olher things, the execution and delivery ofthe Series 20I5A
Indenture and the issuance ofthe Scries 2015A Bonds;
(b)

certified copy of the Bond Ordinance and an executed copy of the Notification of

(c)

an executed counterpart ofthe Series 20 ISA Indenture; and

Sale.

(d)
such other certifications, documents, showings and related matters of law as we
have deemed necessary in order lo render this opinion.
Ba.sed upon the foregoing we are of the opinion (hat:
I 'I'he Cily has full power and authority and has taken all necessary corporate action lo
authorize the issuance oflhe Series 2015A Bonds and the execution and delivery ofthe Series 2015A
Indenture

 2 The Series 2015A Indenture has been duly and lawfully executed and delivered by the City
and, assuming the due authorization, execution and delivery by, and the binding effect on, the Trustee, the
Scries 20ISA Indenlure is a legal, valid and binding obligation ofthe Cily, enforceable againsl ihe Cily in
accordance with ils lerms, cxeepl as enforceability may be limited by laws relating to bankruptcy,
insolvency, moratorium, reorganization and olher similar laws affeclmg credilors' rights generally and by
equitable principles, whether considered at law or in equity, including the exercise of judicial discretion
3. 'fhe Series 20 ISA Indenture creates the valid pledge which it purports to create oflhe Trust
Estate held or .set aside or pledged under the Series 2015A Indenture, subject to the application ihereof lo
the purposes and on (he conditions permilled by the Series 20I5A Indenture
4 The Series 20ISA Bonds have been duly and validly authorized and issued m accordance
wilh law and the Scries 2015A Bonds, to the amount named, are valid and legally binding upon the City,
enforceable in accordance with their terms and the terms of the Series 20 ISA Indenture, except that the
rights ofthe owners of the Series 2015A Bonds and the enforceability ofthe Series 20I5A Bonds may be
limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, moratorium, reorganizafion and other similar laws affecting creditors'
rights and by equitable principles, whether considered at law or in equity, including the exercise of
judicial discretion.
5 'fhe Series 20I5A Bonds arc payable from any funds oflhe Cily legally available for such
purpose, and all taxable property in the City is subject to the levy of taxes to pay the same without
limitation as lo rate or amount. The Series 2015A Bonds are further secured by the olher moneys,
securities and funds pledged under the Series 20ISA Indenture.
6. The form of Series 20 ISA Bond prescribed for said issue is in due form of law.
7. Subject lo the City's compliance wilh certain covenants, under present law, interest on the
Series 20ISA Bonds is excludable from gross income of the owners thereof for federal inconie tax
purposes and is not included as an item of tax preference in computing the alternative minimum tax for
individuals and corporations under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, bul is laken into accounl in
compuling an adjuslment used in determining the federal allernalive minimum lax for certain
corporations Failure lo comply with certain of such Cily covenants could cause inleresi on the Series
2015A Bonds lo be includible in gross income for federal income lax purposes retroactively to Ihe date of
issuance oflhe Series 20 ISA Bonds. Ownership ofthe Series 20 ISA Bonds may result in olher federal
(ax consequences lo certain taxpayers, and we express no opinion regarding any such collateral
consequences arising with respect to the Series 201S A Bonds
8 Interest on the Senes 201SA Bonds is not exempt from present State of Illinois income taxes
Ownership of ihe Series 20ISA Bonds may result in other state and local tax consequences to certain
taxpayers, and we express no opinion regarding any such collateral consequences arising with respect to
the Series 2015A Bonds
We express no opinion herein as to the accuracy, adequacy or completeness of any information
furnished to any person in connection with any offer or sale ofthe Series 20 ISA Bonds

 In rendering this opinion, we have relied upon certifications ofthe City with respect to certain
material facts within the City's knowledge Our opinion represents our legal judgment based upon our
review oflhe law and the facis that we deem relevant to render such opinion and is nol a guarantee of a
result Ihis opinion is given as oflhe dale hereof and we assume no obligalion lo revise or supplemenl
this opinion lo rcllecl any fads or circumstances lhal may hereafter come lo our attention or any changes
in law that may hereafter occur.

F-4

 ITA.XABLE SERIES 201 5 B BONDS)

[LETTERHEAD OF CO-BOND COUNSEL)

]TO HE D..\ I ED CLOSING DA I E)

City of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois

Morgan Stanley & Co LLC,
as representative ofthe underwriters
named in the Bond Purchase Agreement
dated July 15,2015

Zions First National Bank, as trustee
Chicago, Illinois
Re:

City of Chicago
General Obligation Bonds, 'Fa.xable Series 2015B

We hereby certily that we have examined a certified copy ofthe record of the proceedings (the
"Proceedings") ofthe City Council ofthe City of Chicago (the "City"), passed preliminary to the issue
by the City of its fully registered General Obligation Bonds, 'fa.xable Series 201 SB, in the aggregate
principal amount of $742,860,000 (the "Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds'"), dated the date hereof, due on
January 1 ofthe years and in the amounts and bearing interest as follows.
YEAR
(JANUARY 1)

2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2033
2042

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT

% 5,020.000
5,290,000
5,585,000
5,920,000
6,290,000
321,695,000
393.060,000

INTERE.ST
RATE

5.383%
5 633
5 962
6.212
6 361
7 375
7.750

'fhe Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds arc authorized and issued pursuanl lo the provisions of Seclion
6 of Article Vll ofthe Illinois Constitution of 1970 and by virtue of an ordinance adopted by the City
Council oflhe City on the 17th day of June, 20IS (the "Bond Ordinance"), as suppIemeiKed by a
Notification of Sale daled July 16, 2015 (Ihe " Notification of Sale " ), and a Trust Indenture dated as of
July 1, 2015 (the "Ta.xable Senes 2015B Indenlure'") between the Cily and Zions First National Bank, as
truslee (the "Trustee ") Capitalized terms used herein without definition shall have Ihe meanings
assisned to such lerms in the Taxable Series 201 SB Indenture
I hc 'faxable Series 201 SB Bonds maturing on or before Januaiy 1, 2033 arc subject to optional
redemption in whole or in part, on any Business Day, in such principal amounts and from such maturities
as the Cily shall determine, at a redemption price equal to the Make-Whole Redemption Price applicable
thereto, in accordance with the faxable Series 20I5B Indenture

 fhe Series 2015B Bonds maturing on January 1, 2042 are subject to optional redemption in
whole or in part, on any dale on or after January 1, 2025. in such principal amounts as the City shall
determine, at a redemption price equal to the principal amount thereof and accrued interesl lo the date of
redemption, in accordance with the faxable Series 201 SB Indenlure.
The Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds maluring on January 1, 2033, are subject lo mandalory
redemplion at a redemption price of par plus accrued interest to the redemption date, selected as provided
in the Taxable Series 20I5B Indenture, on January I ofthe years and in the principal amounts as follows:
YEAR

PRINCIPAL AMOUNT

2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033

$

10,665,000
9,990,000
3,050,000
3,300,000
3,620,000
3,950,000
45,105,000
55,175,000
154,145,000
32,695,000 (maturity)

20ISB Bonds maturing on January 1, 2042, are subject

redemplion at a redemption price of par plus accrued interest to the redemption date, selected as provided
in the Taxable Series 201 SB Indenture, on January 1 ofthe years and in the principal amounis as follows.
YEAR

PRINCIPAL

2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042

AMOUNT

$ 73,925,000
173,680,000
18,845,000
15,495,000
16,800,000
25,525,000
32,385,000
17,505,000
18,900,000

In our capacity as bond counsel, wc have examined, aniong other things, the following
(a)
certified copies of the proceedings of the Cily Council adopting ihe Bond
Ordinance and authorizing, aniong olher things, the execution and delivery ofthe Taxable Series
201 SB Indenture and the issuance oflhe Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds:
(b)

certified copy oflhe Bond Ordinance and an executed copy oflhe Nolification of

(c)

an executed counterpart ofthe faxable Series 201 SB Indenture; and

Sak

F-6

 (d)
such other certifications, documents, showings and related matters of law as we
have deemed necessary in order to render this opinion.
Based upon the foregoing we are of the opinion that:
1 The City has full power and authority and has taken all necessary corporate action lo
aulhorizc ihc issuance of llie 'Taxable Series 2015B Bonds and llie execution and delivery oflhe Taxable
Series 2015B Indenture
2. The Taxable Series 201 SB Indenture has been duly and lawfully executed and delivered by
the City and, assuming the due authorization, e.xecution and delivery by, and the binding effect on, the
Trustee, the Ta.xable Series 201 SB Indenlure is a legal, valid and binding obligalion of ihe City,
enforceable againsl the City in accordance with ils terms, except as enforceability may be limited by laws
relating to bankruptcy, insolvency, moratorium, reorganization and olher similar laws affecting creditors'
righls generally and by equitable principles, whether considered at law or in equity, including the exercise
of judicial discretion
3 The Taxable Series 20I5B Indenture creates the valid pledge which it purports to create of
the Trust Estate held or set aside or pledged under the Taxable Series 201 SB Indenture, subject to the
application thereof to the purpo.ses and on the conditions permitted by the Taxable Series 201 SB
Indenture.
4. I'he faxable Series 201 SB Bonds have been duly and validly authorized and issued in
accordance with law and the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds, to the amount named, are valid and legally
binding upon the City, enforceable in accordance with their terms and the terms of the Taxable Series
201SB Indenture, except that the rights ofthe owners of the Taxable Series 201SB Bonds and the
enforceability ofthe Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, moratorium,
reorganization and other similar laws affecting creditors' rights and by equitable principles, whether
considered at law or in equity, including the exercise of judicial discretion.
5 The Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds are payable from any funds ofthe Cily legally available for
such purpose, and all taxable property in the City is subject to the levy of taxes to pay the same without
limitation as to rate or aniount fhe fa.xable Scries 2015B Bonds are further secured by the olher
moneys, securities and funds pledged under ihe faxable Series 201 SB Indenlure.
6

fhe form of Taxable Series 2015B Bond prescribed for said issue is in due form of law.

7 Under present law, interest on the faxable Series 201 SB Bonds is includible m gross inconie
oflhe owners ihereof for federal income tax purpo.ses Ownership ofthe faxable Series 201SB Bonds
may result in other federal lax consequences to certain laxpayers, and we express no opinion regarding
any such collateral consequences arising with respect to (he Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds.
8 In(ci'cst on the Taxable Scries 20158 Bonds is not exempt from present State of Illinois
income ta.xes Ownership ofthe faxable Series 201 SB Bonds may result in other stale and local tax
consequences to certain laxpayers, and wc express no opinion regarding any such collateral consequences
arising wiih respect lo the 'faxable Series 20I5B Bonds

F-7

 We express no opinion herein as to the accuracy, adequacy or eompleleness of any information
furnished to any person in connection with any offer or sale ofthe Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds.
In rendering this opinion, we have relied upon certifications oflhe City with respect lo certain
material facts within the City's knowledge. Our opinion represents our legal judgment based upon our
review ofthe law and the facts lhat we deem relevant to render such opinion and is not a guarantee of a
result This opinion is given as ofthe date hereof and we assume no obligation to revise or supplement
this opinion to rellect any facts or circumstances lhat may hereafter come to our attention or any changes
in law (ha( may hereafter occur.

F-8

  

{[9102 531333 (LW V9103 saunas ?suN-og 'Ivmmaf) OSVQIHQ do LL10

EXHIBIT 4

INDENTURE WITH RESPECT TO SERIES 2015A BONDS

Execution Copy

CITY OF CHICAGO

TO

ZIONS FIRST NATIONAL BANK,

as Trustee

TRUST INDENTURE

SECURING

.

$345^30,000
CITY OF CHICAGO

GENERAL O B U G A I I O N BONDS,
SERIES

2015A

Dated as of July 1,2015

.^Sl I 196.0S.(12.l-!.tloc\
2230746

 T A B L E OF CONTENTS

(This Table of Contents is not a part of the Indenture
and is only for convenience of reference)
SECTION
ARTICLE. 1.

DEFINITIONS

Section 1.01.
ARTICLE

II

Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section

2.01.
2.02.
2.03.
2.04.
2.05.
2.06.
2.07.
2.08.

III

Section
Section
Section
Section
ARTICLE

IV

Definitions

3
9

Authority for and Issuance of Series 2015A Bonds
General Terms of Series 2015A Bonds
Execution
Authentication
Form of Bonds; Temporary Bonds
Delivery of Series 2015A Bonds
Mutilated, Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Series 2015A Bonds
Transfer and Exchange of Series 2015A Bonds; Persons
Treated as Owners
Required Information in Series 2015A Bond Form
Cancellation
Book Entry Provisions
REDEMPTION OF SERIES 2015A BONDS

3.01.
3.02.
3.03.
3.04.

Redemption Terms, Dates and Prices
Notice of Redemption
Selection of Series 2015A Bonds for Redemption
Deposit of Funds

9
10
10
10
11
II
11
12
13
13
13
15
15
17
19
19

APPLICA TION OF SERIES 20I5A BOND PROCEEDS; CREATION OF
FUNDS AND SECURTTY FOR SERIES

Section 4.01.
Section 4.02.
Section 4.03.
Section 4.04.
Section 4.05.
Section 4.06.
Section 4.07.
Section 4.08.
Section 4.09. ,
A R I ICLE V

3

T H E SERIES 2015A BONDS

Section 2.09.
Section 2.10.
Section 2.11.
ARTICLE

PAGE

HEADING

Source of Payment of Series 2015A Bonds
Application of Bond Proceeds
Creation of 2015A Bond Fund and Account Therein
Series 2015A Capitalized Interest Account
Series 2015A Project Account
Deposits into Series 2015A Bond Fund
Tax Covenants
Non-presentment of Series 2015A Bonds
Moneys Ilekl in Trust

INVLS TMENT OF MONEYS

Section 5.01.

20i5A BONDS

Investment of Moneys

20
20
20
20
21
21
22
22
22
23
23

23

 Section 5.02.
ARTICLE VI

Investment Income
DISCHARGE OF LIEN

Section 6.01.
ARTICLE V l l

DEFAULT PROVISIONS; REMEDIES

Section 7.01.
Section 7.02.
AR TICLE

Vlll

Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section

Defaults
Remedies

TRUSTEE AND PAYING AGENT

8.01.
8.02.
8.03.
8.04.
8.05.
8.06.
8.07.
8.08.
8.09.
8.JO.
8.11.
8.12.
8.13.
8.14.
8.15.
8.16.

Section 8.17.
ARTICLE IX

Section 9.02.
Section 9.03.
Section 9.04.
Section 9.05.
Section 9.06.
Section 9.07.
Section 9.08.
Section 9.09.
Section 9.10.

Acceptance of Trusts
Dealing in Series 2015A Bonds
Compensation of Trustee
Paying Agent
Qualification of Trustee
Responsibilities of Trustee
Funds Held in Trust and Security Therefor
Evidence on which Trustee May Act
Permitted Acts and Functions
Resignation
Removal
Appointment of Successor
Transfer of Rights and Property to Successor
Merger or Consolidation
Adoption of Authentication
Evidence of Signatures of Owners and Ownership of Series
2015A Bonds
Preservation and Inspection of Documents

SUPPLEMEN'TAL INDENTURE

Section 9.01.

ARTICLE X.

Defeasance

Supplemental Indenture Effective Upon Execution by the
Trustee
Supplemental Indentures Effective With Consent of Owners
of Series 20I5A Bonds
General Provisions
Additional Matters
.•
Mailing of Notice of Amendment
Powers of Amendment
Con.sent of Ovvners of Series 20I5A Bonds
Modifications by Unanimous Consent
Exclusion of Series 2015A Bonds
Notation on Series 20I5A Bonds

MISCELLANEOUS

23
23

23
24

24
25
26
26
26
26
27
28
28
28
29
29
30
30
30
31
31
31
31
32
32

32
33
33
34
34
34
35
36
36
36
37

 Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section

10.01.
10.02.
10.03.
10.04.
10.05.
10.06.

Severability
Payments Due on Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays
Notices
Counterparts
Rules of Interpretation
Captions

EXHIBIT A — Form of Bond
EXHIBI T B — Series 2015A

Debt Management Project

-III-

37
37
38
38
38
38
A-1
B-l

 TRUST INDENTURE

made and entered into as of July 1, 2015 (this "Indenture"),
frorn
"City"), a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local
government duly organized and existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois,
to ZiONS FIR.ST NATIONAL BANK (the "Trustee"), a national banking association with trust
powers, having a corporate trust office located in the City of Chicago, Illinois, duly organized,
validly existing and authorized to accept and execute trusts of the character herein set out under
and by virtue of the laws of the United States of America,
THIS TRUST INDENTURE,
the CITY OF CHICAGO (the

WITNESSETH:
pursuant to an ordinance duly adopted by the City Council of the City (the
"City Council") on June 17, 2015 (the "Bond Ordinance") the City duly authorized the issuance
and sale of its General Obligation Bonds, Series 2015A (the "Bonds") in order to provide funds
for the purpose of paying (i) costs of the Series 2015A Debt Management Project, (ii) certain
interest to become due on the Series 2015A Bonds and (iii) expenses of issuance of the Series
20i5A Bonds; and
WHEREAS,

WHEREAS, by virtue of Article VII ofthe Illinois Constitution of 1970 and pursuant to the
Bond Ordinance, the City is authorized to issue the Series 2015A Bonds, enter into this Indenture
and to do or cause to be done all the acts and things herein provided or required to be done; and

the execution and delivery of the Series 2015A Bonds and of this Indenture
have in all respects been duly authorized and all things necessary to make such Bonds, when
executed by the City and authenticated by the Trustee, the legal, valid and binding obligations of
the City and to make this Indenture a legal, valid and binding agreement, have been done; and
WHEREAS,

WHEREAS, the Series 2015A Bonds, and the Trustee's Certificate of Authentication to be
endorsed on such Bonds, shall be substantially in the form attached hereto as E.xhih'it A, with
necessary and appropriate variations, omissions and insertions as permitted or required by this
Indenture and the Bond Ordinance;
Now,THEREFORE,THIS INDEN LURE WITNESSETH:

GRANTING CLAUSES

That the City, in consideration of the premises and the acceptance by the Trustee of the
trusts hereby created, and of the purchase and acceptance of the Series 2015A Bonds by the
Registered Owners thereof, and of the sum of one dollar, lawful money of the United States of
America, to it duly paid by the Trustee at or before the execution and delivery of these presents,
and for other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are heieby
acknowledged, to secure the payment of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the
Series 2015A Bonds according to their tenor and effect, and to secure the performance and
observance by the City of all the covenants expres.sed or implied herein and in the Scries 2015A

 Bonds, does hereby assign and grant a security interest in and to the following to the Trustee, and
its successors in trust and assigns forever, for the securing of the performance of the obligations
of the City hereinafter set forth (the "Trust Estate"):
GRANTING CLAUSE FIRST

Any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City legally available for
such purposes, including, but not limited to, the proceeds allocable to the Series 2015A Bonds of
a direct annual tax levied by the City in the Bond Ordinance upon all taxable property in the
City, all to the extent provided in this Indenture;
GRANTING CLAUSE SECOND
All moneys and securities from time to time held by the Trustee under the terms of this
Indenture, except for moneys deposited with or paid to the Trustee and held in trust hereunder
for the redemption of Bonds, notice of the redemption of which has been duly given; and
GRANTING CLAUSE T H I R D

Any and all other property, rights and interests of every kind and nature from time to time
hereafter by delivery or by writing of any kind granted, bargained, sold, alienated, demised,
released, conveyed, assigned, transferred, mortgaged, pledged, hypothecated or otherwise
subjected hereto, as and for additional security hereunder by the City or by any other person on
its behalf or with its written consent to the Trustee, and the Trustee is hereby authorized to
receive any and all such property at any and all times and to hold and apply the same subject to
the terms hereof;
To HAVE AND T O HOLD all and singular the Trust Estate, whether now owned or
hereafter acquired, unto the Trustee and its successors in said trust and assigns forever;
upon the terms and trusts herein set forth for the equal and
proportionate benefit, security and protection of all present and future Registered Owners of the
Series 20ISA Bonds, without privilege, priority or distinction as to the lien or otherwise of any
of the foregoing over any other of the foregoing, except to the extent herein otherwise
specifically provided;
IN TRUST, NEVERTHELESS,

that if the City, its successors or assigns shall well and truly pay, or
cause to be paid, the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the Series 20I5A Bonds, at the
times and in the manner set forth therein according to the true intent and meaning thereof, and
shall cause the payments to be made on the Series 2015A Bonds as required heiein, or shall
provide, as permitted hereby, for the payment thereof, and shall well and truly cause to be kept,
performed and observed all of its covenants and conditions pursuant to the terms of this
Indenture, and shall pay or cause to be paid to the Trustee all sums of money due or to become
due to them in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, then upon the final payment
PROVIDED, HOWEVER,

 thereof this Indenture and the rights hereby granted shall cease, determine and be void; otherwise
this Indenture shall remain in full force and effect.
and it is expressly declared, that all Bonds
reissued and secured hereunder are to be reissued, authenticated and delivered, and all said
property, rights and interests and any other amounts hereby assigned and pledged are to be dealt
with and disposed of, under, upon and subject to the terms, conditions, stipulations, covenants,
agreements, trusts, uses and purposes as herein expressed, and the City has agreed and
covenanted, and does hereby agree and covenant, with the Trustee and the respective owners of
the Series 20I5A Bonds as follows:
THIS INDENTURE FURTHER WITNESSETH,

ARTICLE I .
DEFINITIONS

Section 1.01. Definitions. All capitalized terms used herein unless otherwise defined
shall have the meanings given in the recitals above and the following meanings for purposes of
this Indenture:
"Authorized Denomination" means $5,000 and any integral multiple thereof.
"Authorized Officer" means (a) the Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer, the City
Comptroller or any other official of the City so designated by a Certificate signed by the Mayor
or Chief Financial Officer and filed with the Trustee for so long as such designation shall be in
effect, (b) the City Clerk with respect to the certification of any ordinance or resolution of the
City Council or any other document filed in his or her office and (c) the City Treasurer with
respect to the investment of any moneys held pursuant to this Indenture.
"Beneficial Owner" means the owner of a beneficial interest in the Series 2015A Bonds
registered in the name of Cede & Co., as nominee of DTC (or a successor seciirities depository
or nominee for either of them).
"Bond Counsel" means one or more firms of nationally recognized bond counsel
designated by the Corpotation Counsel of the City.
"Bond Fund" means the fund of that name established and described in Section 4.03
hereof.
"Bondholder," "holder," or "owner of the Series 20I5A Bonds" means the Registered
Owner or Beneficial Owner of any Series 20I5A Bond, as the case may be.
"Bond Ordinance" has the meaning given to such term in the recitals hereto.
"Bond Register" means the registration books of the City kept by the Trustee to evidence
the registration and transfer of Series 2015A Bonds.

 "Bond Year" means a 12-month period commencing on January 2 of each calendar year
and ending on January 1 of the next succeeding calendar year.
"Busine.ss Day" means any day other than (i) a Saturday or Sunday, (ii) a day on which
banks located in the city where the Designated Corporate Trust Office is located are authorized
or required by law to close, and (iii) a day on which The New York Stock Exchange, Inc., is
closed.
"Certificate" means an instrument of the City in writing signed by an Authorized
Officer. Any such instrument in writing and supporting opinions or representations, if any, may,
but need not, be combined in a single instrument with any other instrument, opinion or
representation, and the two or more so combined shall be read and construed so as to form a
single instrument. Any such instrument may be based, insofar as it relates to legal, accounting or
engineering matters, upon the opinion or representation of counsel, accountants, or engineers,
respectively, unless the officer signing such instrument knows that the opinion or representation
with respect to the matters upon which such instrument may be based, as aforesaid, is erroneous.
The same Authorized Officer, or the same counsel or accountant or other persons, as the case
may be, need not certify to all of the matters required to be certified under any provision of this
Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture, but different officers, counsel, accountants or other
persons may certify to different facts, respectively.
"Chief Financial Officer" means the Chief Financial Officer appointed by the Mayor, or
the City Comptroller of the City at any time a vacancy exists in the office of the Chief Financial
Officer.
"City" means the City of Chicago, a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local
government, organized and existing under the Constitution and laws of the State.
"City Clerk" means the duly qualified and acting City Clerk of the City or any Deputy
City Clerk or other person that may lawfully take a specific action or perform a specific duty
prescribed for the City Clerk pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.
"City Comptroller" means the City Comptroller of the City.
"City Deposit" means lawfully available funds of the City in the amount of $714,541.13
deposited into the Series 2015A Bond Fund on the date of issuance ofthe Series 20I5A Bonds
for the payment of interest to become due on the Series 2015A Bonds on January 1,2016.
"Code" means the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986. References to the Code
and to Sections of the Code shall include relevant final, temporary or proposed regulations
thereunder as in effect from time to time and as applicable to obligations issued on the Date of
Issuance.
"Date of Issuance" means July 21, 2015. the date of issuance and delivery of the Series
20I5A Bonds to the initial purchasers thereof.

 "Debt Management Purposes" shall have the meaning assigned to such term in the Bond
Ordinance.
"Defeasance Obligations" means: ( I ) money; or (2)(A) direct obligations of the United
States of America, (B) obligations of agencies of the United States of America, the timely
payment of principal of and interest on which are guaranteed by the United States of America,
(C) obligations of the following government-sponsored agencies that are not backed by the full
faith and credit of the U.S. Government: Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. (FHLMC) debt
obligations, Farm Credit System (formerly: Federal Land Banks, Federal Intermediate Credit
Banks, and Banks for Cooperatives) debt obligations. Federal Home Loan Banks (FHL Banks)
debt obligations, Fannie Mae debt obligations. Financing Corp. (FICO) debt obligations.
Resolution Funding Corp. (REFCORP) debt obligations, and U.S. Agency for International
Development (U.S. A.I.D.) Guaranteed notes, (D) pre-refunded municipal obligations defined as
follows: any bonds or other obligations of any state of the United States of America or of any
agency, instrumentality or local governmental unit of any such state which are not callable at the
option of the obligor prior to maturity or as to which irrevocable instructions have been given by
the obligor to call on the date specified in the notice, or (E) instruments evidencing an ownership
interest in obligations described in the preceding clauses (A), (B) and (C); or (3) a combination
ofthe investments described in clauses (1) and (2) above.
"Designated Corporate Trust Office" means the corporate trust office of the Trustee
located at the address of the Trustee set forth for notices to the Trustee in Section 10.03 hereof,
as such address may be changed from time to time by the Trustee.
"DTC" means The Depository Trust Company. New York, New York, or its nominee,
and its successors and assigns, or any other depository performing siinilar functions.
"Federal Obligation" means any direct obligation of, or any obligation the full and
timely payment of principal of and interest on which is guaranteed by, the United States of
America.
"Fitch" means Fitch Ratings Inc., a corporation organized and existing under the laws of
the State of Delaware, its successors and assigns, and, if such corporation shall be dissolved or
liquidated, or shall no longer perform the functions of a securities rating agency, "Fitch" shall be
deemed to refer to any other nationally recognized securities rating agency designated by the
City by notice to the Trustee.
"Indenture" means this Indenture, as amended from time to time in accordance with
Article IX hereof.
"Interest Payment Dale" means each January 1 and July 1. commencing January 1,2016.
"Kroll" means Kroll Bond Rating Agency, its successors and a.ssigns, and, if Kroll shall
be dissolved or liquidated or shall no longer perform the functions of a security rating agency,
"Kroll" shall be deemed to refer to any other nationally recognized securities rating agency
designated by the City by notice to the Tru.stee.

 "Maturity Date" means, for the Series 2015A Bonds of each specified maturity, the
applicable maturity date set forth in Section 2.02.
"Municipal Code" means the Municipal Code of Chicago, as from time to time amended.
"Opinion of Bond Coun.sel" means a written opinion of Bond Counsel in form and
substance acceptable to the City.
"Outstanding" means, when used with reference to any Series 2015A Bonds, all of such
obligations issued under this Indenture that are unpci'\d,provided that such term does not include:
(a)
Series 2015A Bonds canceled at or prior to such date or delivered to or
acquired by the Trustee or Paying Agent at or prior to such date for cancellation;
(b)
matured or redeemed Series 2015A Bonds which have not been presented
for payment in accordance with the provisions of this Indenture and for the payment of
which the City has deposited funds with the Trustee or Paying Agent;
(c)
Series 20I5A Bonds for which the City has provided for payment by
depositing in an irrevocable trust or escrow, cash or Defeasance Obligations, in each
case, the maturing principal of and interest on which will be sufficient to pay at maturity,
or if called for redemption on the applicable redemption date, the principal of,
redemption premium, if any, and interest on such Series 2015A Bonds;
(d)
Series 20I5A Bonds in lieu of or in exchange or substitution for which
other Series 2015A Bonds shall have been authenticated and delivered pursuant to this
Indenture; and
(e)
Series 2015A Bonds owned by the City and tendered to the Trustee for
cancellation.
"Participant," when used with respect to any Securities Depository, means any
participant ofsuch Securities Depository.
"Paying Agent" means the Trustee and any additional Paying Agent designated by the
Trustee pursuant to Section 8.04 hereof, and any successor thereto.
"Permitted Investments" means any of the following obligations or securities permitted
under the laws ofthe State and the Municipal Code:
(a)
interest-bearing general obligations of the United States of America, the
State or the City;
(b)
United States treasury bills and other non-interest bearing general
obligations of the United States of America when offered for sale in the open market at a

 price below the face value of same, so as to afford the City a return on such investment in
lieu of interest;
(c)
short-term discount obligations of the United States Government or United
States Government agencies;
(d)
certificates of deposit of national banks or banks located within the City
which are either (i) fully collateralized at least 110 percent by marketable United States
Government securities marked to market at least inonthly or (ii) secured by a corporate
surety bond issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State and
having a claims-paying rating in the top rating category as rated by a nationally
recognized statistical rating organization and maintaining such rating during the term of
such investment;
(e)
banker's acceptances of banks and commercial paper of banks whose
senior obligations are rated in the top two short-term rating categories by at least two
national rating agencies and maintaining such rating during the term ofsuch investment;
(f)
tax-exempt securities exempt from federal arbitrage provisions applicable
to investments of proceeds of the City's tax-exempt debt obligations;
(g)
domestic money market mutual funds regulated by and in good standing
with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including any such fund for which the
Trustee or any of its affiliates provides any service including any service for which a fee
may be paid; and
(h)
any other suitable investment instrument permitted by State laws and the
Municipal Code governing municipal investments generally, subject to the reasonable
exercise of prudence in making investments of public funds.
"Principal and Interest Account" means the Account of that name established within the
Bond Fund, as described in Section 4.03 hereof.
"Principal and Iriterest AccoutU Requirement" means an amount, equal to the total
principal installment and interest due on the Series 20I5A Bonds as of each January I and July 1
(including any mandatory redemption ofthe Series 20I5A Bonds as required by Section 3.01(c)
hereof), which amount shall be deposited in the Principal and Interest Account not later than the
Business Day prior to such January I and July I .
"Qualified Collateral" means:
(a)

Federal Obligations;

(b)
direct and general obligations of any state of the United States of America
or any political subdivision of the Slate which are rated not less than "AA" or "Aa2" or
their equivalents by any Rating Agency; and

-7-

 (c)
public housing bonds issued by public housing authorities and fully
secured as to the payment of both principal and interest by a pledge of annual
contributions under an annual contributions contract or contracts with the United States
of America, or project notes issued by public housing authorities, or project notes issued
by local public agencies, in each case fully secured as to the payment of both principal
and interest by a requisition or payment agreement with the United States of America.
"Rating Agency" means any of Fitch, S&P and Kroll, or another rating agency that has a
credit rating assigned to the Series 20I5A Bonds at the request of the City.
"Record Date" means each June 15 and December 15 (whether or not a Business Day).
"Redemption Price" means with respect to the Series 2015A Bonds, the principal amount
thereof plus the applicable premium, if any, payable upon redemption thereof pursuant to the
provisions of such Series 2015A Bonds.
"Registered Owner" or "Owner" means the person or persons in whose name or names a
Series 2015A Bond shall be registered in the Bond Register.
"Securities Depository" means DTC and any other securities depository registered as a
clearing agency with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to Section 17A of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and appointed as the securities depository for the
Series 2015A Bonds.
"Series 20I5A Bond Fund" has the meaning assigned to such term in Section 4.03
hereof.
"Series 2015A Bonds" means the General Obligation Bonds, Series 2015A, issued
pursuant to Section 2.01 hereof.
"Series 2015A Capitalized Interest Account" means the account of that name established
and described in Section 4.04 hereof.
"Series 2015A Debt Management Project" means (i) the payment of costs of the Debt
Management Purposes described in Exhibd B attached hereto and (ii) any other expenditure of
proceeds of the Series 2015A Bonds authorized by the City Council after the date of execution
and delivery of this Indenture, which expenditure is in accordance with the provisions of the Tax
Agreement.
"Series 20/5/4 Project Accounl" means the account of that name established and
described in Section 4.05 hereof.
"S&P" means Standaid & Poor's Financial Services LLC, a division of McGraw Hill
Financial, Inc., its successors and assigns, and. if S&P shall be dissolved or liquidated or shall no
longer perform the functions of a securities rating agency. "S&P" shall be deemed to refer to any

 other nationally recognized securities rating agency designated by the City by notice to the
Trustee.
"State" means the State of Illinois.
"Supplemental Indenture" means any indenture modifying, altering, amending,
supplementing or confirming this Indenture duly entered into in accordance with the terms
hereof.
"Tax Agreenient" means the Tax Exemption Certificate and Agreement of the City, dated
the date of issuance of the Series 2015A Bonds.
"Trust Estate" means the property conveyed to the Trustee pursuant to the Granting
Clauses hereof.
"Trustee" means Zions First National Bank, a national banking association with trust
powers, and its successors and any entity resulting from or surviving any consolidation or merger
to which it or its successors may be a party, and any successor Trustee at the time serving as
successor trustee hereunder.
A R T I C L E II
T H E SERIES

2015A BONDS

Section 2.01.
Authority for and Issuance of Ser'ies 2015A Bonds, (a) No Series 2015A
Bonds may be issued under the provisions of this Indenture except in accordance with this
Article. Except as provided in Section 2.07 hereof, the total principal amount of Series 2015A
Bonds that may be issued hereunder is expressly limited to $345,530,000.
The Series 2015A Bonds shall be designated "City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds,
Series 2015A" and shall be issued as fully registered bonds, without coupons, in Authorized
Denominations'substantially in the form attached as Exhibit A thereto.
Unless the City shall
otherwise direct, the Series 2015A Bonds shall be lettered and numbered from R-l and upwards.
Each Series 2015A Bond shall be dated the Date of Issuance and shall mature, subject to prior
redemption as provided in Article III hereof, on its Maturity Date.
(b)
Each Series 2015A Bond shall bear interest from the later of its date or the most
recent Interest Payment Date to which interest has been paid or duly provided for, until the
principal amount of such Series 20I5A Bond is paid, such interest being payable on each Interest
Payment Date. Interest on each Series 2015A Bond shall be paid to the person in whose name
such Series 2015A Bond is legistered at the close of business on the Record Date next preceding
the appllivable Interest Payment Date, by check or draft of the Trustee, or, at the option of any
registered owner of $1.000,000 or more in aggregate principal amount of Series 2015A Bonds,
by wire transfer of immediately available funds to such bank in the continental United States of
America as the registered owner of such Series 2015A Bonds shall request in writing to the
Trustee.

 (c) The principal of the Series 2015A Bonds and any redemption premium shall be
payable in lawful money of the United States of America which, at the respective dates of
payment thereof, is legal tender for the payinent of public and private debts, upon presentation
and surrender thereof at the Designated Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee.
Section 2.02. General Terms of Series 2015A Bonds. The Series 2015A Bonds shall
mature on January 1 in each year shown in the following table in the respective principal amount
set forth opposite each such year. The Series 2015A Bonds shall bear interest from and
including the Date of Issuance as shown in the table below until payment of the principal or
Redemption Price thereof shall have been made or provided for in accordance with the
provisions hereof, whether at the applicable Maturity Date, upon redemption or acceleration, or
otherwise. Interest accrued on the Series 20I5A Bonds shall be paid in arrears on each Interest
Payment Date. Interest on the Series 20I5A Bonds shall be computed upon the basis of a 360
day year consisting of twelve 30 day months.
YEAR
(JANUARY 1)

2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2026

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT

$4,965,000
7,380,000
7,870,000
8,320,000
8,845,000
5,415,000
19,390,000

INTEREST
RATE

YEAR
(JANUARY 1)

5.00%
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

2027
2028
2029
2033
2034
2035
2039

PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT

INTEREST

$24,925,000
33,585,000
35,275,000
88,100,000
36,430,000
16,420,000
48,610,000

5.250%
5.250
5.375
5.500
5.500
5.500
5.500

RATE

Section 2.03. Execution. The seal of the City or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed to or
printed on each ofthe Series 2015A Bonds, and the Series 2015A Bonds shall be executed by the
manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the manual or facsimile signature of
the City Clerk, and in case any officer whose signature shall appear on any Series 2015A Bond
shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such Series 20I5A Bond, such signature shall
nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all proposes, the same as if such officer had remained in
office until delivery.
Section 2.04. Authentication. All Series 2015A Bonds shall have thereon a certificate of
authentication substantially in the form attached hereto as part of E.xhibit A duly executed by the
Trustee as authenticating agent of the City and showing the date of authentication. No Series
2015A Bond shall be valid or obligatory for any purpose or be entitled to any security or benefit
under this Indenture.unless and until such certificate of authentication shall have been duly
executed by the Trustee by manual signature, and such certificate of authentication upon any
such Series 2015A Bond shall be conclusive evidence that such Series 20I5A Bond has been
authenticated and delivered under the Bond Oidinance and this Indenture. The ceitificate of
authentication on any Series 20I5A Bond shall be deemed to have been executed by the Trustee
if signed by an authorized officer of such Trustee, but it shall not be necessary that the same
officer sisn the certificate of authentication on all of the Series 20I5A Bonds issued hereunder.

10-

 Section 2.05. Form of Series 2015A Bonds. The Series 20I5A Bonds issued under this
Indenture shall be substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A, with such appropriate
variations, omissions and insertions as are permitted or required by the Bond Ordinance and this
Indenture.
Section 2.06. Delivery of Series 2015A Bonds. Upon the execution and delivery of this
Indenture, the City shall execute and deliver to the Trustee, and the Trustee shall authenticate,
the Series 20I5A Bonds and deliver them to the purchasers as may be directed by the City as
hereinafter in this Section provided.
Prior to the delivery by the Trustee of any of the Series 2015A Bonds theie shall be filed
with the Trustee:
(1)
Ordinance;
(2)

copies, duly certified by the City Clerk of the City, of the Bond

original executed counterparts of this Indenture;

(3)
an Opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that this Indenture (i) has been
duly and lawfully authorized by the City Council of the City and executed by the City in
accordance with the provisions of the Bond Ordinance and (ii) will, when executed and
delivered by the Trustee, be valid and binding upon the City and enforceable in
accordance with its terms; and
(4)
a Certificate executed by an Authorized Officer stating that all conditions
precedent vvith respect to the execution of all documents by the City relating to the Series
20ISA Bonds have been satisfied.
Section 2.07. Mutilated, Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Series 2015A Bonds. If any Series
2015A Bond, whether in temporary or definitive form, is lost (whether by reason of theft or
otherwise), destroyed (whether by mutilation, damage, in whole or in part, or otherwise) or
improperly cancelled, the Trustee may authenticate a new Series 201 SA Bond of like date,
maturity date, interest rate, denomination and principal amount and bearing a number not
contemporaneously outstanding; provided that (i) in the case of any mutilated Series 2015A
Bond, such mutilated Series 20I5A Bond shall first be surrendered to the Trustee, and (ii) in the
case of any lost Series 20I5A Bond or Series 2015A Bond destroyed in whole, there shall be first
furnished to the Trustee evidence of such loss, theft, or destruction satisfactory to the City and
the Trustee, together with indemnification ofthe City and the Trustee, satisfactory to the Trustee.
If any lost, destroyed or improperly cancelled Series 2015A Bond shall have matured or is about
to mature, or has been called for redemption, instead of issuing a duplicate Series 2015A Bond,
the Trustee shall pay the same without surrender thereof if theie shall be first furnished to the
Trustee evidence of such loss, destruction or cancellation, together with indemnity, satisfactory
to it. Upon the issuance of any substitute Series 20I5A Bond, the Trustee may require the
payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other governmental charge that may be imposed
in relation thereto.

II

 All Series 20ISA Bonds shall be owned upon the express condition that the foregoing
provisions, to the extent permitted by law, are exclusive with respect to the replacement or
payment of mutilated, destroyed, lost, stolen or purchased Series 20I5A Bonds, and shall
preclude any and all other rights or remedies.
Section 2.08. Transfer and Exchange of Series 2015A Bonds: Persons Treated as
Owners, (a) Subject to the limitations contained in subsection (c) of this Section, upon surrender
for registration of transfer of any Series 201 SA Bond at the Designated Corporate Trust Office of
the Trustee, duly endorsed by, or accompanied by a written instrument or instruments of transfer
in form satisfactory to the Trustee and duly executed by the Bondholder or such Bondholder's
attorney duly authorized in writing in such form and with guarantee of signature as shall be
satisfactory to the Trustee, the City shall execute, and the Trustee shall authenticate and deliver,
in the name of the transferee or transferees, one or more fully registered Series 2015A Bonds of
the same interest rate and Maturity Date of Authorized Denominations, for a like principal
amount bearing numbers not contemporaneously outstanding. Subject to the limitations
contained in subsection (c) of this Section, Series 201SA Bonds may be exchanged at the
Designated Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee for a like aggregate principal amount of Series
2015A Bonds of the same interest rate and Maturity Date of other Authorized Denominations
bearing numbers not contemporaneously outstanding.
(b) No service charge shall be made for any transfer or exchange of Series 201SA
Bonds, but the City or the Trustee may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or
other governmental charge that may be imposed in connection with any transfer or exchange of
Series 201 SA Bonds, except that no such payment may be required in the case of the issuance of
a Series 2015A Bond or Bonds for the unredeemed portion of a Series 20ISA Bond surrendered
for redemption.
(c) The Trustee shall not be required to transfer or exchange any Series 2015A Bond
during the period commencing on the Record Date next preceding any Interest Payment Date of
such Series 20ISA Bond and ending on such Interest Payment Date, or to transfer or exchange
such Series 20ISA Bond after the mailing of notice calling such Series 201SA Bond for
redemption has been made as herein provided or during the period of 15 days next preceding the
giving of notice of redemption of Series 201SA Bonds of the same Matunty Date.
(d) Series 20I5A Bonds delivered upon any registration of transfer or exchange as
provided herein or as provided in Section 2.07 hereof shall be valid general obligations of the
City, evidencing the same debt as the Series 2015A Bonds surrendered, shall be secured by this
Indenture and shall be entitled to all of the security and benefits hereof and of the Bond
Ordinance to the same extent as the Series 20ISA Bond surrendered. The City, the Trustee and
any Paying Agent tnay treat the Registered Owner of any Series 201 SA Bond as the absolute
owner thereof for all purposes, whether or not such Series 20ISA Bond shall be overdue, and
shall not be bound by any notice to the contrary. All payments of or on account of the principal
of. premium, if any. and interest on any such Series 20ISA Bond as herein provided shall be
made only to or upon the written order of the Registered Owner thereof or such Registered
Owner's legal representative, but such registration may be changed as herein provided. All such

-12-

 payments shall be valid and effectual to satisfy and discharge the liability upon such Series
20ISA Bond to the extent of the sum or sums so paid.
Section 2.09. Required Information in Series 2015A Bond Form. On each date on which
the Trustee authenticates and delivers a Series 2015A Bond, it shall complete the information
required to be inserted by the Series 201 SA Bond form and shall keep a record of such
information.
Section 2.10. Cancellation. Any Series 201SA Bond surrendered for the purpose of
payment or retirement, or for exchange, transfer or replacement, shall be canceled upon
surrender thereof to the Trustee or any Paying Agent. If the City shall acquire any of the Series
20ISA Bonds, the City shall deliver such Series 201SA Bonds to the Trustee for cancellation and
the Trustee shall cancel the same. Any such Series 2015A Bonds canceled by any Paying Agent
other than the Trustee shall be promptly transmitted by such Paying Agent to the Trustee.
Certification of Series 201SA Bonds canceled by the Trustee and Series 20ISA Bonds canceled
by a Paying Agent other than the Trustee which are transmitted to the Trustee shall be made to
the City. Canceled Series 201SA Bonds may be destroyed by the Trustee unless instructions to
the contrary are received from the City.
Section 2.11. Book Entry Provisions. The provisions of this Section shall apply as long
as the Series 201 SA Bonds are maintained in book entry form with DTC or another Securities
Depository, any provisions of this Indenture to the contrary notwithstanding. Notwithstanding
anything else to the contrary herein, so long as DTC is the Securities Depository, the Series
20ISA Bonds shall be subject to the operational arrangements of DTC in effect from time to
time.
(a)
The Series 201SA Bonds shall be payable to the Securities Depository, or
its nominee, as the Registered Owner of the Series 2015A Bonds, in same day funds on
each date on which the principal of, premium, if any, and inteiest on the Series 2015A
Bonds is due as set forth in this Indenture and the Series 201SA Bonds. Such payments
shall be made to the offices of the Securities Depository specified by the Securities
Depository to the City and the Trustee in writing. Without notice to or the consent of the
Beneficial Owners of the Series 20ISA Bonds, the City and the Securities Depository
may agree in writing to make payments of principal and interest in a manner different
from that set forth herein. If such different manner of payment is agreed upon, the City
shall give the Trustee notice thereof, and the Trustee shall make payments with respect to
the Series 20ISA Bonds in the manner specified in such notice. Neither the City nor the
Trustee shall have any obligation with respect to the transfer or crediting of the principal
of, premium, if any, and interest on the Series 20I5A Bonds to Participants or the
Beneficial Ovvners ofthe Series 2015A Bonds or their nominees.
(b)
If (i) the City determines, or (ii) the City receives notice that the Securities
Depository has received notice from its Participants having interests in at least 50 percent
in principal amount of the Series 20I5A Bonds, that the Securities Depository or its
successor is incapable of discharging its responsibilities as a securities depository, or that
it is in the best interests of the Beneficial Owners that they obtain certificated Series

13-

 201SA Bonds, the City may (or, in the case of clause (ii) above, the City shall) cause the
Trustee to authenticate and deliver Series 20ISA Bond certificates. The City shall have
no obligation to make any investigation to determine the occurrence of any events that
would permit the City to make any determination described in this paragraph.
(c)
If. following a determination or event specified in paragraph (b) above, the
City discontinues the maintenance of the Series 201 SA Bonds in book entry form vvith
the then current Securities Depository, the City will issue replacement Series 201 SA
Bonds to the replacement Securities Depository, if any, or, if no replacenient Securities
Depository is selected for the Series 201SA Bonds, directly to the Participants as shown
on the records of the former Securities Depository or, to the extent requested by any
Participant, to the Beneficial Owners of the Series 201 SA Bonds shown on the records of
such Participant. Any such Series 20ISA Bonds so issued in replacement shall be in fully
registered form and in Authorized Denominations, be payable as to interest on the
Interest Payment Dates of the Series 20ISA Bonds by check mailed to each Registered
Owner at the address of such Registered Owner as it appears on the Bond Register or, at
the option of any Registered Owner of not less than $1,000,000 principal amount of
Series 20ISA Bonds, by wire transfer to any address in the United States of America on
such Interest Payment Date to such Registered Owner as of such Record Date, if such
Registered Owner provides the Trustee with written notice of such wire transfer address
not later than the Record Date (which notice may provide that it will remain in effect with
respect to subsequent Interest Payment Dates unless and until changed or revoked by
subsequent notice). Principal and premium, if any, on the replacement Series 2015A
Bonds are payable only upon presentation and surrender of such replacement Series
2015A Bond or Bonds at the Designated Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee.
(d)
The Securities Depository and its Participants, and the Beneficial Owners
of the Series 20I5A Bonds, by their acceptance ofthe Series 201SA Bonds, agree that the
City and the Trustee shall not have liability for the failure of such Securities Depository
to perfortTi its obligations to the Participants and the Beneficial Owners of the Series
20ISA Bonds, nor shall the City or the Trustee be liable for the failure of any Participant
or other nominee of the Beneficial Owners to perform any obligation of the Participant to
a Beneficial Owner of the Series 20 ISA Bonds.
(e)
As long as Cede & Co. (or such other nominee as may be requested by an
authorized representative of DTC) is the Registered Owner of the Series 20ISA Bonds, as
nominee of DTC, references herein to the Registered Owners of the Series 201 SA Bonds
shall mean Cede & Co. and shall not mean the Beneficial Owners of the Series 201 SA
Bonds.
(f)
As long as Cede & Co. (or such other nominee as may be requested by an
authorized representative of DTC) is the Registered Owner of the Series 20ISA Bonds:
(i)
if less than all of the Seiies 20ISA Bonds of a maturity ate to be
redeemed prior to maturity, the paiticular Series 201 SA Bonds or portions of such

-14-

 Bonds will be selected by lot by DTC or such successor securities depository in
such manner as DTC or such successor securities depository may determine.
(ii)
selection of Series 20ISA Bonds to be redeemed upon partial
redemption or presentation of Series 2015A Bonds to the Trustee upon partial
redemption, shall be deemed made when the right to exercise ownership rights in
such Series 2015A Bonds through DTC or DTC's Participants is transferred by
DTC on its books;
(iii)
any notices of the interest rate on the Series 20ISA Bonds to be
provided by the Trustee shall be provided to anyone identifying itself to the
Trustee as a person entitled to exercise ownership rights with respect to such
Series 20ISA Bonds through DTC or its Participants; and
(iv)
DTC may present notices, approvals, waivers or other
communications required or permitted to be made by Registered Owners under
this Indenture on a fractionalized basis on behalf of some or all of those persons
entitled to exercise ownership rights in the Series 2015A Bonds through DTC or
its Participants.
A R T I C L E III
REDEMPTION OF S E R I E S

2015A BONDS

Section 3.01.
Redemption Terms, Dates and Prices. The Series 20ISA Bonds shall be
subject to redemption prior to their respective Maturity Dates in the amounts, at the times, at the
Redemption Prices and in the manner provided in this Section.
(a) Optional Redemption.
The Series 20ISA Bonds maturing on or after
January 1, 2026 are subject to optional redemption in whole or in part, on any date occurring on
or after January 1, 2025, in such principal amounts and from such maturities as the City shall
determine and by lot within a single maturity, at a Redemption Price equal to the principal
amount of the Series 201SA Bonds being redeemed plus accrued interest, if any, to the date of
redemption.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call any of the
Series 20ISA Bonds for optional redemption, in whole or in part; provided, that such sale or
waiver will not adversely affect the excludability of interest on the Seiies 20ISA Bonds from
gross income for federal income tax purposes.
(b)

General Provisions Regarding Redemptions.

(i)
No redemption of less than all of the Scries 20ISA Bonds Outstanding
shall be made pursuant to Section 3.01(a) hereof unless the aggregate principal amount of
Series 20ISA Bonds to be redeemed is equal to .SS.OOO multiples. Any redemption of
less than all of the Series 20I5A Bonds Outstanding shall be made in such a manner that
15-

 all Series 20ISA Bonds Outstanding after such redemption are in Authorized
Denominations. If fewer than all Series 20ISA Bonds Outstanding are to be optionally
redeemed, the Series 201SA Bonds to be called shall be called from such maturities as
may be determined by an Authorized Officer.
(ii)
Series 201 SA Bonds may be called for redemption by the Trustee pursuant
to Section 3.01(a) hereof upon receipt by the Trustee at least 45 days prior to the
redemption date (unless a shorter time period shall be satisfactory to the Trustee) of a
written request of the City requesting such redemption. In the case of a redemption
pursuant to Section 3.01(c), Series 20ISA Bonds shall be called for redemption by the
Trustee in accordance with the applicable mandatory schedule provided in Section
3.01(c) hereof, without further action by the City.
(iii)
In lieu of redeeming Series 20ISA Bonds pursuant to Section 3.01(a)
hereof, the Trustee may, at the request of the City, use such funds available hereunder for
redemption of Series 201SA Bonds to purchase Series 20ISA Bonds in the open market
at a price not exceeding the Redemption Price then applicable hereunder. Any Series
20ISA Bond so purchased in lieu of redemption shall be delivered to the Trustee for
cancellation and shall be canceled, all as provided in Section 2.10 hereof.
(c)

Mandatory Redemption of Series 20I5A Bonds.

The Series 201SA Bonds maturing on January 1, 2033 are subject to mandatory
redeinption prior to maturity on January 1 of the years and in the amounts set forth below, at a
RedeiTiption Price equal to the principal amount thereof plus accrued interest to the date fixed for
redemption:
YEAR

PRINCIPAL AMOUNT

2031
2032
2033'

$ 6.205,000
8,275,000
73,620,000

FIII.TI Malunlv

The Series 2015A Bonds maturing on January 1, 2039 are subject to mandatory
redemption prior to maturity at a Redemption Price on January I of the years and in the amounts
set forth below, at a Redemption Price equal to the principal amount thereof plus accrued interest
to the date fixed for redemption:

16-

 YEAR

PRINCIPAL AMOUNT

2036
2037
2038
2039*

$16,135,000
12,620,000
15,875,000
3,980,000

Fiii.ll M.nturily

The principal amount of the Series 201SA Bonds to be mandatorily redeemed in each
year may be reduced through the earlier optional redemption thereof, with any partial optional
redemption of such Series 20ISA Bonds credited against future mandatory redemption
requirements in such order of the mandatory redemption dates as the City may determine. In
addition, on or prior to the sixtieth (60th) day preceding any mandatory redemption date, the
Trustee may, and if directed by the City shall, purchase Series 20ISA Bonds required to be
retired on such mandatory redemption date at such prices as the City shall determine. Any such
Series 201SA Bond so purchased shall be canceled and the principal amount thereof shall be
credited against the payment required on such next mandatory redemption date.
Section 3.02. Notice of Redemption, (a) Unless waived by any owner of Series 201 SA
Bonds to be redeemed, notice of the call for any such redemption shall be given by the Trustee
on behalf of the City by mailing the redemption notice by first class mail at least 30 days and not
more than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption to the Registered Owner of the Series
20ISA Bond or Bonds to be redeemed at the address shown on the Bond Register or at such
other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to the Trustee, but the failure
to mail any such notice or any defect therein as to any Series 2015A Bond shall not affect the
validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Series 201 SA Bond. Any notice of
redemption mailed as provided in this Section 3.02 hereof shall be conclusively presumed to
have been given whether or not actually received by the addressee.
All notices of redemption shall state:
(1)

the redemption date,

(2)

the Redemption Price,

(3)
if less than all outstanding Series 201SA Bonds are to be redeemed, the
identification (and, in the case of partial redemption, the respective principal amounts and
interest rates) of the Series 20ISA Bonds to be redeemed.
(4)
that on the redemption date the Redemption Price will become due and
payable upon each such Series 20ISA Bond or portion thereof called for redemption, and
that interest thereon shall cease to accrue or compound from and after said date.

17-

 (5)
the place where such Series 20ISA Bonds are to be surrendered for
payment of the Redemption Price, and
(6)
such other information as shall be deemed necessary by the Trustee at the
time such notice is given to comply with lavv, regulation or industry standard.
(b) With respect to an optional redemption of Series 20ISA Bonds, such notice may
state that said redemption is conditioned upon the receipt by the Trustee on or prior to the date
fixed for redemption of moneys sufficient to pay the Redemption Price of the Series 20ISA
Bonds. If such moneys are not so received, such redemption notice shall be of no force and
effect, the City shall not redeem such Series 201SA Bonds and such failure to deposit such funds
shall not constitute an Event of Default under this Indenture. The Trustee shall give notice, in
the same manner in which the notice of redemption was given, that such moneys were not so
received and that such Series 2015A Bonds will not be redeemed. Unless the notice of
redemption shall be made conditional as provided above, on or prior to any redemption date for
the Series 20ISA Bonds, the City shall deposit with the Trustee an amount of money sufficient to
pay the Redemption Price of all the Series 20ISA Bonds or portions thereof which are to be
redeemed on that date.
(c) Notice of redemption having been given as aforesaid, the Series 20ISA Bonds, or
portions thereof, so to be redeemed shall, on the redemption date, become due and payable at the
Redemption Price therein specified, and from and after such date (unless the City shall default in
the payment of the Redemption Price or unless, in the event of a conditional notice as described
above, the necessary moneys were not deposited) such Series 20ISA Bonds, or portions thereof,
shall cease to bear interest. Upon surrender of such Series 201 SA Bonds for redemption in
accordance with said notice, such Series 20ISA Bonds shall be paid by the Trustee at the
Redemption Price. Installments of interest due on or prior to the redemption date shall be
payable as herein provided for payment of interest. Upon surrender for any partial redemption of.
any Series 201SA Bond, there shall be prepared for the Registered Owner a new Series 2015A
Bond or Bonds of the same interest rate and maturity in the amount of the unpaid principal.
(d) If any Series 20ISA Bond, or portion thereof, called for redemption shall not be so
paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the principal shall, until paid, bear interest from the
redemption date at the rate borne by such Series 20ISA Bond, or portion thereof, so called for
redemption. All Series 201SA Bonds which have been redeemed shall be cancelled and
destroyed by the Trustee and shall not be reissued.
(e) Failure to give notice in the manner prescribed hereunder with respect to any Series
20ISA Bond, or any defect in such notice, shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for
redeinption for any Series 201SA Bond vvith respect to which notice was properly given. Upon
the happening of the above conditions and if sufficient moneys are on deposit with the Trustee
on the applicable redemption date to redeem the Series 20ISA Bonds to be redeemed and to pay
interest due thereon and premium, if any, the Series 20I5A Bonds thus called shall not. after the
applicable redemption date, bear interest, be protected by this Indenture or the Bond Ordinance
or be deemed to be Outstanding under the provisions of this Indenture.

18-

 (0 It any Series 20ISA Bond is transferred or exchanged on the Bond Register after
notice has been given calling such Series 20ISA Bond for redemption, the Trustee will attach a
copy of such notice to the Series 20ISA Bond issued in connection with such transfer or
exchange.
(g) If any Series 20ISA Bond is not presented for payment when the principal amount
thereof becomes due, either at maturity or at a date fixed for redemption thereof or otherwise,
and if moneys sufficient to pay such Series 20ISA Bond are held by the Trustee for the benefit of
the Registered Owner of such Series 20ISA Bond, the Trustee shall hold such moneys for the
benefit of the Registered Owner of such Series 201 SA Bond without liability to the Registered
Owner for interest. The Registered Owner of such Series 20ISA Bond thereafter shall be
restricted exclusively to such funds for satisfaction of any claims relating to such Series 2015A
Bond.
Section 3.03. Selection of Series 2015A Bonds for Redemption. If less than all the Series
20ISA Bonds shall be called for redemption under any provision of this Indenture permitting
such partial redemption, (i) such redemption shall be by lot in such inanner as the Trustee may
determine among such Series 201SA Bonds, and (ii) subject to other applicable provisions of this
Indenture, the portion of any Series 201SA Bond to be redeemed shall be in a principal amount
equal to an Authorized Denomination. In selecting Series 2015A Bonds for redemption, the
Trustee shall assign to each Series 201 SA Bond of like Maturity Date, a distinctive number for
each minimum Authorized Denomination of such Series 20ISA Bond and shall select by lot
from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as, at such minimum Authorized Denomination
for each number, shall equal the principal amount of such Series 2015A Bonds to be redeemed.
In such case, the Series 2015A Bonds to be redeemed shall be those to which were assigned
numbers so selected; provided that only so much of the principal amount of each Series 2015A
Bond shall be redeemed as shall equal such minimum authorized denomination for each number
assigned to it and so selected. If it is determined that one or more, but not all, of the integral
multiples ofthe Authorized Denomination of principal amount represented by any Series 201SA
Bond is to be called for redemption, then, upon notice of intention to redeem such integral
multiple of an Authorized Denomination, the Registered Owner of such Series 201 SA Bond shall
forthwith surrender such Series 201 SA Bond to the Trustee for (a) payment to such Registered
Owner of the Redemption Price of the integral multiple of the Authorized Denomination of
principal aniount called for redemption, and (b) delivery to such Registered Owner of a new
Series 20ISA Bond or Bonds in the aggregate principal amount of the unredeemed balance of the
principal amount of such Series 20ISA Bond. New Series 20I5A Bonds representing the
unredeemed balance ofthe principal amount of such Series 2015A Bond shall be issued to the
Registered Owner thereof without charge therefor.
The Trustee shall promptly notify the City in writing of the Series 20ISA Bonds, or
portions thereof, selected for redemption and, in the case of any Series 20ISA Bond selected for
partial redemption, the principal amount theieof, and the interest rate thereof to be redeemed.
Section 3.04. Deposit of Funds. For the redemption of any of the Series 20ISA Bonds,
the City shall cause to be deposited in the Principal and Interest Account moneys sufficient to

-19-

 pay when due the principal of, and premium, if any, and interest on, the Series 201 SA Bonds to
be redeemed on the redemption date to be applied in accordance with the provisions hereof.
ARTICLE I V

2015A BOND PROCEEDS;
CREATION OF FUNDS AND SECURITY FOR SERIES 2015A BONDS
APPLICATION OF SERIES

Section 4.01. Source of Payment of Series 2015A Bonds. Pursuant to the Bond
Ordinance, the Series 201 SA Bonds constitute direct and general obligations of the City for the
payment of which the City pledges its full faith and credit.
Section 4.02. AppUcation of Botid Proceeds. The proceeds of the sale of the Series
201SA Bonds, consisting of the principal ainount of the Series 2015A Bonds less net original
issue discount of $4,570,044.25 used in the marketing of the Series 201 SA Bonds and less an
Underwriters' discount of $2,176,525.60, shall be applied simultaneously with their delivery as
follows:
(i)
There shall be deposited to the credit of the Series 20ISA Capitalized
Interest Account the sum of $41,299,227.98 to be applied to the payment of certain
interest to accrue on the Series 201 SA Bonds as provided in Section 4.04 hereof.
(ii)
There shall be deposited to the credit of the Series 20ISA Project Account
the sum of $297,484^02.17 to be applied to the payment of costs of the Series 2015A
Debl Management Project and costs of issuance of the Series 2015A Bonds as provided
in Section 4.05 hereof.
Section 4.03. Creation of 2015A Bond Fund and Account Therein.
(a) There is
established with the Trustee a trust fund designated "City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds,
Series 20ISA Bond Fund" (the "Series 2015A Bond Fund").
(i)
At each such time as is required under this Indenture, the City shall
deposit into the Series 20ISA Bond Fund, from funds of the City legally available
therefor, an amount sufficient to satisfy the Principal and Interest Account Requirement.
On the date of issuance of the Series 20ISA Bonds, the City has delivered to the Trustee
for deposit to the Series 2015A Bond Fund the City Deposit vvhich shall be applied to the
payment of interest to become due on the Series 20ISA Bonds on January 1, 2016.
(ii)
Money on deposit in the Series 20ISA Bond Fund shall be applied by the
Trustee to pay the principal of (whether due at maturity or by mandatory redemption) and
interest on the Series 20ISA Bonds as the same become due.
(iii)
Pending the use of moneys held in the Series 20ISA Bond Fund, the
Trustee shall invest such moneys in Permitted Investments upon the direction of an
Authorized Officer or any person designated by an Authorized Officer. Income from
such investments shall be credited to the Series 20I5A Bond Fund.
-20-

 (b) Creation of Principal and Interest Account. There is established with the Trustee an
account within the Series 20I5A Bond Fund, designated as the "Series 201SA Principal and
Interest Account" (the "Principal and Interest Account").
Section 4.04. Series 2015A Capitalized Interest Account. There is established with the
Trustee as part of the Series 20ISA Bond Fund a trust account designated "City of Chicago
General Obligation Bonds, Series 20ISA Capitalized Interest Account" (the "Series 2015A
Capitalized Interest Account") to hold certain proceeds of sale of the Series 2015A Bonds
described in subparagraph (i) of Section 4.02 hereof for application as authorized herein.
Moneys on deposit in the Series 20ISA Capitalized Interest Account shall be withdrawn by the
Trustee on the Business Day prior to each of the following Interest Payment Dates and deposited
into the Series 20ISA Bond Fund for application to the payment of the interest due on the Series
20ISA Bonds on each of such Interest Payment Dates in the amounts as follows:
AMOUN T OF INTERES T
INTERES T PAYMEN I DA TE

TO BE PAID

January 1,2016
July 1,2016
January 1,2017
July 1,2017
January 1,2018

$7,508,950.54
8,447,569.36
8,447,569.36
8,447,569.36
8,447,569.36

Pending the use of moneys held in the Series 201 SA Capitalized Interest Account, the Trustee
shall invest such moneys in Permitted Investments upon the direction of an Authorized Officer or
any person designated by an Authorized Officer. Income from such investments shall be
transferred to the Series 201SA Project Account. Any amount remaining in the Series 201SA
Capitalized Interest Account on January 2,2018 shall be withdrawn therefrom and deposited into
the Series 20ISA Bond Fund and applied to the payment of the next interest to become due on
the Series 201 SA Bonds.
Section 4.05. Series 20/5/1 Project Account. There is established with the Trustee a trust
account designated "City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Series 20ISA Project Account"
(the "Series 2015A Project Accounl") to hold certain proceeds of sale of the Series 20ISA
Bonds described in subparagraph (ii) of Section 4.02 hereof for application as authorized herein.
Proceeds of the sale of the Series 20ISA Bonds deposited in the Series 20ISA Project Account
shall be used (i) to pay costs of the Series 20ISA Debt Management Project, and (ii) to pay costs
of issuance of the Series 201 SA Bonds. Moneys on deposit in the Series 20ISA Project Account
shall be disbursed by the Trustee upon receipt of a written request therefor executed by an
Authorized Officer, specifying the purpose for which such disbursement is being made. Pending
the use of moneys held in the Series 20ISA Project Account, the Trustee shall invest such
moneys in Permitted Investments upon the direction of an Authorized Officer or any peison
designated by an Authorized Officer. Income from such investments shall be retained in the
Series 201SA Project Account. Completion of the Series 20I5A Debt Management Project shall
be evidenced by a written notification to the Trustee executed by an Authorized Officer directing
the Trustee to apply transfer any remaining balance in the Series 20ISA Project Account to the

-21

 Series 201 SA Bond Fund for application to the payment ofthe next interest to become due on the
Series 20ISA Bonds.
Section 4.06.
Deposits into Series 2015A Bond Fund. Not later than the Business Day
prior to each Interest Payment Date (each such date referred to herein as the "Deposit Date")
there shall be on deposit in the Series 201 SA Bond Fund (which deposit may include amounts
from the Series 201 SA Capitalized Interest Account as described in Section 4.04 hereof) an
amount equal to the Principal and Interest Account Requirement (such amount with respect to
any Deposit Date being referred to herein as the "Series 2015A Deposit Requirement").
In addition to the Series 201SA Deposit Requirement, there shall be deposited into the
Series 20ISA Bond Fund any other moneys received by the Trustee under and pursuant to this
Indenture, when accompanied by directions from the person depositing such moneys that such
moneys are to be paid into the Series 201 SA Bond Fund.
Upon calculation by the Trustee of each Series 201SA Deposit Requirement under this
Section, the Trustee shall notify the City of the Series 20ISA Deposit Requirement and the
Deposit Date to which it relates, and shall provide the City with such supporting documentation
and calculations as the City may reasonably request.
Sect'ion 4.07. Tax Covenants, (a) The City covenants that it will take no action in the
investment of the proceeds of the Series 201SA Bonds which would result in making the interest
payable on any of such Series 201 SA Bonds subject to federal income taxes by reason of such
Series 201 SA Bonds being classified as "arbitrage bonds" within the meaning of Section 148 of
the Code.
(b) The City further covenants that it will act with respect to the proceeds of the Series
201SA Bonds, the earnings on the proceeds of such Series 2015A Bonds and any other moneys
on deposit in any fund or account maintained in respect of such Series 201SA Bonds, including,
if necessary, a rebate of such earnings to the United States of America, in a manner which would
cause the interest on such Series 20ISA Bonds to continue to be exempt from federal income
taxation under Section 103(a) of the Code.
Section 4.08. Non-presentment of Series 20ISA Bonds. In the event any Series 20ISA
Bond shall not be presented for payment when the principal thereof becomes due, whether at
maturity, at the date fixed for redemption or otherwise, if moneys sufficient to pay such Series
20ISA Bond shall have been made available to the Trustee for the benefit of the Registered
Owner thereof, subject to the provisions of the immediately following paragraph, all liability of
the City to the Registered Owner thereof for the payment of such Series 20ISA Bond shall
forthwith cease, determine and be completely discharged, and thereupon it shall be the duty of
the Trustee to hold such moneys, without liability for interest thereon, for the benefit of the
Registered Owner of such Series 20ISA Bond who shall thereafter be restricted exclusively to
such moneys, for any claim of whatever nature on his or her part under this Indenture or on. or
with respect to. such Series 20ISA Bond.

-22-

 Any moneys so deposited with and held by the Trustee not so applied to the payment of
Series 20I5A Bonds within two years after the date on which the same shall have become due
shall be repaid by the Trustee to the City, and thereafter the Registered Owners of such Series
2015A Bonds shall be entitled to look only to the City for payment, and then only to the extent of
the amount so repaid, and all liability of the Trustee with respect to such moneys shall thereupon
cease, and the City shall not be liable for any interest thereon and shall not be regarded as a
trustee of such moneys. The obligation of the Trustee under this Section to pay any such funds
to the City shall be subject, however, to any provisions of law applicable to the Trustee or to
such funds providing other requirements for disposition of unclaimed property.
Section 4.09. Moneys Held in Trust. All moneys required to be deposited with or paid to
the Trustee for the account of any fund or account referred to in any provision of this Indenture
shall be held by the Trustee in trust as provided in Section 8.07 of this Indenture, and shall, while
held by the Trustee, constitute part of the Trust Estate and be subject to the lien or security
interest created hereby.
ARTICLE V
INVESTMEN T OF MONEYS

Section 5.01. Investment of Moneys. Moneys held in the funds, accounts and subaccounts
established hereunder shall be invested and reinvested in accordance with the provisions
governing investments contained in this Indenture. All such investments shall be held by or
under the control of the Trustee and shall be deemed at all times a part of the fund, account or
subaccount for which they were made.
Section 5.02. Investment Income. The interest earned on any investment of moneys held
hereunder, any profit realized from such investment and any loss resulting from such investment
shall be credited or charged to the fund, account or subaccount for which such investment was
made.
ARTICLE V I
DISCHARGE OF L I E N

Section 6.01. Defeasance, (a) If the City shall pay to the Registered Owners of the Series
2015A Bonds, or provide for the payment of, the principal, premium, if any, and interest to
become due on the Series 20ISA Bonds, then this Indenture and the Bond Ordinance shall be
fully discharged and satisfied with lespect to the Series 201 SA Bonds. Upon the satisfaction and
discharge of this Indenture, the Trustee shall, upon the request of the City, execute and deliver to
the City all such instruments as may be desirable to evidence such discharge and satisfaction, and
all fiduciaries shall pay over or deliver to the City all funds, accounts and other moneys or
securities held by them pursuant to this Indenture which are not required for the payment or
redemption of the Series 20ISA Bonds. If payment or provision for payment is made, to or for
the Registered Ovvners of all or a portion of the Series 20ISA Bonds, of the principal of and

-23-

 interest due and to become due on any Series 20ISA Bond at the times and in the manner
stipulated therein, and there is paid or caused to be paid to the Trustee all sums of money due and
to become due according to the provisions of this Indenture, then these presents and the estate
and rights hereby and by the Bond Ordinance granted shall cease, terminate and be void as to
those Series 20ISA Bonds or portions thereof except for purposes of registration, transfer and
.exchange of Series 20ISA Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations. Any
Series 20ISA Bond shall be deemed to be paid within the meaning of this Section when payment
of the principal of any such Series 201SA Bond, plus interest thereon to the due date thereof
(whether such due date be by reason of maturity or upon redemption as provided in this
Indenture or otherwise), either (a) shall have been made or caused to have been made in
accordance with the terms thereof, or (b) shall have been provided for by irrevocably depositing
with the Trustee, in trust and exclusively for such payment, (1) moneys sufficient to make such
payment or (2) Defeasance Obligations, or (3) a combination of the investments described in
clauses (1) and (2) above, such amounts so deposited being available or maturing as to principal
and interest in such amounts and at such times, without consideration of any reinvestment
thereof, as will insure the availability of sufficient moneys to make such payment (ail as
confirmed by a nationally recognized firm of independent public accountants). If the City shall
pay and discharge a portion of the Series 2015A Bonds as aforesaid, such portion shall cease to
be entitled to any lien, benefit or security under this Indenture and the Bond Ordinance. The
liability of the City with respect to such Series 2015A Bonds shall continue, but the Registered
Owners thereof shall thereafter be entitled to payment (to the exclusion of all other Bondholders)
only out of the Defeasance Obligations deposited with the Trustee under this Article VI.
(b) No such deposit under this Section shall be made or accepted hereunder and no use
made of any such deposit unless the Trustee shall have received an Opinion of Bond Cpunsel to
the effect that such deposit and use would not cause any of such Series 201SA Bonds to be
treated as "arbitrage bonds" within the meaning of Section 148 of the Code or any successor
provision thereto.
(c) Nothing in this Indenture shall prohibit a defeasance deposit of escrow securities as
provided in this section from being subject to a subsequent sale of such escrow securities and
reinvestment of all or a portion of the proceeds of that sale in escrow securities which, together
with money to remain .so held in trust, shall be sufficient to provide for payment of principal,
redemption premium, if any, and interest on any of the defeased Series 201SA Bonds. Amounts
held by the Trustee in excess of the amounts needed so to provide for payment of the defeased
Series 201 SA Bonds may be subject to withdrawal by the City.

ARTICLE V I I
DEFAULT PROVISIONS; REMEDIES

Section 7.01.
of Default":

Defaults. Each of the following events is hereby declared to be an "Event

-24-

 (a)
payment of the principal or Redemption Price, if any, of any Series 2015A
Bonds shall not be made when and as the same shall become due, whether at maturity or
upon call for redemption or otherwise;
(b)
payment of any installment of interest on any Series 201 SA Bonds shall
not be made when and as the same shall become due; or
(c)
the City shall fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this Indenture,
or shall default in the performance or observance of any of the covenants, agreements or
conditions on its part contained herein or in the Series 2015A Bonds, which materially
affects the rights of the owners of the Series 2015A Bonds and such failure, refusal or
default shall continue for a period of 45 days after written notice thereof by the Trustee or
the owners of not less than 25 percent in principal amount of the Outstanding Series
20ISA Bonds; provided, however, that in the case of any such default which can be cured
by due diligence but which cannot be cured within the 4S-day period, the time to cure
shall be extended for such period as may be necessary to remedy the default with all
diligence.
Sect'ion 7.02. Remedies, (a) Upon the happening and continuance of any Event of Default
specified in paragraph (a) or (b) of Section 7.01 hereof, the Trustee shall proceed, or upon the
happening and continuance of any Event of Default (beyond the time periods specified therein)
specified in paragraph (c) of Section 7.01 hereof, the Trustee may proceed, and upon the written
request of the owners of not less than 25 percent in principal amount of the Outstanding Series
2015A Bonds, shall proceed, in its own name, subject to the provisions of this Section, to protect
and enforce its rights and the rights of the owners of the Series 201SA Bonds by such of the
following remedies as the Trustee, being advised by counsel, shall deem most effectual to protect
and enforce such rights:
(i)
by mandamus or other suit, action or proceeding at law or in equity, to
enforce all rights of the owners of the Series 201 SA Bonds including the right to require
the City to receive and collect taxes adequate to carry out the covenants and agreements
as to such taxes and to require the City to carry out any other covenant or agreement with
the owners of the Series 2015A Bonds and to perform its duties under this Indenture;
(ii)

by bringing suit upon the Series 201 SA Bonds;

(iii)
by action or suit in equity, require the City to account as if it were the
trustee of an express trust for the owners of the Series 2015A Bonds; and/or
(iv)
by action or suit in equity, enjoin any acts or things which may be
unlawful or in violation of the rights of the ovvners of the Series 20ISA Bonds.
(b) In the enforcemenl of any rights and remedies under this Indenture, the Trustee shall
be entitled to sue for, enforce payment of and receive any and all amounts then or during any
default becoming, and at any time remaining, due from the City but only out of moneys pledged
as security for the Series 201SA Bonds for principal. Redemption Price, interest or otherwise.

-25-

 under any provision of this Indenture or of the Series 2015A Bonds, and unpaid, with interest on
overdue payments at the rate or rates of interest specified in such Series 20ISA Bonds, together
with any and all costs and expenses of collection and of all proceedings hereunder and under
such Series 201SA Bonds without prejudice to any other right or remedy of the Trustee or of the
owners of the Series 20ISA Bonds, and to recover and enforce a Judgment or decree against the
City for any portion of such amounts remaining unpaid, vvith interest, costs and expenses, and to
collect from any moneys available under this Indenture for such purpose, in any manner
provided by law, the moneys adjudged or decreed to be payable.
(c) Under no circumstance may the Trustee declare the principal of or interest on any
Series 201SA Bond to be due and payable prior to its Maturity Date following the occurrence of
an Event of Default under this Indenture.
ARTICLE

VIII

TRUSTEE AND PAYING AGENT

Section 8.01. Acceptance ofTru.sts. The Trustee hereby accepts the trusts imposed upon
it by this Indenture, and agrees to perform said trusts, but only upon and subject to the express
terms and conditions set forth herein. Except as otherwise expressly set forth in this Indenture,
the Trustee assumes no duties, responsibilities or liabilities by reason of its execution of this
Indenture other than as set forth in this Indenture, and this Indenture is executed and accepted by
the Trustee subject to all the terms and conditions of its acceptance of the trust under this
Indenture. The Trustee shall make payments to Bondholders and effect optional and mandatory
redemptions when required, whether or not its fees and expenses have been fully paid.
Seclion 8.02. Dealing in Series 2015A Bonds. The Trustee, in its individual capacity,
may buy, sell, own, hold and deal in any of the Series 2015A Bonds, and may Join in any action
which the Registered Owner of any Series 201 SA Bond may be entitled to take with like effect
as if it did not act in any capacity hereunder. The Trustee, in its individual capacity, either as
principal or agent, may also engage in or be interested in any financial or other function with the
City, and may act as depositary, trustee or agent for any committee or body of the Registered
Owners of Series 201 SA Bonds secured hereby or other obligations of the City as freely as if it
did not act in any capacity hereunder.
Seclion 8.03. Compensation of Trustee. The City shall pay to the Trustee from time to
time reasonable compensation for all services rendered under this Indenture and also all
reasonable expenses, charges, counsel fees and other disbursements, including those of their
attorneys, agents and employees incurred in and about the peiformance of their powers and
duties under this Indenture and, except as provided in Section 8.01 hereof the Trustee shall have
a lien therefor on any and all moneys at any time held by it under this Indenture. The City
further agrees to indemnify and save the Trustee harmless against any liabilities which it may
incur in the exercise and performance of its powers and duties hereunder, which are not due to its
nesligence or default.

-26-

 Section 8.04. Paying Agent. 'The 'Trustee may appoint a Paying Agent with power to act
on its behalf and subject to its direction (i) in the authentication, registration and delivery of
Series 20ISA Bonds in connection with transfers and exchanges hereunder, as fully to all intents
and purposes as though such Paying Agent had been expressly authorized by this Indenture to
authenticate, register and deliver Series 201 SA Bonds, and (ii) for effecting purchases and sales
of Series 2015A Bonds pursuant hereto and accepting deliveries of Series 2015A Bonds, making
deliveries of Series 201SA Bonds and holding Series 2015A Bonds pursuant hereto. The
foregoing notwithstanding, the Trustee need not appoint a Paying Agent hereunder as long as the
Series 20ISA Bonds are held in book-entry form pursuant to Section 2.11 hereof; at any time the
Series 20ISA Bonds are not held in book-entry form pursuant to Section 2.1 1 hereof, the Trustee
shall either maintain an office in New York, New York capable of handling the duties of Paying
Agent hereunder, or shall appoint a Paying Agent with an office in New York, New York
hereunder. Any Paying Agent appointed pursuant to this Section shall evidence its acceptance
by a certificate filed with the Trustee and the City. For all purposes of this Indenture, the
authentication, registration and delivery of Series 2015A Bonds by or to any Paying Agent
pursuant to this Section 8.04 shall be deemed to be the authentication, registration and delivery
of Series 2015A Bonds "by or to the Trustee." Such Paying Agent shall at all times be a
commercial bank or trust company having an office in New York, New York, and shall at all
times be a corporation organized and doing business under the laws of the United States of
America or of any state with combined capital and surplus of at least $50,000,000 and in each
case authorized under such laws to exercise corporate trust powers and subject to supervision or
examination by Federal or state authority. If such corporation publishes reports of condition at
least annually pursuant to law or the requirements of such authority, then for the purposes of this
Section the combined capital and surplus of such corporation shall be deemed to be its combined
capital and surplus as set forth in its most recent report of condition so published.
Any corporation into which such Paying Agent may be merged or converted, or vvith
which it may be consolidated, or any corporation resulting from any merger, consolidation or
conversion to which such Paying Agent shall be a party, or any corporation succeeding to the
corporate trust business of such Paying Agent, shall be a successor of such Paying Agent
hereunder, if such successor corporation is otherwise eligible under this Section, without the
execution or filing or any further act on the part of the parties hereto or such Paying Agent or
such successor corporation.
Any Paying Agent may at any time resign by giving written notice of resignation to the
Trustee and the City, and such resignation shall take effect at the appointment by the Trustee of a
successor Paying Agent pursuant to the succeeding provisions of this Section and the acceptance
by the successor Paying Agent of such appointment. The Trustee may at any time terminate the
agency of any Paying Agent by giving written notice of termination to such Paying Agent and
the City, which termination shall not take effect until the acceptance by the successor Paying
Agent of such appointment. Upon receiving such a notice of resignation or upon such a
termination, or in case at any time such Paying Agent shall cease to be eligible tmder this
Section, the Trustee shall promptly appoint a successor Paying Agent, shall give written notice of
such appointment to the City and shall mail notice ofsuch appointinent to all Registered Ovvners
of Series 20ISA Bonds.

-27-

 Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any Paying Agent shall be entitled to
rely on information furnished to it orally or in writing by the 'Trustee and shall be protected
hereunder in relying thereon. The Trustee agrees to pay to any Paying Agent from time to time
its fees and expenses for its services, and the Trustee shall be entitled to be reimbursed for such
payments pursuant to Section 8.03 hereof.
Section 8.05. Qualification of Trustee. The Trustee hereunder shall be a bank, trust
company or national banking association having the powers of a trust company doing business
and having a corporate trust office in the City of Chicago, Illinois.
Section 8.06. Responsibilities of Trustee, (a) The recitals of fact herein and in the Series
201 SA Bonds shall be taken as the statements of the City and the Trustee assumes no
responsibility for the correctness of the same. The Trustee makes no representations as to the
validity or sufficiency of this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture or of any Series 20ISA
Bonds issued hereunder or thereunder or in respect of the security afforded by this Indenture or
any Supplemental Indenture and the Trustee shall not incur any responsibility in respect thereof.
The Trustee shall, however, be responsible for its representation contained in its certificate of
authentication on the Series 20ISA Bonds. The Trustee shall not be under any responsibility or
duty with respect to the issuance of the Series 201 SA Bonds for value or the application of the
proceeds thereof except to the extent such proceeds are paid to the Trustee in its capacity as
Trustee, or the application of any moneys paid to the City or others in accordance with this
Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture. The Trustee shall not be under any obligation or duty
to perform any act that would involve it in expense or liability or to institute or defend any action
or suit in respect hereof, or to advance any of its own moneys, unless properly indemnified.
Subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this Section, the Trustee shall not be liable in
connection with the performance of its duties hereunder except for its own negligence or willful
misconduct or that of its agents.
(b) The Trustee, prior to the occurrence of an Event of Default and after the remedy of
all Events of Default that may have occurred, undertakes to perform such duties and only such
duties as are specifically set forth in this Indenture and each Supplemental Indenture. In case an
Event of Default has occurred and has not been remedied, the Trustee shall exercise such of the
rights and powers vested in it by law, this Indenture and each Supplemental Indenture and shall
use the same degree of care and skill in their exercise as a prudent person would exercise or use
under the circumstances in the conduct of his or her own affairs. Any provision of this Indenture
and any Supplemental Indenture relating to action taken or so to be taken by the Trustee or to
evidence upon which the Trustee may rely shall be subject to the provisions of this Section.
Seclion 8.07. Funds Field in Trust and Security Therefor. Any moneys held by the
Trustee, as such, at any time pursuant to the terms of this Indenture or any Supplemental
Indenture shall be and hereby are assigned, transferred and set over unto the Trustee in trust for
the purposes and upon the terms and conditions of this Indentme or any Supplemental Indenture.
Subject to the terms of this Indenture concerning Permitted Investments, all moneys (not
including securities) held by the Trustee, as such, may be deposited by the Trustee in its banking
department, or with such other banks, trust companies, or national banking associations, each
having a place of business in the City of Chicago, Illinois, as niay be designated by the City and

-28-

 approved by the Trustee. No such funds shall be deposited with any bank, trust company or
national banking association, other than the Trustee, in an amount exceeding 25 percent of the
amount which an officer of such bank, trust company or national banking association shall
certify to the Trustee and the City as the combined capital, surplus and undivided profits of such
bank, trust company or national banking association. No such funds shall be deposited or remain
on deposit with any bank, trust company or national banking association in excess of the amount
insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, unless (a) such bank, trust company or
national banking association shall have deposited in trust with the trust department of the Trustee
or vvith a Federal Reserve Bank or branch or. with the written approval of the Trustee and the
City, pledged to some other bank, trust company or national banking association, for the benefit
of the City and the appropriate fund or account, as collateral security for the moneys deposited.
Qualified Collateral having a current market value (exclusive of accrued interest) at least equal to
110 percent of the amount of such moneys, or (b) in lieu of such collateral security as to all or
any part of such moneys, there shall have been deposited in trust with the trust department of the
Trustee, for the benefit of the City and the appropriate fund, account, subfund or subaccount, and
remain in full force and effect as security for such moneys or part thereof, the indemnifying bond
or bonds of a surety company or companies qualified as surety for deposits of funds of the
United States of America and qualified to transact business in the State in a sum at least equal to
the amount of such moneys or part thereof. The Trustee shall allow and credit interest on any
such moneys held by it at such rate as it customarily allows upon similar moneys of similar size
and under similar conditions or as required by law. Interest in respect of moneys or on securities
in any fund, account, subfund or subaccount shall be credited in each-case to the fund, account,
subfund or subaccount in vvhich such moneys or securities are held.
Section 8.08. Evidence on which Trustee May Act. The Trustee shall be protected in
acting upon any notice, resolution, request, consent, order, certificate, report, opinion, bond or
other paper or document believed by it to be genuine, and to have been signed or presented by
the proper party or parties. The Trustee may consult with counsel, who may or may not be
counsel to the City, and the opinion of such counsel shall be full and complete authorization and
protection in respect of any action taken or suffered by it hereunder in good faith and in
accordance therewith. Whenever the Trustee shall deem it necessary or desirable that a matter be
proved or established prior to taking or suffering any action hereunder, including payment of
moneys out of any fund or account, such matter (unless other evidence in respect thereof be
herein specifically prescribed) may be deemed to be conclusively proved and established by a
Certificate, and such Certificate shall be full warrant for any action taken or suffered in good
faith under the provisions of this Indenture upon the faith thereof, but in its discretion the Trustee
may in lieu thereof accept other evidence of such fact or matter or may require such further or
additional evidence as to it may seem reasonable. Except as otherwise expressly provided herein
or therein, any request, order, notice or other direction required or permitted to be furnished
pursuant to any provision hereof or thereof by the City to the Trustee shall be sufficiently
executed if executed in the name of the City by an Authorized Officer.
Section 8.09. Permitted Acls and Functions. The Trustee may become the Owner of any
Series 20ISA Bonds, with the same rights it would have if it weie not the Trustee. To the extent
permitted by law, the Trustee may act as depositary for, and permit any of its officers or directors
to act as a member of, or in any other capacity with respect to, any committee formed to protect

-29-

 the rights of the Owners of Series 2015A Bonds or to effect or aid in any reorganization growing
out of the enforcement of the Series 201SA Bonds or this Indenture, whether or not any such
committee shall represent the Owners of a majority in principal amount of the Series 201SA
Bonds then Outstanding.
Section 8.10. Resignation. The Trustee may at any time resign and be discharged of its
duties and obligations created by this Indenture by giving not fewer than 60 days' written notice
to the City and mailing notice thereof, to the owners of Series 201 SA Bonds at their addresses
shown on the registration books kept by the Trustee within 20 days after the giving of such
written notice. Such resignation shall take effect upon the appointment and acceptance of
appointment of a successor by the City or the Owners of Series 201 SA Bonds as herein provided.
Section 8.11. Removal. The Trustee may be removed at any time by the Owners of a
majority in principal amount of the Series 201SA Bonds then Outstanding, excluding any Series
201 SA Bonds held by or for the account of the City, by an instrument or concurrent instruments
in writing signed and duly acknowledged by such Owners of Series 20ISA Bonds or by their
attorneys duly authorized in writing and delivered to the City. Copies of each such instrument
shall be delivered by the City to the Trustee and any successor. The City may remove the
Trustee at any time, except during the existence of an Event of Default, for such cause (or upon
30 days' notice for any reason) as shall be determined in the sole discretion of the City by filing
with the Trustee an instrument signed by an Authorized Officer and by mailing notice thereof to
the Owners of Series 20ISA Bonds at their addresses shown on the registration books kept by the
Trustee. Any reinoval of the Trustee shall take effect upon the appointment and acceptance of
appointment of a successor Trustee.
Section 8.12. Appointment of Successor. In case at any time the Trustee shall resign or
shall be removed or shall become incapable of acting, or shall be adjudged a bankrupt or
insolvent, or if a receiver, liquidator or conservator of the Trustee or of its property shall be
appointed, or if any public officer shall take charge or control of the Trustee or of its property or
affairs, a successor may be appointed by the Owners of a majority in principal amount of the
Series 20ISA Bonds then Outstanding, excluding any Series 20ISA Bonds held by or for the
account of the City, by an instrument or concurrent instruments in writing signed by such
Owners or their attorneys duly authorized in writing and delivered to such successor Trustee,
notification thereof being given to the City and the predecessor Trustee. Pending such
appointment, the City shall forthwith appoint a Trustee to fill such vacancy until a successor
Trustee (if any) shall be appointed by the Owners of Series 20ISA Bonds as herein authorized.
The City shall mail notice to Ovvners of Series 20ISA Bonds of any such appointment within
20 days after such appointment. Any successor Trustee appointed by the City shall, immediately
and without further act, be superseded by a Trustee appointed by the Owners of Series 201SA
Bonds. If in a proper case no appointment of a successor Trustee shall be made pursuant to the
foregoing provisions of this Section within 45 days after the Trustee shall have given to the City
written notice of resignation as provided in Section 8.10 hereof or after the occurrence of any
other event requiring or authorizing such appointment, the Trustee, any Owner of Series 20I5A
Bonds may apply to any court of competent Jurisdiction to appoint a successor. Said court may
thereupon, afler such notice, if any, as said court may deem proper and prescribe, appoint such
successor Trustee. Any Trustee appointed under the provisions of this Section shall be a bank.

-30-

 trust company or national banking association, in any such case having corporate trust powers,
doing business and having a corporate trust office in the City.
Seclion 8.13. Transfer of Rights and Property to Successor. Any successor Trustee
appointed under this Indenture shall execute, acknowledge and deliver to its predecessor Trustee,
and also to the City, a written in.strument of acceptance respecting such appointment, and
thereupon such successor Trustee, without any further act, deed or conveyance, shall become
fully vested with all moneys, estates, properties, rights, powers, duties and obligations of such
predecessor Trustee, with like effect as if originally named as Trustee; but the Trustee ceasing to
act shall nevertheless, on the request of the City, or of the successor Trustee, execute,
acknowledge and deliver such instruments of conveyance and further assurance and do such
other things as may reasonably be required for more fully and certainly vesting and confirming
in such successor Trustee all the right, title and interest of the predecessor Trustee in and to any
property held by it under this Indenture, and shall pay over, assign and deliver to the successor
Trustee any money or other property subject to the trusts and conditions herein set forth. Should
any deed, conveyance or instrument in writing from the City be required by such successor
Trustee for more fully and certainly vesting in and confirming to such successor Trustee any
such estates, rights, powers and duties, any and all such deeds, conveyances and instruments in
writing shall, on request, and so far as may be authorized by law, be executed, acknowledged and
delivered by the City.
Section 8.14. Merger or Consolidation. Any company into which the Trustee may be
merged or converted or vvith which it may be consolidated or any company resulting from any
merger, conversion or consolidation to which it shall be a party or any company to which the
Trustee may sell or transfer all or substantially all of its corporate trust business, provided such
company shall be a bank, trust company or national banking association which is qualified to be
a successor to the Trustee under Section 8.12 hereof and shall be authorized by law to perform
all the duties imposed upon it by this Indenture, shall be the successor to the Trustee without the
execution or filing of any paper or the performance of any further act.
Section 8.15. Adoption of Authentication. In case any of the Series 20I5A Bonds
contemplated to be issued under this Indenture shall have been authenticated but not delivered,
any successor Trustee may adopt the certificate of authentication of any predecessor Trustee so
authenticating such Series 201SA Bonds and deliver such Series 2015A Bonds so authenticated,
and in case any of the said Series 20ISA Bonds shall not have been authenticated, any successor
Trustee may authenticate such Series 201SA Bonds in the name ofthe predecessor Trustee, or in
the name of the successor Trustee, and in all such cases such certificate shall have the full force
vvhich it is anywhere in the Series 201SA Bonds or in this Indenture provided that the certificate
of the Trustee shall have.
Section 8.16. Evidence of Signatures of Owners and Ownership of Series 2015A Bonds.
(a) Any request, consent or other instrument vvhich this Indenture may require or permit to be
signed and executed by the Owners of Series 20ISA Bonds may be in one or more instruments
of similar tenor, and shall be signed or executed by such Ovvners in person or by their attorneys
appointed in writing. Proof of (i) the execution of any such instrument, or of an instrument
appointing any such attoi"ney, or (ii) the ownership by any person of the Series 201SA Bonds,

-31

 shall be sufficient for any purpose of this Indenture (except as otherwise herein expressly
provided) if made in the following manner, but the Trustee may nevertheless in its discretion
require further or other proof in cases where it deems the same desirable:
(1)
The fact and date of the execution by any Owner or his attorney of such
instrument may be proved by the certificate, which need not be acknowledged or verified,
of an officer of a bank or trust company satisfactory to the Trustee or of any notary public
or other officer authorized to take acknowledgments of deeds to be recorded in the
Jurisdiction in which he purports to act, that the person signing such request or other
•instrument acknowledged to him the execution thereof, or by an affidavit of a witness of
such execution, duly sworn to before such notary public or olher officer.
(2)
The authority of the person or persons executing any such instrument on
behalf of a corporate Owner of Series 201 SA Bonds may be established without further
proof if such instrument is signed by a person purporting to be the president or vice
president of such corporation with a corporate seal affixed and attested by a person
purporting to be its secretary or an assistant secretary.
(b) The ownership of Series 201SA Bonds and the amount, numbers and other
identification, and date of ownership of the same shall be proved by the Bond Register. Any
request, consent or vote of the Owner of any Series 20ISA Bond shall bind all future Owners of
such Series 201SA Bond in respect of anything done or suffered to be done by the City or the
Trustee in accordance therewith.
Section 8.17. Preservation and In.spection of Documents. All documents received by the
Trustee under the provisions of this Indenture shall be retained in its possession and shall be
subject at all reasonable times to the inspection of the City and any Owner of Series 20ISA
Bonds and their agents and their representatives, any of whom may make copies thereof.
ARTICLE IX
SUPPLEMENTAL INDENTURE

Section 9.01. Supplemental Indenture Effective Upon Execution by the Trustee. For any
one or more of the following purposes and the purposes enumerated in Section 9.04 hereof, and
at any time or from time to time, a Supplemental Indenture may be authorized by an ordinance
adopted by the City Council of the City, which, upon the filing with the Trustee of a copy of
such ordinance certified by the City Clerk and the execution and delivery ofsuch Supplemental
Indenture by the City and the Trustee, shall be fully effective in accordance with its terms and
not subject to consent by the Registered Owners of the Series 201 SA Bonds:
(a)
to add to the covenants and agreements of the City in this Indenture other
covenants and agreements to be observed by the City which are not contrary to or
inconsistent vvith this Indenture as theretofore in effect:

-32-

 (b)
to add to the limitations and restrictions in this Indenture other limitations
and restrictions to be observed by the City which are not contrary to or inconsistent with
this Indenture as theretofore in effect;
(c)
to surrender any right, power or privilege reserved to or conferred upon
the City by the terms of this Indenture, but only if the surrender of such right, power or
privilege is not contrary to or inconsistent with the covenants and agreements of the City
contained in this Indenture;
(d)
to confirm, as further assurance, the pledge herein, and the subjection of,
additional properties, taxes or other collateral to any lien, claim or pledge created or to be
created by, this Indenture;
(e)
to cure any ambiguity, supply any omission, or cure or correct any defect
or inconsistent provision in this Indenture;
(f)
to insert such provisions clarifying matters or questions arising under this
Indenture as are necessary or desirable and are not contrary to or inconsistent with this
Indenture as theretofore in effect; or
(g)

to provide additional duties of the Trustee under this Indenture.

Section 9.02. Supplemental Indentures Effective With Consent of Owners of Series 2015A
Bonds. At any time or from time to time, a Supplemental Indenture may be authorized by an
ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City, subject to consent by the Owners of Series
201 SA Bonds in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this Article, which
Supplemental Indenture, upon the filing with the Trustee of a copy ofsuch ordinance certified by
the City Clerk, upon compliance with the provisions of this Article, and upon execution and
delivery of such Supplemental Indenture by the City and the Trustee, shall become fully
effective in accordance with its terms.
Section 9.03. General Provisions, (a) This Indenture shall not be modified or amended in
any respect except as provided in and in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this
Article. Nothing in this Article shall affect or limit the right or obligation of the City to adopt,
make, do, execute, acknowledge or deliver any ordinance, resolution, act or other instrument
pursuant to the provisions of this Article or the right or obligation of the City to execute and
deliver to the Trustee any instrument which elsewhere in this Indenture it is provided shall be
delivered to the Trustee.
(b) Any ordinance authorizing a Supplemental Indenture referred to and permitted or
authorized by Section 9.01 or 9.04 hereof may be adopted by the City Council of the City
without the consent of any of the Ovvners of Seiies 20ISA Bonds, but such Supplemental
Indenture shall be executed and delivered by the City and the Trustee and shall become effective
only on the conditions, to the extent and at the time provided in this Article. Every Supplemental
Indenture delivered to the Trustee for execution shall be accompanied by an opinion of counsel
stating that such Supplemental Indenture has been duly and lawfully authorized by the City

-33-

 Council of the City and executed by the City in accordance vvith the provisions of this Indenture,
is authorized or permitted by this Indenture, and will, when executed and delivered by the
Trustee, be valid and binding upon the City and enforceable in accordance with its terms.
(c) The Trustee is hereby authorized to enter into, execute and deliver any
Supplemental Indenture referred to and permitted or authorized by this Article and to make all
further agreements and stipulations which may be therein contained, and the Trustee, in taking
such action, shall be fully protected in relying on an opinion of counsel that such Supplemental
Indenture is authorized or permitted by the provisions of this Indenture.
(d)
No Supplemental Indenture shall change or modify any of the rights or obligations
of the Trustee without its written assent thereto.
(e) No Supplemental Indenture shall take effect unless and until there has been
delivered to the Trustee an Opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that such Supplemental
Indenture does not adversely affect the exclusion from gross income for federal income tax
purposes to which interest on the Series 201SA Bonds would otherwise be entitled.
Section 9.04. Additional Matters. Additionally, this Indenture may, without the consent
of, or notice to, any of the Bondholders, be supplemented and amended, in such manner as shall
not be inconsistent with the terms and provisions hereof, for any one or more of the following
purposes:
(a)

to provide for certificated Series 2015A Bonds; and

(b)
to secure or maintain ratings from any Rating Agency in the highest long
term debt rating category, of such Rating Agency which are available for the Series
201 SA Bonds, which changes will not restrict, limit or reduce the obligation of the City
to pay the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the Series 2015A Bonds as
provided in this Indenture or otherwise adversely affect the Registered Ovvners of the
Series 201 SA Bonds under this Indenture.
Section 9.05. Mailing of Notice of Amendment. Any provision in this Article for the
mailing of a notice or other paper to owners of Series 20I5A Bonds shall be fully complied vyith
if it is mailed postage prepaid only (i) to each Registered Owner of then Outstanding Series
201SA Bonds at his address, if any, appearing upon the registration books maintained by the City
at the Designated Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee, and (ii) to the Trustee.
Section 9.06. Powers of Ainendment. Any modification or amendment of this Indenture
or of the rights and obligations of the City and of the Owners of the Series 20I5A Bonds, in
particular, which requires the consent of the Bondholders, may be made by a Supplemental
Indenture, vvith the written consent given as provided in Section 9.07. (a) of the Owners of a
majority in principal amount ofthe Series 201SA Bonds Outstanding at the time such consent is
given, or (b) in case less than all of the then Outstanding Series 20ISA Bonds are affected by the
modification or amendment, of the Owners of a majority in principal amount of the then
Outstanding Series 20ISA Bonds so affected. No such modification or amendment shall permit

-34-

 a change in the terms of redemption or maturity of the principal of any Outstanding Series
201 SA Bonds or of any installment of interest thereon or a reduction in the principal amount or
the Redemption Price thereof or in the rate of interest thereon, or in terms of purchase or the
purchase price thereof, without the consent of the owner of such Series 2015A Bonds, or shall
reduce the percentages or otherwise affect the classes of Series 20ISA Bonds the consent of the
owners of which is required to effect any such modification or amendinent, or shall change or
modify any of the rights or obligations of the Trustee without its written assent thereto. For the
purposes of this Section, a Series 20ISA Bond shall be deemed to be affected by a modification
or amendment of this Indenture if the same adversely affects or diminishes the rights of the
owners of such Series 2015A Bond.
Section 9.07. Consent of Owners of Series 2015A Bonds, (a) The City may at any time
authorize a Supplemental Indenture making a modification or amendment permitted by the
provisions of Section 9.06, to take effect when and as provided in this Section. A copy of such
Supplemental Indenture (or brief summary thereof or reference thereto in form approved by the
Trustee), together with a request to the Owners of the Series 2015A Bonds for their consent
thereto in form satisfactory to the Trustee, shall be mailed by the City to the Owners of the Series
20I5A Bonds (but failure to mail such copy and request shall not affect the validity of the
Supplemental Indenture when consented to as in this Section provided). Such Supplemental
Indenture shall not be effective unless and until, and shall take effect in accordance with its terms
when, (i) there shall have been filed with the Trustee (1) the written consents of Owners of the
percentages of Outstanding Series 2015A Bonds specified in Section 9.06 and (2) an opinion of
counsel stating that such Supplemental Indenture has been duly and lawfully executed and
delivered by the City and the Trustee in accordance with the provisions of this Indenture, is
authorized or permitted hereby and is valid and binding upon the City and enforceable in
accordance with its terms upon its becoming effective as in this Section provided, and (ii) a
notice shall have been mailed as hereinafter in this Section provided.
(b) The consent of an Owner of Series 201 SA Bonds to any modification or amendment
shall be effective only if accompanied by proof of the Ownership, at the date of such consent, of
the Series 201SA Bonds with respect to which such consent is given, which proof shall be such
as is permitted by Section 8.16. A certificate or certificates signed by the Trustee that it has
examined such proof and that such proof is sufficient in accordance with Section 8.16 shall be
conclusive that the consents have been given by the Owners of the Series 20I5A Bonds
described in such certificate or certificates. Any such consent shall be binding upon the Owner
of the Series 20ISA Bonds giving such consent and upon any subsequent Owner of such Series
20ISA Bonds and of any Series 20ISA Bonds issued in exchange therefor (whether or not such
subsequent Owner thereof has notice thereof) unless such consent is revoked in writing by the
Owner of such Series 20ISA Bonds giving such consent or a subsequent Owner thereof by filing
such revocation with the Trustee, prior to the time when the written statement of the Trustee
hereinafter provided for in this Section is filed. The fact that a consent has not been revoked
may likewise be proved by a certificate of the Trustee to the effect that no revocation thereof is
on file with the Trustee.
(c) At any time after the Owners of the required percentages of Series 20ISA Bonds
shall have filed their consents to the Supplemental Indenture, the Trustee shall make and file

-35-

 with the City a written statement that the Owners of such required percentages of Series 20ISA
Bonds have filed such consents. Such written statement shall be conclusive that such consents
have been so filed. At any time thereafter notice, stating in substance that the Supplemental
Indenture (which may be referred to as a Supplemental Indenture entered into by the City and the
Trustee as of a stated date, a copy of which is on file with the Trustee) has been consented to by
the Owners of the required percentages of Series 201 SA Bonds and will be effective as provided
in this Section, shall be given to Owners by the Trustee by mailing such notice to the Owners of
the Seiies 201 SA Bonds (but failure to mail such notice shall not prevent such Supplemental
Indenture from becoming effective and binding as provided in this Section). The Trustee shall
file with the City proof of the mailing of such notice. A record, consisting of the papers required
or permitted by this Section to be filed with the Trustee, shall be proof of the matters therein
stated. Such Supplemental Indenture making such amendment or modification shall be deemed
conclusively binding upon the Trustee and the Owners of all Series 20ISA Bonds at the
expiration of 40 days after the filing with the Trustee of proof of the mailing of such last
mentioned notice, except in the event of a final decree of a court of competent Jurisdiction setting
aside such Supplemental Indenture in a legal action or equitable proceeding for such purpose
commenced within such 40-day period; except that the Trustee and the City, during such 40-day
period and any such further period during which any such action or proceeding may be pending,
shall be entitled in their absolute discretion to take such action, or to refrain from taking such
action, with respect to such Supplemental Indenture as they may deem expedient.
Section 9.08. Modifications by Unanimous Consent. The terms and provisions of this
Indenture and the rights and obligations of the City and of the Owners of the Series 20I5A
Bonds hereunder may be modified or amended in any respect upon the consent of the Owners of
all the then Outstanding Series 20ISA Bonds to the execution and delivery of such Supplemental
Indenture, such consent to be given as provided in Section 9.07 except that no notice to the
Owners of the Series 20ISA Bonds shall be required; but no such modification or amendment
shall change or modify any of the rights or obligations of the Trustee without its written assent
thereto.
Section 9.09. Exclusion of Series 2015A Bonds. Series 201 SA Bonds owned by or for the
account ofthe City shall not be deemed Outstanding for the purpose of consent or other action or
any calculation of Outstanding Series 201SA Bonds provided for in this Article, and the City
shall not be entitled with respect to such Series 201SA Bonds to give any consent or take any
other action provided for in this Article. At the time of any consent or other action taken under
this Article, the City shall furnish the Trustee vvith a Certificate upon which the Trustee may rely,
describing all Series 20ISA Bonds so to be excluded.
Section 9.10. Notation on Series 20I5A Bonds. Series 201 SA Bonds authenticated and
delivered after the effective date of any action taken as in this Article provided may, and, if the
Trustee so determines, shall, bear a notation by endorsement or otherwise in form approved by
the City and the Trustee as to such action, and in that case upon demand of the Owner of any
Series 201SA Bond Outstanding at such effective date and presentation of his Series 20I5A
Bond for that purpose at the Designated Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee or upon any
exchange or registration of transfer of any Series 20I5A Bond Outstanding at such effective
date, suitable notation shall be made on such Series 20ISA Bond or upon any Series 20ISA

-36-

 Bond issued upon any such exchange or registration of transfer by the Trustee as to any such
action. If the City or the Trustee shall so determine, new Series 201SA Bonds so modified as in
the opinion of the Trustee and the City to conform to such action shall be prepared, authenticated
and delivered, and upon demand of the Owner of any Series 201SA Bond then Outstanding shall
be exchanged, without cost to such Owner, for Series 20ISA Bonds of the same maturity upon
surrender of such Series 201SA Bond.
ARTICLE X

MISCELLANEOUS

Section 10.01. Severability. If any provision of this Indenture shall be held or deemed to
be, or shall in fact be, illegal, inoperative or unenforceable, the same shall not affect any other
provision or provisions herein contained or render the same invalid, inoperative or unenforceable
to any extent whatever.
Section 10.02. Payments Due on Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays. If the date for making
any payment, or the last date for the performance of any act or the exercise of any right, as
provided in this Indenture, shall not be a Business Day, such payment may be made, act
performed or right exercised on the next Business Day with the same force and effect as if done
on the nominal date provided in this Indenture, and no interest shall accrue for the period after
such nominal date.

-37-

 Section 10.03. Notices. Any notice, demand, direction, request or other instruments
authorized or required by this Indenture to be given to, delivered to or filed with the City or the
Trustee shall be deemed to have been sufficiently given, delivered or filed for all purposes of the
Indenture if and when sent by registered mail, postage prepaid, return-receipt requested:
To the City, if addressed to:

City of Chicago
Office of the Chief Financial Officer

or at such other address as may be designated in writing by the City to the Trustee; and
To the Trustee, if addressed to:

Zions First National Bank

or at such other address as may be designated in writing by the Trustee to the City.
Section 10.04. Counterparts. This Indenture may be simultaneously executed in several
counterparts, each of which shall be an original and all of which shall constitute but one and the
same instrument.
Section 10.05. Rules of Interpretation. Unless expressly indicated otherwise, references to
Sections or Articles are to be construed as references to Sections or Articles of this instrument as
originally executed. Use of the words "herein," "hereby," "hereunder," "hereof, "hereinbefore,"
"hereinafter" and other equivalent words refer to this Indenture and not solely to the particular
portion in which any such word is used. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of
this Indenture and the Bond Ordinance (including in the form of Series 201SA Bond attached
hereto as Exhibit A), the terms of this Indenture shall be deemed to control.
Section 10.06. Captions. The captions and headings in this Indenture are for convenience
only and in no way define, limit or describe the scope or intent of any provisions or Sections of
this Indenture.

-38-

  



"iv-h 
gamma-imam 
- 






Iran." rui

 

the City has caused these presents to be executed in its name and
with its official seal hereunto affixed and attested by its duly authorized officials; and to
evidence its acceptance of the trusts hereby created, the Trustee has caused these presents to be
executed in its corporate name and vvith its corporate seal hereunto affixed and attested by its
duly authorized officers, on the date first above written.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF,

CITY.

Chief Financial Officer
ISEALI

Attest:

Susana A. Mendoza
City Clerk

^

ZIONS FIRST NATIONAL BANK,

as Trustee

By:.
Name:
Authorized Signatory

ISignature Page - Trust Indenture 

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City has caused these presents to be executed in its name and
with ils official seal hereunto affixed and allesled by ils duly authorized officials; and to
evidence its acceptance ofthe Iriisls hereby created, the Trustee has caused these presents to be
executed in its corporate name and with ils corporate sea! hereunto affixed and attested by its
duly authorized officers, on the date firsl above written.
CITY OF CHICAGO

By:.
Carole L. Brown
Chief Financial Officer
[SEAL]

Attesl:

By:_
Susana A. Mendoza
City Clerk

ZiONS FIRST NATIONAL BANK,
asTn

[Signalure Page - Trust Indenture]

 ATTESTI

 

Name:

 

[Attestation ot?Trustee Trust Indenture]

 

EXHIBIT A

FORM OF BOND
REGISTERED

No.
UNITED S TATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF ILLINOIS
C I T Y OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND
SERIES 2015A

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
Interest
Rate:

%

Maturity Date:
January 1,20_

Dated Date:
.20_

CUSIP:

Registered Owner:
Principal Amount:
The City of Chicago (the "City") hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for value
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date identified above, the Principal Amount identified
above and to pay interest (computed on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months) on
such Principal Amount from the later of the date of this Series 2015A Bond or the most recent
interest payment date to which interest has been paid at the Interest Rate per annum set'forth
above on January 1 and July 1 of each year commencing January I , 2016. until said Principal
Amount is paid. Principal of this Series 20ISA Bond and redemption premium, if any, shall be
payable in lawful money of the United States of America upon presentation and surrender at the
designated corporate trust office of Zions First National Bank. Chicago. Illinois, as trustee, bond
registrar and paying agent (the "Trustee"). Payment of the installments of interest shall be made
to the Registered Owner hereof as shown on the registration books of the City maintained by the
Trustee at the close of business on the 15th day of the month next preceding each interest
payment date and shall be paid by check or draft of the Trustee mailed to the address of such
Registered Owner as it appears on such registration books or at such other address furnished in
writing by such Registered Owner to the Trustee or, at the option of any Registered Owner of
$1,000,000 or more in aggregate principal amount of the Series 2015A Bonds, by wire transfer
of immediately available funds to such bank in the continental United States of America as ihe
Regislercd Owner hereof shall request in writing to the Trustee.

A-

 Reference is hereby m<ide to the further provisions of this Series 20ISA Bond set forth on
the reverse hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set
forth at this place.
It is hereby certified and recited that all conditions, acts and things required by law to
exist or to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this Series 20ISA Bond did exist, have
happened, been done and performed in regular and due form and time as required by law; that
the indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Series 201SA Bonds of which this is one,
does not exceed any limitation imposed by law; and that provision has been made for the
collection of a direct annual tax sufficient to pay the interest hereon as it falls due and also to pay
and discharge the principal hereof at maturity.
this Series 201SA Bond shall not be valid or become obligatory for any purpose until the
certificate of authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Trustee.
I N WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by the City Council has caused its corporate
seal to be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Series 20ISA Bond to be signed by the duly
authorized facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City
Clerk, all as of the Dated Date identified above.

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature)
City Clerk
City of Chicago
I SEAL I

Date of Authentication:

A-2

 CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Series 2015A Bond is one of the Series 201SA Bonds described in the
within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and Indenture and is one of the General Obligation Bonds,
Series 20ISA, of the City of Chicago.

Zions First National Bank,
as Trustee
By;

A-3

(Manual Signature)
Authorized Officer

 [Form of Series 20ISA Bond — Reverse Side]
C I T Y OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND
SERIES 2015A

For the prompt payment of this Series 2015A Bond, both principal and interest, as
aforesaid, as the same become due, and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full
faith, credit and resources of the City are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Series 20ISA Bond is one of a series of Series 20ISA Bonds aggregating the
principal amount of $345,530,000 issued pursuant to issued pursuant to, under authority of and
in full compliance with the Constitution and laws ofthe State of Illinois, particularly Article V I I ,
Section 6(a) of the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois and an Ordinance adopted by the
City Council of the City on June 17, 20IS (the "Bond Ordinance"), and executed under a Trust
Indenture securing the City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Series 2015A, dated
July 1, 2015 (the "Indenture") from the City to the Trustee, for the purposes of paying (i) costs
of the Series 201SA Debt Management Project described in the Indenture, (ii) certain interest to
become due on the Series 2015A Bonds and (iii) expenses incidental to the issuance of the Series
2015A Bonds.
The Series 201SA Bonds maturing on or after January 1, 2026, are redeemable prior to
maturity at the option of the City, in whole or in part on any date on or after January 1, 2025, and
if less than all of the outstanding Series 20I5A Bonds are to be redeemed, the Series 2015A
Bonds to be called shall be called from such maturities as shall be determined by the City and in
the manner provided in the Indenture, at a Redemption Price equal to the principal amount
thereof plus accrued interest to the date of redemption.
The Series 20ISA Bonds maturing on January 1, 2033 are subject to mandatory
redemption prior to maturity on January 1 of the years 2031 and 2032 and the Series 2015A
Bonds maturing on January 1, 2039 are subject to mandatory redemption prior to maturity on
January 1 of the years 2036 to 2038, inclusive, in each case at a Redemption Price equal to the
principal amount thereof plus accrued interest to the date of redemption.
In the event of the redemption of less than all the Scries 201SA Bonds of like maturity
and interest rate, the aggregate principal amount thereof to be redeemed shall be $5,000 or an
integral multiple thereof, and the Trustee shall assign to each Series 20ISA Bond of such
maturity and interest rate a distinctive number for each $5,000 principal amount of such Series
201SA Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as, at $5,000
for each number, shall equal the principal amount of such Series 20I5A Bonds to be redeenied.
The Series 20ISA Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Series 20ISA Bonds to which were
assigned numbers so selected; provided that only so much of the principal amount of each Series
20ISA Bond shall be redeemed as shall equal $5,000 for each number assigned to it and so
selected.

A-4

 Notice of any such redemption shall be .sent by first class mail not less than 30 days nor
more than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption to the Registered Owner of each Series
20ISA Bond to be redeemed at the address shown on the registration books of the City
maintained by the Trustee or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered
Owner to the Trustee; provided that the failure to mail any such notice or any defect therein as to
any Series 201SA Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any
other Series 201SA Bond. When so called for redemption, this Series 201SA Bond shall cease to
bear interest on the specified redemption dale, provided that funds for redemption are on deposit
at the place of payment at that time, and shall not be deemed to be outstanding.
This Series 201SA Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by
its attorney duly authorized in writing at the designated corporate trust office of the Trustee in
Chicago, Illinois, but only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Indenture, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Series 201SA
Bond. Upon such transfer a new Series 2015A Bond or Bonds of authorized denominations, of
the same interest rate, series and maturity and for the same aggregate principal amount will be
issued to the transferee in exchange therefor. The Trustee shall not be required to transfer or
exchange this Series 20ISA Bond during the period commencing on the Record Date next
preceding any Interest Payment Date for this Series 2015A Bond and ending on such Interest
Payment Date, or to transfer or exchange such Series 201 SA Bond (A) after notice calling this
Series 201SA Bond for redemption has been mailed, or (B) during a period of 15 days next
preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Series 20I5A Bond.
The Series 201 SA Bonds are issued in fully registered form in the denomination of
$5,000 each or authorized integral multiples thereof. This Series 2015A Bond may be
exchanged at the designated corporate trust office of the Trustee for a like aggregate principal
amount of Series 20ISA Bonds of the same interest late, series and maturity of other authorized
denominations, upon the terms set forth in the Indenture.
The City and the Trustee may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as the absolute
owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment of or on account of principal hereof and
interest due hereon and redemption premium, if any. and for all other purposes and neither the
City nor the Trustee shall be affected by any notice to the contrary.

A-5

 (ASSIGNMENT)
FOR V A L U E RECEIVED,

the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)

the within Series 201 SA Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Series 201 SA Bond on the books kept for registration thereof with
full power of substitution in the premises.
Dated:
Signature guaranteed:
NOTICE:

The signature to this assignment must correspond vvith the name of the Registered
Owner as it appears upon the face of the within Series 2015A Bond in every
particular, without alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

A-6

 EXHIBIT B
SERIES 2015A DEBT MANAGEMENT PROJECT

For the payment or the refunding of all or a portion of the Outstanding Line and CP
Indebtedness as follows:

YEAR

OUTSTANDING
LINE ("LINE")

EXPIRATION

AND CP

TERMINATION

AMOUNT

DAIE

TO B E PAID

INDEBTEDNESS

2013
2014
2014
2014

Line
Line
Line
Line

2015

Line

OR

FINANCIAL PROVIDER

Bank of America, N.A.
Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A.
Barclays Bank PLC
JPMorgan Chase Bank,
National As.sociation
DNT Asset Trust

11/30/2015
6/30/2016
9/30/2015
4/25/16

$ 86,170,855.22
31264,234.58
62,360,000.00
43,740.45

9/30/2015

117,405,638.28

 EXHIBIT 5

INDENTURE WITH RESPECT TO TAXABLE SERIES 2015B BONDS

Execution Copy

CTTY OF CHICAGO

TO

ZIONS FIRST NATIONAL BANK,

as Trustee

TRUST INDENTURE

SECURING

$742,860,000
C I TY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGA TION BONDS.
TAXABLE SERIES

2015B

•Dated as of July 1,2015

•(SI 2.SS7.09.1)2.n iloL-.\
22.^0746

 T A B L E OF CONTENTS

(This Table of Contents is not a part of the Indenture
and is only for convenience of reference)
SECTION

HEADING

ARTICLE I .

DEFINITIONS

Section 1.01.
ARTICLE II

Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section

2.01.
2.02.
2.03.
2.04.
2.05.
2.06.
2.07.
2.08.

III

Section
Section
Section
Section

3

Definitions

;

3.01.
3.02.
3.03.
3.04.

3
9

Authority for and Issuance of Series 201 SB Bonds
General Terms of Series 201 SB Bonds
Execution
Authentication
Form of Bonds; Temporary Bonds
Delivery of Series 201 SB Bonds
Mutilated, Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Series 201SB Bonds
Transfer and Exchange of Series 2015B Bonds; Persons
Treated as Owners
Required Information in Series 20ISB Bond Form
Cancellation
Book Entry Provisions

REDEMPTION OF SERIES

ARTICLE IV

2015B BONDS

9
10
11
11
11
II
12
12
13
13
14
16

Redemption Terms, Dates and Prices
Notice of Redemption
Selection of Series 201 SB Bonds for Redemption
Deposit of Funds

16
18
20
21

APPLICA TION OF SERIES 201 SB BOND PROCEEDS; CREATION OF
FUNDS AND SECURITY TOR SERIES

Section 4.01.
Section 4.02.
Section 4.03.
Section 4.04.
Section 4.05.
Section 4.06.
Section 4.07.
Section 4.08.
A K I ICLI: V

:.

T H E SERIES 201 SB BONDS

Section 2.09.
Section 2.10.
Section 2.11.
ARTICLE

PAGE

Source of Payment of Series 201 SB Bonds
Application of Bond Proceeds
Creation of 201 SB Bond Fund and Account Therein
Series 20ISB Capitalized Interest Account
Series 201 SB Project Account
Deposits into Series 201 SB Bond Fund
Non-presentment of Series 201 SB Bonds
Moneys Held in Trust

INVE-S TMEN 1 OF MONEYS

Section 5.01.
Section 5.02.

201SB BONDS

Investment of Moneys
Investment Income

21
21
21
21
22
22
23
23
23
24

24
24

 AR TICLE VI

DLSCHARGE OF LIEN

Section 6.01.
ARTICLE VII

24

Defeasance

24

DEFAULT PROVISIONS; REMEDIES

25
I

Section 7.01.
Section 7.02.
ARTICLE

VIII

Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section

8.01.
8.02.
8.03.
8.04.
8.05.
8.06.
8.07.
8.08.
8.09.
8.10.
8.11.
8.12.
8.13.
8.14.
8.15.
8.16.

ARTICLE IX

Acceptance of Trusts
Dealing in Series 201 SB Bonds
Compensation of Trustee
Paying Agent
Qualification of Trustee
,
Responsibilities of Trustee
Funds Held in Trust and Security Therefor
Evidence on which Trustee May Act
Permitted Acts and Functions
Resignation
Removal
Appointment of Successor
Transfer of Rights and Property to Successor
Merger or Consolidation
Adoption of Authentication
Evidence of Signatures of Owners and Ownership of
Series 2015B Bonds
Preservation and Inspection of Documents

SUPPLEMENTAL INDENTURE

Section 9.01.
Section 9.02.

ARTICLE X.

25
25
26

TRUSTEE AND PAYING AGENT

Section 8.17.

Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section

Defaults
Remedies

9.03.
9.04.
9.05.
9.06.
9.07.
9.08.
9.09.
9.10.

Supplemental Indenture Effective Upon Execution by the
Trustee
Supplemental Indentures Effective With Consent of Owners
of Series 201 SB Bonds
General Provisions
Additional Matters
Mailing of Notice of Amendment
Powers of Amendment
Consent of Owners of Series 201 SB Bonds
Modifications by Unanimous Consent
Exclusion of Series 201 SB Bonds
Notation on Series 20ISB Bonds

MISCEI.I.ANEOUS

Section 10.01.
Section 10.02.

Severability
Payments Due on Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays

!

26
27
27
27
28
28
29
30
30
30
30
31
31
32
32
32
33
33

33
34
34
34
35
35
35
36
37
37
37

37
37

 Section
Section
Section
Section
EXHIBIT A
EXHIBIT B

10.03.
10.04.
10.05.
10.06.

Notices
Counterparts
Rules of Interpretation
Captions

37
38
38
38

— Form of Bond
— Series 201SB Debt Management Project

-III-

A-l
B-1

 TRUST INDENTURE

made and entered into as of July 1, 2015 (this "Indenture"),
from the CITY OF CHICAGO (the "City"), a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local
government duly organized and existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois,
to ZIONS FIRST NATIONAL BANK (the "Trustee"), a national banking association with trust
powers, having a corporate trust office located in the City of Chicago, Illinois, duly organized,
validly existing and authorized to accept and execute trusts of the character herein set out under
and by virtue ofthe laws ofthe United States of America,
THIS TRUST INDENTURE,

WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, pursuant to an ordinance duly adopted by the City Council of the City (the
"City Council") on June 17, 2015 (the "Bond Ordinance") the City duly authorized the issuance
and sale of its General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB (the "Bonds") in order to
provide the funds, together with other available funds, including proceeds of other general
obligation bonds, for the purpose of paying (i) costs of the Series 201SB Debt Management
Project, (ii) certain interest to become due on the Series 2015B Bonds and (iii) expenses of
issuance of the Series 201 SB Bonds; and
WHEREAS, by virtue of Article VII of the Illinois Constitution of 1970 and pursuant to the
Bond Ordinance, the City is authorized to issue the Series 2015B Bonds, enter into this Indentuie
and to do or cause to be done all the acts and things herein provided or required to be done; and
WHEREAS, the execution and delivery of the Series 2015B Bonds and of this Indenture
have in all respects been duly authorized and all things necessary to make such Bonds, when
executed by the City and authenticated by the Trustee, the legal, valid and binding obligations of
the City and to make this Indenture a legal, valid and binding agreement, have been done; and
WHEREAS, the Series 201 SB Bonds, and the Trustee's Certificate of Authentication to be
endorsed on such Bonds, shall be substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A, with
necessary and appropriate variations, omissions and insertions as permitted or required by this
Indenture and the Bond Ordinance;
N O W , T H E R E F O R E , T H I S INDENTURE WITNESSETH:

GRANTING CLAUSES

That the City, in consideration of the premises and the acceptance by the Trustee of the
trusts hereby created, and of the purchase and acceptance of the Series 20ISB Bonds by the
Registered Ovvners thereof, and of the sum of one dollar, lawful money of the United States of
America, to it duly paid by the Trustee at or before the execution and delivery of these presents,
and for other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby
acknowledged, to secure the payment of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the
Series 2015B Bonds according to their tenor and effect, and to secure the performance and

 observance by the City of all the covenants expressed or implied herein and in the Series 2015B
Bonds, does hereby assign and grant a security interest in and to the following to the Trustee, and
its successors in trust and assigns forever, for the securing of the performance of the obligations
of the City hereinafter set forth (the "Trust Estate"):
GRANTING CLAUSE FIRST

Any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City legally available for
such purposes, including, but not limited to, the proceeds allocable to the Series 2015B Bonds of
a direct annual tax levied by the City in the Bond Ordinance upon all taxable property in the
City, all to the extent provided in this Indenture;
GRANTING CLAUSE SECOND
All moneys and securities from time to time held by the Trustee under the terms of this
Indenture, except for moneys deposited with or paid to the Trustee and held in trust hereunder
for the redemption of Bonds, notice ofthe redemption of which has been duly given; and
GRANTING C L A U S E THIRD

Any and all other property, rights and interests of every kind and nature from time to time
hereafter by delivery or by writing of any kind granted, bargained, sold, alienated, deiTiised,
released, conveyed, assigned, transferred, mortgaged, pledged, hypothecated or otherwise
subjected hereto, as and for additional security hereunder by the City or by any other person on
its behalf or with its written consent to the Trustee, and the Trustee is hereby authorized to
receive any and all such property at any and all times and to hold and apply the same subject to
the terms hereof;
To HAVE AND T O HOLD all and singular the Trust Estate, whether now owned or
hereafter acquired, unto the Trustee and its successors in said trust and assigns forever;
I N TRU.ST, NEVERTHELESS, upon the terms and trusts herein set forth for the equal and
proportionate benefit, security and protection of all present and future Registered Owners of the
Series 201SB Bonds, without privilege, priority or distinction as to the lien or otherwise of any of
the foregoing over any other of the foregoing, except to the extent herein otherwise specifically
provided;

that if the City, its successors or assigns shall well and truly pay. or
cause to be paid, the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the Series 2015B Bonds, at the
times and in the manner set forth therein according to the true intent and meaning thereof, and
shall cause the payments to be made on the Series 201SB Bonds as required herein, or shall
provide, as permitted hereby, for the payment thereof, and shall well and truly caii.se to be kept,
performed and observed all of its covenants and conditions pursuant to the terms of this
Indenture, and shall pay or cause to be paid to the Trustee all sums of money due or to become
due to them in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, then upon the final payment
PROVIDED, HOWEVER,

-2-

 thereof this Indenture and the rights hereby granted shall cease, determine and be void; otherwise
this Indenture shall remain in full force and effect.
and it is expressly declared, that all Bonds
reissued and secured hereunder are to be reissued, authenticated and delivered, and all said
property, rights and interests and any other amounts hereby assigned and pledged are to be dealt
with and disposed of, under, upon and subject to the terms, conditions, stipulations, covenants,
agreements, trusts, uses and purposes as herein expressed, and the City has agreed and
covenanted, and does hereby agree and covenant, with the Trustee and the respective owners of
the Series 201 SB Bonds as follows:
THIS INDENTURE FURTHER WITNESSETH,

ARTICLE I.
DEFINITIONS

Section ].01. Definitions. All capitalized terms used herein unless otherwise defined
shall have the meanings given in the recitals above and the following meanings for purposes of
this Indenture:
"Authorized Denomination" means $1,000 and any integral multiple thereof.
"Authorized Officer" means (a) the Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer, the City
Comptroller or any other official of the City so designated by a Certificate signed by the Mayor
or Chief Financial Officer and filed with the Trustee for so long as such designation shall be in
effect, (b) the City Clerk with respect to the certification of any ordinance or resolution of the
City Council or any other document filed in his or her office and (c) the City Treasurer with
respect to the investment of any moneys held pursuant to this Indenture.
"Beneficial Owner" means the owner of a beneficial interest in the Series 201SB Bonds
registered in the name of Cede & Co., as nominee of DTC (or a successor securities depository
or nominee for either of them).
"Bond Counsel" means one or more firms of nationally recognized bond counsel
designated by the Corporation Counsel of the City.
"Bond Fund" means the fund of that name established and described in Section 4.03
hereof.
"Bondholder," "holder." or "owner of the Series 2015B Bonds" means the Registered
Owner or Beneficial Owner of any Series 201 SB Bond, as the case may be.
"Bond Ordinance" has the meaning given to such term in the recitals hereto.
"Bond Register" means the registration books of the City kept by the Trustee to evideiice
the registration and transfer of Series 2015B Bonds.

 "Bond Year" means a 12-month period commencing on January 2 of each calendar year
and ending on January 1 of the next succeeding calendar year.
"Bonds" means the General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 20ISB, issued pursuant to
Section 2.01 hereof.
"Business Day" means any day other than (i) a Saturday or Sunday, (ii) a day on which
banks located in the city where the Designated Corporate Trust Office is located are authorized
or required by law to close, and (iii) a day on which The New York Stock Exchange, Inc., is
closed.
"Certificate" means an instrument of the City in writing signed by an Authorized
Officer. Any such instrument in writing and supporting opinions or representations, if any, may,
but need not, be combined in a single instrument with any other instrument, opinion or
representation, and the two or more so combined shall be read and construed so as to form a
single instrument. Any such instrument may be based, insofar as it relates to legal, accounting or
engineering matters, upon the opinion or representation of counsel, accountants, or engineers,
respectively, unless the officer signing such instrument knows that the opinion or representation
with respect to the matters upon which such instrument may be based, as aforesaid, is erroneous.
The same Authorized Officer, or the same counsel or accountant or other persons, as the case
may be, need not certify to all of the matters required to be certified under any provision of this
Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture, but different officers, counsel, accountants or other
persons may certify to different facts, respectively.
"Chief Financial Officer" means the Chief Financial Officer appointed by the Mayor, or
the City Comptroller of the City at any time a vacancy exists in the office of the Chief Financial
Officer.
"City" means the City of Chicago, a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local
government, organized and existing under the Constitution and laws of the State.
•'C//V Clerk" means the duly qualified and acting City Clerk of the City or any Deputy
City Clerk or other person that may lawfully take a specific action or perform a specific duty
prescribed for the City Clerk pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.
"City Comptroller" means the City Comptroller of the City.
"Code" means the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986. References to the Code
and to Sections of the Code shall include relevant final, temporary or proposed regulations
thereunder as in effect from time to time and as applicable to obligations issued on the Date of
Issuance.
"Date of Issuance" means July 21, 2015, the date of issuance and delivery of the
Scries 201 SB Bonds to the initial purchasers thereof.

-4-

 "Debt Management Purposes" shall have the meaning assigned to such term in the Bond
Ordinance.
"Defea.sance Obligations" means: (1) money; or (2)(A) direct obligations of the United
States of America, (B) obligations of agencies of the United States of America, the timely
payment of principal of and interest on which are guaranteed by the United States of America,
(C) obligations of the following government-sponsored agencies that are not backed by the full
faith and credit of the U.S. Government: Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. (FHLMC) debt
obligations. Farm Credit System (formerly: Federal Land Banks, Federal Intermediate Credit
Banks, and Banks for Cooperatives) debt obligations. Federal Home Loan Banks (FHL Banks)
debt obligations, Fannie Mae debt obligations. Financing Corp. (FICO) debt obligations.
Resolution Funding Corp. (REFCORP) debt obligations, and U.S. Agency for International
Development (U.S. A.I.D.) Guaranteed notes, (D) pre-refunded municipal obligations defined as
follows: any bonds or other obligations of any state of the United States of America or of any
agency, instrumentality or local governmental unit of any such state which are not callable at the
option of the obligor prior to maturity or as to vvhich irrevocable instructions have been given by
the obligor to call on the date specified in the notice, or (E) instruments evidencing an ownership
interest in obligations described in the preceding clauses (A), (B) and (C); or (3) a combination
of the investments described in clauses (1) and (2) above.
"Designated Corporate Trust Office" means the corporate trust office of the Trustee
located at the address of the Trustee set forth for notices to the Trustee in Section 10.03 hereof,
as such address may be changed from time to time by the Trustee.
"DTC" means The Depository Trust Company, New York, New York, or its nominee,
and its successors and assigns, or any other depository performing similar functions.
..."Federal Obligation" means any direct obligation of, or any obligation the full and
timely payment of principal of and interest on which is guaranteed by, the United States of
America.
"Fitch" means Fitch Ratings Inc., a corporation organized and existing under the laws of
the State of Delaware, its successors and assigns, and, if such corporation shall be dissolved or
liquidated, or shall no longer perform the functions of a securities rating agency, "Fitch" shall be
deemed to refer to any other nationally recognized securities rating agency designated by the
City by notice to the Trustee.
"liidetuure" means this Indenture, as amended from time to time in accordance with
Article IX hereof.
"//ift'rei'? Pc/v/zic/i/Dare" means each January I and July 1. commencing Januaiy 1.2016.
"Kroll" means Kroll Bond Rating Agency, its successors and assigns, and, if Kroll shall
be dissolved or liquidated or shall no longer perform the functions of a security rating agency.
"Kroll" shall be deemed lo refer to any other nationally recognized securities rating agency
designated by the City by notice to the Trustee.

-5-

 "Make-Whole Redemption Price" means the greater of (A) 100% of the principal amount
of the Series 201SB Bonds to be redeemed or (B) the sum of the present values of the remaining
scheduled payments of principal and interest on such Series 2015B Bonds to be redeemed, not
including any portion of those payments of interest accrued and unpaid as of the date on which
such Series 20ISB Bonds are to be redeemed, discounted to the date of redemption of such
Series 201SB Bonds are to be redeemed on a semi-annual basis (assuming a 360-day year
consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury Rate (as defined herein) plus SO basis
points, plus, in each case, accrued interest on the Series 201 SB Bonds to be redeemed to the date
fixed for redemption. The Make-Whole Redemption Price of the Series 2015B Bonds to be
redeemed will be calculated by an independent accounting firm, investment banking firm or
financial advisor (the "Calculation Agent") retained by the City at the City's expense. The
Trustee and the City may rely on the Calculation Agent's determination of the Make-Whole
Redemption Price and will not be liable for such reliance. An Authorized Officer shall confirm
and transmit the redemption price as so calculated on such dates to the Trustee and to such other
parties as shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.
"Maturity Date" means, for the Series 2015B Bonds of each specified maturity, the
applicable maturity date set forth in Section 2.02.
"Municipal Code" means the Municipal Code of Chicago, as from time to time amended.
"Opinion of Bond Counsel" means a written opinion of Bond Counsel in form and
substance acceptable to the City.
"OiiLstanding" means, when used with reference to any Series 201 SB Bonds, all of such
obligations issued under this Indenture that are \xn^a\d,provided that such term does not include:
(a)
Series 2015B Bonds canceled at or prior to such date or delivered to or
acquired by the Trustee or Paying Agent at or prior to such date for cancellation;
(b)
matured or redeemed Scries 201 SB Bonds which have not been presented
for payment in accordance with the provisions of this Indenture and for the payment of
which the City has deposited funds with the Trustee or Paying Agent;
(c)
Series 20ISB Bonds for which the City has provided for payment by
depositing in an irrevocable trust or escrow, cash or Defeasance Obligations, in each
case, the maturing principal of and interest on which will be sufficient to pay at maturity,
or if called for redeinption on the applicable redemption date, the principal of.
redemption premium, if any, and interest on such Series 201 SB Bonds;
(d)
Series 2015B Bonds in lieu of or in exchange or substitution for vvhich
other Series 20ISB Bonds shall have been authenticated and delivered pursuant to this
Indenture; and
(e)
Series 201 SB Bonds owned by the City and tendeied to the Trustee for
cancellation.

 "Participant," when used with respect to any Securities Depository, means any
participant ofsuch Securities Depository.
"Paying Agetu" means the Trustee and any additional Paying Agent designated by the
Trustee pursuant to Section 8.04 hereof, and any successor thereto.
"Permitted Investments" means any of the following obligations or securities permitted
under the laws of the State and the Municipal Code:
(a)
interest-bearing general obligations of the United States of America, the
State or the City;
(b)
United States treasury bills and other non-interest bearing general
obligations of the United States of America when offered for sale in the open market at a
price below the face value of same, so as to afford the City a return on such investment in
lieu of interest;
(c)
short-term discount obligations of the United States Government or United
States Government agencies;
(d)
certificates of deposit of national banks or banks located within the City
which are either (i) fully collateralized at least 110 percent by marketable United States
Government securities marked to market at least monthly or (ii) secured by a corporate
surety bond issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State and
having a claims-paying rating in the top rating category as rated by a nationally
recognized statistical rating organization and maintaining such rating during the term of
such investment;
(e)
banker's acceptances of banks and commercial paper of banks whose
senior obligations are rated in the top two short-term rating categories by at least two
national rating agencies and maintaining such rating during the term of such investment;
(f)
tax-exempt securities exempt from federal arbitrage provisions applicable
to investments of proceeds of the City's tax-exempt debt obligations;
(g)
domestic money market mutual funds regulated by and in good standing
with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including any such fund for which the
Trustee or any of its affiliates provides any service including any service for vvhich a fee
may be paid; and
(h)
any other suitable investment instrument permitted by State laws and the
Municipal Code governing municipal investments generally, subject to the reasonable
exercise of prudence in making investments of public funds.
"Principal and Inlerest Account" means the Account of that name established within the
Bond Fund, as desciibed in Section 4.03 hereof.

 "Principal and Interest Account Requirement" means an amount, equal to the total
principal installment and interest due on the Scries 201 SB Bonds as of each January I and July I
(including any mandatory redemption of the Series 20I5B Bonds as required by Section 3.01(c)
hereof), which amount shall be deposited in the Principal and Interest Account not later than the
Business Day prior to such January 1 and July 1.
"Qualified Collateral" means:
(a)

Federal Obligations;

(b)
direct and general obligations of any state of the United States of America
or any political subdivision of the State which are rated not less than "AA" or "Aa2" or
their equivalents by any Rating Agency; and
(c)
public housing bonds issued by public housing authorities and fully
secured as to the payment of both principal and interest by a pledge of annual
contributions under an annual contiibutions contract or contracts with the United States
of America, or project notes issued by public housing authorities, or project notes issued
by local public agencies, in each case fully secured as to the payment of both principal
and interest by a requisition or payment agreement with the United States of America.
"Rating Agency" means any of Fitch, S&P and Kroll. or another rating agency that has a
credit rating assigned to the Series 2015B Bonds at the request of the City.
"Record Dare" means each June 15 and December 15 (whether or not a Business Day).
"Redeinption Price" means for purposes of this Indenture, (i) in the case of an optional
redemption of Series 2015B Bonds under Section 3.01(a)(i) hereof the Make-Whole
Redemption Price and (ii) in the ca.se of an optional redemption of Series 201SB Bonds under
Section 3.01(a)(ii) hereof or a mandatory redemption of Series 201SB Bonds under
Section 3.01(c) hereof, the principal amount thereof plus accrued interest on the Series 201SB
Bonds to be redeemed to the date fixed for redemption.
"Registered Owner" or "Owner" means the person or persons in whose name or naines a
Series 201 SB Bond shall be registered in the Bond Register.
"Securuies Depository" means DTC and any other securities depository registered as a
clearing agency with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to Section 17A of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as atnended, and appointed as the securities depository for the
Series 201 SB Bonds.
"S&P" means Standard & Poor's Financial Services LLC. a division of McGraw Fiill
Financial. Inc., its successors and assigns, and. if S&P shall be dissolved or liquidated or shall no
longer perform the functions of a securities rating agency. "S&P" shall be deemed to refer to any
other nationally recognized securities rating agency designated by the City by notice to the
Trustee.

 "Series 20I5B Capitalized Interest Account" means the account of that name established
and described in Section 4.04 hereof.
"Series 2015B Debt Management Project" means (i) the payment of costs of the Debt
Management Purposes described in E.\hibit B attached hereto and (ii) any other expenditure of
proceeds of the Series 2015B Bonds authorized by the City Council after the date of execution
and delivery of this Indenture.
"Series 20I5B Project Accoimt" means the account of that name established and
described in Section 4.05 hereof.
"State" means the State of Illinois.
"Supplemental Indenture" means any indenture modifying, altering, amending,
supplementing or confirming this Indenture duly entered into in accordance with the terms
hereof.
"Trust Estate" means the property conveyed to the Trustee pursuant to the Granting
Clauses hereof.
"Trustee" means Zions First National Bank, a national banking association with trust
powers, and its successors and any entity resulting from or surviving any con.solidation or merger
to which it or its successors may be a party, and any successor Trustee at the time serving as
successor trustee hereunder.
"Treasury Rate" means, as of any redemption date, the yield to maturity as of such
redemption date of United States Treasury securities with a constant maturity (as compiled and
published in the most recent Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.IS (519) that has become
publicly available at least four Business Days prior to the redemption date (excluding inflation
indexed securities) (or, if such Statistical Release is no longer published, any publicly available
source of similar market data)) most nearly equal to (i) in the case of Series 201SB Bonds
maturing on January 1 of the years 2019 to 2023, inclusive, the period from the redemption date
to the maturity date of such Series 2015B Bonds to be redeemed and (ii) in the case of the
Series 201SB Bonds maturing on January 1, 2033, the then-remaining average life of such
maturity ofthe Series 201SB Bonds to be redeemed; provided, however, that if the period from
the redemption date to such maturity date is less than one year, the weekly average yield on
actually traded United States Treasuiy securities adjusted to a constant maturity of one year will
be used. The Treasury Rate shall be determined by an independent accounting firm, investment
banking firm or municipal advisor retained by the City at the City's expense.
ARTICLE I I
T H E SERIES

2015B BONDS

Section 2.01. Authority for and Issuance of Series 2015B Bonds, (a) No Series 201 SB
Bonds may be issued under the provisions of this Indenlure except in accordance with this
-9-

 Article. Except as provided in Section 2.07 hereof, the total principal amount of Series 201 SB
Bonds that may be issued hereunder is expressly limited to $742,860,000.
The Series 2015B Bonds shall be designated "City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Series 201SB" and shall be issued as fully registered bonds, without coupons, in
Authorized Denominations substantially in the form attached as E.xhibit A thereto. Unless the
City shall otherwise direct, the Series 20I5B Bonds shall be lettered and numbered from R-l and
upwards. Each Series 201 SB Bond shall be dated the Date of Issuance and shall mature, subject
to prior redemption as provided in Article III hereof, on its Maturity Date.
(b) Each Series 201SB Bond shall bear interest from the later of its date or the most
recent Interest Payment Date to which interest has been paid or duly provided for, until the
principal amount ofsuch Series 201SB Bond is paid, such interest being payable on each Interest
Payment Date. Interest on each Series 20ISB Bond shall be paid to the person in whose naiTie
such Series 201 SB Bond is registered at the close of business on the Record Date next preceding
the applicable Interest Payment Date, by check or draft of the Trustee, or, at the option of any
registered owner of $1,000,000 or more in aggregate principal amount of Series 201 SB Bonds,
by wire transfer of immediately available funds to such bank in the continental United States of
America as the registered owner of such Series 201SB Bonds shall request in writing to the
Trustee.
(c) The principal of the Series 2015B Bonds and any redemption premium shall be
payable in lawful money of the United States of America which, at the respective dates of
payment thereof, is legal tender for the payment of public and private debts, upon presentation
and surrender thereof at the Designated Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee.
Section 2.02. General Terms of Series 2015B Bonds. The Series 2015B Bonds shall
mature on January I in each year shown in the following table in the respective principal ainount
set forth opposite each such year. The Series 2015B Bonds shall bear interest from and
including the Date of Issuance as shown in the table below until payment of the principal or
applicable Redemption Price thereof shall have been made or provided for in accordance with
the provisions hereof, whether at the applicable Maturity Date, upon redemption or acceleration,
or otherwise. Interest accrued on the Series 201SB Bonds shall be paid in arrears on each
Interest Payment Date. Interest on the Series 201SB Bonds shall be computed upon the basis of
a 360 day year consisting of twelve 30 day months.

10-

 YEAR

PRINCIPAL

INTEREST

(JANUARY 1)

AMOUNT

RATE

2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2033
2042

$

5,020,000
5,290,000
5.585,000
5,920,000
6,290,000
321,695,000
393,060,000

5.383%
5.633
5.962
6.212
6.361
7.375
7.750

Section 2.03. Execution. The seal of the City or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed to or
printed on each of the Series 201SB Bonds, and the Series 2015B Bonds shall be executed by the
manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the manual or facsimile signature of
the City Clerk, and in case any officer whose signature shall appear on any Series 2015B Bond
shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such Series 201 SB Bond, such signature shall
nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all proposes, the same as if such officer had remained in
office until delivery.
Section 2.04. Authentication. All Series 20I5B Bonds shall have thereon a certificate of
authentication substantially in the form attached hereto as part of Exhibit A duly executed by the
Trustee as authenticating agent of the City and showing the date of authentication. No
Series 201SB Bond shall be valid or obligatory for any purpose or be entitled to any security or
benefit under this Indenture unless and until such certificate of authentication shall have been
duly executed by the Trustee by manual signature, and such certificate of authentication upon
any such Series 2015B Bond shall be conclusive evidence that such Series 20I5B Bond has been
authenticated and delivered under the Bond Ordinance and this Indenture. The certificate of
authentication on any Series 201 SB Bond shall be deemed to have been executed by the Trustee
if signed by an authorized officer of such Trustee, but it shall not be necessary that the same
officer sign the certificate of authentication on all ofthe Series 201 SB Bonds issued hereunder.
Section 2.05. Form of Series 2015B Bonds. The Series 201SB Bonds issued under this
Indenture shall be substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A. vvith such appropriate
variations, omissions and in.sertions as are permitted or required by the Bond Ordinance and this
Indenture.
Section 2.06. Delivery of Series 2015B Bonds. Upon the execution and delivery of this
Indenture, the City shall execute and deliver to the Trustee, and the Trustee shall authenticate,
the Series 2015B Bonds and deliver them to the purchasers as may be directed by the City as
hereinafter in this Section provided.
Prior to the delivery by the Trustee of any of the Series 201 SB Bonds there shall be filed
with the Trustee:

-II-

 (1)
Ordinance;
(2)

copies, duly certified by the City Clerk of the City, of the Bond

original executed counterparts of this Indenture;

(3)
an Opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that this Indenture (i) has been
duly and lawfully authorized by the City Council of the City and executed by the City in
accordance with the provisions of the Bond Ordinance and (ii) will, when executed and
delivered by the Trustee, be valid and binding upon the City and enforceable in
accordance vvith its terms; and
(4)
a Certificate executed by an Authorized Officer stating that all conditions
precedent with respect to the execution of all documents by the City relating to the
Series 201 SB Bonds have been satisfied.
Section 2.07. Mutilated, Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Series 2015B Bonds.
If any
Series 2015B Bond, whether in temporary or definitive form, is lost (whether by reason of theft
or otherwise), destroyed (whether by mutilation, damage, in whole or in part, or otherwise) or
improperly cancelled, the Trustee may authenticate a new Series 201SB Bond of like date,
maturity date, interest rate, denomination and principal amount and bearing a number not
contemporaneously outstanding; provided that (i) in the case of any mutilated Series 201SB
Bond, such mutilated Series 201 SB Bond shall first be surrendered to the Trustee, and (ii) in the
case of any lost Series 20ISB Bond or Series 2015B Bond destroyed in whole, there shall be first
furnished to the Trustee evidence of such loss, theft, or destruction satisfactory to the City and
the Trustee, together with indemnification of the City and the Trustee, satisfactory to the Trustee.
If any lost, destroyed or improperly cancelled Series 201SB Bond shall have matured or is about
to mature, or has been called for redemption, instead of issuing a duplicate Series 20I5B Bond,
the Trustee shall pay the same without surrender thereof if there shall be first furnished to the
Trustee evidence of such loss, destruction or cancellation, together with indemnity, satisfactory
to it. Upon the issuance of any substitute Series 201SB Bond, the Trustee may require the
payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other governmental charge that may be imposed
in relation thereto.
All Series 2015B Bonds shall be owned upon the express condition that the foregoing
provisions, to the extent permitted by law, are exclusive vvith respect to the replacement or
payment of mutilated, destroyed, lost, stolen or purchased Series 2015B Bonds, and shall
preclude any and all other rights or remedies.
Section 2.08. Tran.sfer and Exchange of Series 2015B Bonds; Persons Treated as
Owners, (a) Subject to the limitations contained in subsection (c) of this Section, upon surrender
for registration of transfer of any Series 201 SB Bond at the Designated Corporate Trust Office of
the Trustee, duly endorsed by, or accompanied by a written instrument or instruments of transfer
in form satisfactory to the Trustee and duly executed by the Bondholder or such Bondholder's
attorney duly authorized in writing in such form and with guarantee of signature as shall be
satisfactory to the Trustee, the City shall execute, and the Trustee shall authenticate and deliver,
in the name of the transferee or transferees, one or more,fully registered Series 201 SB Bonds of

12-

 the same interest rate and Maturity Date of Authorized Denominations, for a like principal
amount bearing numbers not contemporaneously outstanding. Subject to the limitations
contained in subsection (c) of this Section, Series 20ISB Bonds may be exchanged at the
Designated Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee for a like aggregate principal amount of
Series 201SB Bonds of the same interest rate and Maturity Date of other Authorized
Denominations bearing numbers not contemporaneously outstanding.
(b) No service charge shall be made for any transfer or exchange of Series 201 SB
Bonds, but the City or the Trustee may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or
other governmental charge that may be imposed in connection with any tran.sfer or exchange of
Series 2015B Bonds, except that no such payment may be required in the case of the issuance of
a Series 201 SB Bond or Bonds for the unredeemed portion of a Series 201 SB Bond surrendered
for redemption.
(c) The Trustee shall not be required to transfer or exchange any Series 20I5B Bond
during the period commencing on the Record Date next preceding any Interest Payment Date of
such Series 201SB Bond and ending on such Interest Payment Date, or to transfer or exchange
such Series 2015B Bond after the mailing of notice calling such Series 2015B Bond for
redemption has been made as herein provided or during the period of 15 days next preceding the
giving of notice of redemption of Series 201 SB Bonds of the same Maturity Date.
I

(d) Series 2015B Bonds delivered upon any registration of transfer or exchange as
provided herein or as provided in Section 2.07 hereof shall be valid general obligations of the
City, evidencing the same debt as the Series 20I5B Bonds surrendered, shall be secured by this
Indenture and shall be entitled to all of the security and benefits hereof and of the Bond
Ordinance to the same extent as the Series 201SB Bond surrendered. The City, the Trustee and
any Paying Agent may treat the Registered Owner of any Series 2015B Bond as the absolute
owner thereof for all purposes, whether or not such Series 2015B Bond shall be overdue, and
shall not be bound by any notice to the contrary. All payments of or on account of the principal
of, premium, if any, and interest on any such Series 201SB Bond as herein provided shall be
made only to or upon the written order of the Registered Owner thereof or such Registered
Owner's legal representative, but such registration may be changed as herein provided. All such
payments shall be valid and effectual to satisfy and discharge the liability upon such
Series 201 SB Bond to the extent ofthe sum or sums so paid.
Section 2.09. Required Information in Series 2015B Bond Form. On each date on which
the Trustee authenticates and delivers a Scries 2015B Bond, it shall complete the information
required to be inserted by the Seiies 2015B Bond form and shall keep a record of such
information.
Seclion 2.10. Cancellalion. Any Series 201 SB Bond surrendered for the purpose of
payment or reliiement, or for exchange, transfer or replacement, shall be canceled upon
surrender thereof to the Trustee or any Paying Agent. If the City shall acquire any of the
Series 20ISB Bonds, the City shall deliver such Series 201SB Bonds to the Trustee for
cancellation and the Trustee shall cancel the same. Any such Series 201 SB Bonds canceled by
any Paying Agent other than the Trustee shall be promptly transmitted by such Paying Agent to

 the Trustee. Certification of Series 201SB Bonds canceled by the Trustee and Series 201SB
Bonds canceled by a Paying Agent other than the Trustee vvhich are transmitted to the Trustee
shall be made to the City. Canceled Series 201 SB Bonds may be destroyed by the Trustee unless
instructions to the contrary are received from the City.
Section 2.11. Book Entry Provisions. The provisions of this Section shall apply as long
as the Series 20I5B Bonds are maintained in book entry form with DTC or another Securities
Depository, any provisions of this Indenture to the contrary notwithstanding. Notwithstanding
anything else to the contrary herein, so long as DTC is the Securities Depository, the
Series 201 SB Bonds shall be subject to the operational arrangements of DTC in effect from time
to time.
(a)
The Series 2015B Bonds shall be payable to the Securities Depository, or
its nominee, as the Registered Owner of the Series 2015B Bonds, in same day funds on
each date on which the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the Series 201SB
Bonds is due as set forth in this Indenture and the Series 201 SB Bonds. Such payments
shall be made to the offices of the Securities Depository specified by the Securities
Depository to the City and the Trustee in writing. Without notice to or the consent of the
Beneficial Owners of the Series 201SB Bonds, the City and the Securities Depository
may agree in writing to make payments of principal and interest in a manner different
from that set forth herein. If such different manner of payment is agreed upon, the City
shall give the Trustee notice thereof, and the Trustee shall make payments with respect to
the Series 201 SB Bonds in the manner specified in such notice. Neither the City nor the
Trustee shall have any obligation with respect to the transfer or crediting of the principal
of, premium, if any, and interest on the Series 201SB Bonds to Participants or the
Beneficial Owners ofthe Series 201 SB Bonds or their nominees.
(b)
If (i) the City determines, or (ii) the City receives notice that the Securities
Depository has received notice from its Participants having interests in at least SO percent
in principal amount of the Series 2015B Bonds, that the Securities Depository or its
successor is incapable of discharging its responsibilities as a securities depository, or that
it is in the best interests of the Beneficial Owners that they obtain certificated
Series 2015B Bonds, the City may (or, in the case of clause (ii) above, the City shall)
cause the Trustee to authenticate and deliver Series 201SB Bond certificates. The City
shall have no obligation to make any investigation to determine the occurrence of any
events that would permit the City to make any deteiinination described in this paragraph.
(c)
If. following a determination or event specified in paragraph (b) above, the
City discontinues the maintenance of the Series 201 SB Bonds in book entry fonn vvith the
then current Securities Depository, the City will issue replacement Series 201SB Bonds
to the replacement Securities Depository, if any, or. if no replacement Securities
Depository is selected for the Seiies 201 SB Bonds, directly to the Participants as shown
on the records of the former Securities Depository or. to the extent requested by any
Participant, to the Beneficial Owners of the Series 201 SB Bonds shown on the records of
such Participant. Any such Series 201 SB Bonds so issued in replacement shall be in fully
registered form and in Authorized Denominations, be payable as to interest on the

•14-

 Interest Payment Dates of the Series 201SB Bonds by check mailed to each Registered
Owner at the address of such Registered Owner as it appears on the Bond Register or, at
the option of any Registered Owner of not less than $1,000,000 principal amount of
Series 2015B Bonds, by wire tran.sfer to any address in the United States of America on
such Interest Payment Date to such Registered Owner as of such Record Date, if such
Registered Owner provides the Trustee with written notice of such wire transfer address
not later than the Record Date (which notice may provide that it will remain in effect with
respect to subsequent Interest Paynient Dates unless and until changed or revoked by
subsequent notice). Principal and premium, if any, on the replacement Series 201 SB
Bonds are payable only upon presentation and surrender of such replacement
Series 201 SB Bond or Bonds at the Designated Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee.
(d)
The Securities Depository and its Participants, and the Beneficial Owners
of the Series 201SB Bonds, by their acceptance of the Series 201SB Bonds, agree that the
City and the Trustee shall not have liability for the failure of such Securities Depository
to perform its obligations to the Participants and the Beneficial Owners of the
Series 201SB Bonds, nor shall the City or the Trustee be liable for the failure of any
Participant or other nominee of the Beneficial Owners to perform any obligation of the
Participant to a Beneficial Owner of the Series 201 SB Bonds.
(e)
As long as Cede & Co. (or such other nominee as may be requested by an
authorized representative of DTC) is the Registered Owner of the Series 2015B Bonds, as
nominee of DTC, references herein to the Registered Owners of the Series 201 SB Bonds
shall mean Cede & Co. and shall not mean the Beneficial Owners of the Series 2015B
Bonds.
(f)
As long as Cede & Co. (or such other nominee as may be requested by an
authorized representative of DTC) is the Registered Owner ofthe Series 201 SB Bonds:
(i)
if less than all of the Series 201 SB Bonds of a maturity are to be
redeemed prior to maturity, the particular Series 201 SB Bonds or portions of such
Bonds will be selected by DTC or such successor securities depository as
described in Section 3.03 hereof;
(ii)
selection of Series 201SB Bonds to be redeemed upon partial
redemption or presentation of Series 20ISB Bonds to the Trustee upon partial
redemption, shall be deemed made when the right to exercise ownership rights in
such Series 2015B Bonds through DTC or DTC's Participants is transferred by
DTC on its books;
(iii)
provided by
Trustee as. a
Series 201 SB

any notices of the interest rate on the Series 20ISB Bonds to be
the Trustee shall be provided to anyone identifying itself to the
person entitied to exercise ownership rights with respect to such
Bonds through DTC or its Participants; and

IS-

 (iv)
DTC may present notices, approvals, waivers or other
communications required or permitted to be made by Registered Owners under
this Indenture on a fractionalized basis on behalf of some or all of those persons
entitled to exercise ownership rights in the Series 2015B Bonds through DTC or
its Participants.
ARTICLE I I I
REDEMPTION OF SERIES

2015B BONDS

Section 3.01. Redemption Terms, Dates and Prices. The Series 201 SB Bonds shall be
subject to redemption prior to their respective Maturity Dates in the amounts, at the times, at the
Redemption Prices and in the manner provided in this Section.
(a)

Optional Redemption.

(i)
The Series 201 SB Bonds maturing on or before January I , 2033 are
subject to optional redemption in whole or in part, on any Business Day, in such principal
amounts and from such maturities as the City shall determine, at a Redemption Price
equal to the Make-Whole Redemption Price applicable thereto.
(ii)
The Series 201SB Bonds maturing on January 1, 2042 are subject to
optional redemption in whole or in part, on any date on or after January 1, 2025, in such
principal amounts as the City shall determine, at a Redemption Price equal to the
principal amount thereof and accrued interest to the date of redemption.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call any of the
Series 201 SB Bonds for optional redemption, in whole or in part.
(b)

General Provisions Regarding Redemptions.

(i)
No redemption of less than all of the Series 20ISB Bonds Outstanding
shall be made pursuant to Section 3.01(a) hereof unless the^aggregate principal amount of
Series 201 SB Bonds to be redeemed is equal to $1,000 multiples. Any redemption of less
than all of the Series 201 SB Bonds Outstanding shall be made in such a inanner that all
Series 20I5B Bonds Outstanding after such redemption are in Authorized
Denominations. If fewer than all Series 201SB Bonds Outstanding are to be optionally
redeemed, the Series 201SB Bonds to be called shall be called from such maturities as
may be determined by an Authorized Officer.
(ii)
Series 20ISB Bonds may be called for redemption by the Trustee pursuant
to Section 3.01(a) hereof upon receipt by the Trustee at least 45 days prior to the
redemption date (unless a shorter time period shall be satisfactory to the Trustee) of a
written request of the City requesting such redemption. In the case of a redemption
pursuant to Section 3.01(c), Series 201 SB Bonds shall be called for redemption by the

16

 Trustee in accordance with the mandatory schedule provided herein, without further
action by the City.
(iii)
In lieu of redeeming Series 201SB Bonds pursuant to Section 3.01(a)
hereof, the Trustee may, at the request of the City, use such funds available hereunder for
redemption of Series 201 SB Bonds to purchase Series 201 SB Bonds in the open market at
a price not exceeding the Redemption Price then applicable hereunder.
Any
Series 2015B Bond so purchased in lieu of redemption shall be delivered to the Trustee
for cancellation and shall be canceled, all as provided in Section 2.10 hereof.
(c)

Mandatory Redeinption of Series 2015B Bonds.

The Series 201 SB Bonds maturing on January 1, 2033 are subject to mandatory
redemption prior to maturity on January I of the years and in the amounts set forth below, at a
Redemption Price equal to the principal amount thereof and accrued interest to the date of
redemption:
YEAR

PRINCIPAL AMOUNT

2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033*

$ 10,665,000
9,990,000
3,050,000
3,300,000
3,620,000
3,950,000
45,105,000
55,175,000
154,145,000
32,695,000

*Final Mniuriiv

•17-

 The Series 20I5B Bonds maturing on January 1, 2042 are subject to mandatory
redemption prior to maturity January I of the years and in the amounts set forth below, at a
Redeinption Price equal to the principal amount thereof and accrued interest to the date of
redemption:
YEAR

PRINCIPAL AMOUNT

2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042*

$ 73,925,000
173,680,000
18,845,000
15,495,000
16,800,000
25,525,000
32,385,000
17,505,000
18,900,000

*l-inal M i i t u r i l y

The principal ainount of the Series 20I5B Bonds to be mandatorily redeemed in each
year may be reduced through the earlier optional redemption thereof, with any partial optionail
redemption of such Series 20I5B Bonds of a maturity credited against future mandatory
redemption requirements for Series 201SB Bonds of that maturity on a pro-rata basis. In
addition, on or prior to the sixtieth (60th) day preceding any mandatory redemption date, the
Trustee may, and if directed by the City shall, purchase Series 2015B Bonds required to be
retired on such mandatory redemption date at such prices as the City shall determine. Any such
Series 201SB Bond so purchased shall be canceled and the principal amount thereof shall be
credited against future mandatory redemption requirements for the Series 201SB Bonds of that
maturity on a pro-rata basis.
Section 3.02. Notice of Redemption, (a) Unless waived by any owner of Series 201 SB
Bonds to be redeemed, notice of the call for any such redemption shall be given by the Trustee
on behalf of the City by mailing the redemption notice by first class mail at least 30 days and not
more than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption to the Registered Owner of the
Series 20I5B Bond or Bonds to be redeemed at the address shown on the Bond Register or at
such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to the Trustee, but the
failure to mail any such notice or any defect therein as to any Series 201SB Bond shall not affect
the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Series 20ISB Bond. Any notice
of redemption mailed as provided in this Section 3.02 hereof shall be conclusively presumed to
have been given whether or not actually received by the addressee.
All notices of redemption shall state:
(1)

the redemption date.

(2)

the applicable Redemption Price.

18-

 (3)
if less than all outstanding Series 20I5B Bonds are to be redeemed, the
identification (and, in the case of partial redemption, the respective principal amounts and
interest rates) of the Series 201 SB Bonds to be redeemed,
(4)
that on the redemption date the applicable Redemption Price will become
due and payable upon each such Series 201SB Bond or portion thereof called for
redemption, and that interest thereon shall cease to accrue or compound from and after
said date,
(5)
the place where such Series 201SB Bonds are to be surrendered for
payment of the applicable Redemption Price, and
(6)
such other information as shall be deemed necessary by the Trustee at the
time such notice is given to comply with law, regulation or industry standard.
(b)
With respect to an optional redemption of Series 201SB Bonds, such notice may
state that said redemption is conditioned upon the receipt by the Trustee on or prior to the date
fixed for redemption of moneys sufficient to pay the applicable Redemption Price of the
Series 201SB Bonds. If such moneys are not so received, such redemption notice shall be of no
force and effect, the City shall not redeem such Series 2015B Bonds and such failure to deposit
such funds shall not constitute an Event of Default under this Indenture. The Trustee shall give
notice, in the same manner in which the notice of redemption was given, that such moneys were
not so received and that such Series 2015B Bonds will not be redeemed. Unless the notice of
redemption shall be made conditional as provided above, on or prior to any redemption date for
the Series 201 SB Bonds, the City shall deposit with the Trustee an amount of money sufficient to
pay the applicable Redemption Price of all the Series 201 SB Bonds or portions thereof which are
to be redeemed on that date.
(c)
Notice of redemption having been given as aforesaid, the Series 2015B Bonds, or
portions thereof, so to be redeemed shall, on the redemption date, become due and payable at the
Redemption Price therein specified, and from and after such date (unless the City shall default in
the payment ofthe applicable Redemption Price or unless, in the event of a conditional notice as
described above, the necessary moneys were not deposited) such Series 201SB Bonds, or
portions thereof, shall cease to bear interest. Upon surrender of such Series 201SB Bonds for
redemption in accordance with said notice, such Series 2015B Bonds shall be paid by the Trustee
at the applicable Redemption Price. Installments of interest due on or prior to the redemption
date shall be payable as herein provided for payment of interest. Upon suirender for any partial
redemption of any Series 201 SB Bond, there shall be prepared for the Registered Owner a new
Series 201 SB Bond or Bonds of the same interest rate and maturity in the amount of the unpaid
principal.
(d)
If any Series 201 SB Bond, or portion thereof, called for redemption shall not be so
paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the principal shall, until paid, bear interest from the
redemption date at the rate borne by such Series 201SB Bond, or portion theieof. so called for
redemption. All Series 2015B Bonds which have been redeemed shall be cancelled and
destroyed by the Trustee and shall not be reissued.

19-

 (e) Failure to give notice in the manner prescribed hereunder with respect to- any
Series 201SB Bond, or any defect in such notice, shall not affect the validity of the proceedings
for redemption for any Series 2015B Bond with respect to which notice was properly given.
Upon the happening of the above conditions and if sufficient moneys are on deposit with the
Trustee on the applicable redemption date to redeem the Series 2015B Bonds to be redeemed and
to pay interest due thereon and premium, if any, the Series 20ISB Bonds thus called shall not,
after the applicable redemption date, bear interest, be protected by this Indenture or the Bond
Ordinance or be deemed to be Outstanding under the provisions of this Indenture.
(f) If any Series 20I5B Bond is transferred or exchanged on the Bond Register after
notice has been given calling such Series 201SB Bond for redemption, the Trustee will attach a
copy of such notice to the Series 2015B Bond issued in connection with such transfer or
exchange.
(g) If any Series 201 SB Bond is not presented for payment when the principal amount
thereof becomes due, either at maturity or at a date fixed for redemption thereof or otherwise,
and if moneys sufficient to pay such Series 20I5B Bond are held by the Trustee for the benefit of
the Registered Owner of such Series 201SB Bond, the Trustee shall hold such moneys for the
benefit of the Registered Owner of such Series 201SB Bond without liability to the Registered
Owner for interest. The Registered Owner of such Series 201SB Bond thereafter shall be
restricted exclusively to such funds for satisfaction of any claims relating to such Series 201 SB
Bond.
Section 3.03. Selection of Ser'ies20158 Bonds for Redemption. If less than all Taxable
Series 2015B Bonds shall be called for redemption, the Trustee shall instruct DTC to provide for
pro-rata redemption following its procedures as a pro-rata pass-through distribution of principal,
or, if (i) DTC procedures do not allow for pro-rata pass-through distribution of principal or
(ii)the Series 2015B Bonds are no longer maintained in book entry form with DTC, the
Series 20ISB Bonds to be redeemed shall be selected pro-rata within each interest rate and
maturity to be redeemed on the redemption date. Subject to other applicable provisions of this
Indenture, the portion of any Series 201 SB Bond to be redeemed shall be in a principal amount
equal to an Authorized Denomination. If it is determined that one or more, but not all, of the
integral multiples of the Authorized Denomination of principal amount represented by any
Series 201 SB Bond is to be called for redemption, then, upon notice of intention to redeem such
integral multiple of an Authorized Denomination, the Registered Owner of such Series 2015B
Bond shall forthwith surrender such Series 20ISB Bond to the Trus'tee for (a) payment to such
Registered Owner of the applicable Redemption Price of the integral multiple of the Authorized
Denomination of principal amount called for redemption, and (b) delivery to such Registered
Owner of a new Series 201SB Bond or Bonds in the aggregate principal amount of the
unredeemed balance of the principal ainount ofsuch Series 20I5B Bond. New Series 2015B
Bonds representing the unredeemed balance ofthe principal amount of such Series 2015B Bond
shall be issued to the Registered Owner thereof without charge therefor.
The Trustee shall promptly notify the City in writing of the Series 2015B Bonds, or
portions thereof, selected for redeinption and. in the case of any Series 201 SB Bond selected for
partial redemption, the principal amount thereof, and the interest rate thereof lo be redeemed.

-20-

 Section 3.04. Deposit of Funds. For the redemption of any of the Series 201 SB Bonds,
the City shall cause to be deposited in the Principal and Interest Account moneys sufficient to
pay when due the principal of, and premium, if ai"»y, and interest on, the Series 201 SB Bonds to
be redeemed on the redemption date to be applied in accordance with the provisions hereof.
A R T I C L E IV
APPLICATION OF SERIES 2015B BOND PROCEEDS;
CREATION OF FUNDS AND SECURITY FOR SERIES 2015B BONDS

Section 4.01. Source of Payinent of Ser'ies2015B Bonds.
Pursuant to the Bond
Ordinance, the Series 2015B Bonds constitute direct and general obligations of the City for the
payment of which the City pledges its full faith and credit.
Section 4.02. Application of Bond Proceeds. The proceeds of the sale of the
Series 201SB Bonds, consisting of the principal amount of the Series 201SB Bonds minus
original issue discount of $11,396,932.85 used in the marketing of the Series 20I5B Bonds and
less an Underwriters' discount of $4,678,862.02, shall be applied simultaneously with their
delivery as follows:
(i)
There shall be deposited to the credit of the Series 201SB Capitalized
Interest Account the sum of $136,537,386.48 to be applied to the payment of certain
interest to accrue on the Series 201 SB Bonds as provided in Section 4.04 hereof.
(ii)
There shall be deposited to the credit ofthe Series 201SB Project Account
the sum of $590,246,818.65 to be applied to the payment of costs of the Series 201SB
Debt Management Project and costs of issuance of the Series 201 SB Bonds, as provided
in Section 4.05 hereof.
Section 4.03. Creation of 2015B Bond Fund and Account Therein.
(a) There is
established with the Trustee a trust fund designated "City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Series 201 SB Bond Fund" (the "Series 2015B Bond Fund").
(i)
At each such time as is required under this Indenture, the City shall
deposit into the Series 201SB Bond Fund, from funds of the City legally available
therefor, an amount sufficient to satisfy the Principal and Interest Account Requirement.
(ii)
Money on deposit in the Series 201 SB Bond Fund shall be applied by the
Trustee to pay the principal of (whether due at maturity or by mandatory redemption) and
interest on the Scries 20ISB Bonds as the same become due.
(iii)
Pending the use of moneys held in the Series 20ISB Bond Fund, the
Trustee shall invest such moneys in Permitted Investments upon the direction of an
Authorized Officer or any person designated by an Authorized Officer. Income from
such investments shall be credited to the Series 201SB Bond Fund.

 (b) Creation of Principal and Interest Account. There is established with the Trustee an
account within the Series 201SB Bond Fund, designated as the "Series 2015B Principal and
Interest Account" (the "Principal and Interest Account").
Section 4.04. Series 20I5B Capitalized Interest Account. 'There is established with the
Trustee as part of the Series 201SB Bond Fund a trust account designated "City of Chicago
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201 SB Capitalized Interest Account" (the
"Series 2015B Capitalized Interest Account"), to hold certain proceeds of sale of the
Series 20ISB Bonds described in subparagraph (i) of Section 4.02 hereof for application as
authorized herein. Moneys on deposit in the Series 2015B Capitalized Interest Account shall be
withdrawn by the Trustee on the Business Day prior to each of the following Interest Payment
Dates and deposited into the Series 20I5B Bond Fund for application to the payment of the
interest due on the Series 201SB Bonds on each of such Interest Payment Dates in the amounts
as follows:
AMOUNT OF I N TEREST

I N'T ER EST PA Y M ENT DA TE

TO B E PA ID

January 1,2016
July 1,2016
January 1,2017
July 1,2017
January 1,2018

$24,824,979.36
27,928,101.78
27,928,101.78
27,928,101.78
27,928,101.78

Pending the use of moneys held in the Series 201SB Capitalized Interest Account, the Trustee
shall invest such moneys in Permitted Investments upon the direction of an Authorized Officer or
any person designated by an Authorized Officer. Income from such investments shall be
transferred to the Series 2015B Project Account. Any amount remaining in the Series 201SB
Capitalized Inteiest Account on January 2,^2018, shall be withdrawn therefrom and deposited
into the Series 201 SB Bond Fund and applied to the payment of the next interest to become due
on the Series 201 SB Bonds.
Section 4.05. Series 2015B Project Accoutu. There is established with the Trustee a trust
account designated "City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 20ISB Project
Account" (the "Series 2015B Project Account") to hold certain proceeds of sale of the
Series 201SB Bonds described in subparagraph (ii) of Section 4.02 hereof for application as
authorized herein. Proceeds ofthe sale of the Series 201SB Bonds deposited in the Series 2015B
Project Account shall be used (i) to pay costs of the Series 201SB Debt Management Project, and
(ii) to pay costs of issuance of the Series 201 SB Bonds. Moneys on deposit in the Series 201 SB
Project Account shall be disbursed by the Trustee upon receipt of a written request therefor
executed by an Authorized Officer, specifying the purpose for which such disbursement is being
made. Pending the use of moneys held in the Series 2015B Project Account, the Trustee shall
invest such moneys in Permitted Investments upon the direction of an Authorized Officer or any
person designated by an Authorized Officer. Income from such investments shall be retained in
the Series 20ISB Project Account. Completion of the Series 20I5B Debt Managemenl Project
shall be evidenced by a written notification to the Trustee executed by an Authorized Officer

-22-

 directing the Trustee to transfer any remaining balance in the Series 2015B Project Account to
the Series 201 SB Bond Fund for application to the payment of the next interest to become due on
the Series 2015B Bonds.
Section 4.06. Deposits into Series 2015B Bond Fund. Not later than the Business Day
prior to each Interest Payment Date, commencing January I, 2016 (each such date referred to
herein as the "Deposit Date") there shall be on deposit in the Series 201 SB Bond Fund (which
deposit may include amounts from the Series 20ISB Capitalized Interest Account as described in
Section 4.04 hereoO an amount equal to the Principal and Interest Account Requirement (such
amount with respect to any Deposit Date being referred to herein as the "Series 2015B Deposit
Requirement").
In addition to the Series 2015B Deposit Requirement, there shall be deposited into the
Series 201 SB Bond Fund any other moneys received by the Trustee under and pursuant to this
Indenture, when accompanied by directions from the person depositing such moneys that such
moneys are to be paid into the Series 201 SB Bond Fund.
Upon calculation by the Trustee of each Series 201SB Deposit Requirement under this
Section, the Trustee shall notify the City of the Series 2015B Deposit Requirement and the
Deposit Date to which it relates, and shall provide the City with such supporting documentation
and calculations as the City may reasonably request.
Section 4.07. Non-presentment of Ser'ies 2015B Bonds. In the event any Series 201 SB
Bond shall not be presented for payment when the principal thereof becomes due, whether at
maturity, at the date fixed for redemption or otherwise, if moneys sufficient to pay such
Series 201SB Bond shall have been made available to the Trustee for the benefit of the
Registered Owner thereof, subject to the provisions of the immediately following paragraph, all
liability of the City to the Registered Owner thereof for the payment of such Series 201SB Bond
shall forthwith cease, determine and be completely discharged, and thereupon it shall be the duty
of the 'Trustee to hold such moneys, without liability for interest thereon, for the benefit of the
Registered Owner of such Series 201SB Bond who shall thereafter be restricted exclusively to
such moneys, for any claim of whatever nature on his or her part under this Indenture or on, or
with respect to, such Series 201 SB Bond.
Any moneys so deposited with and held by the Trustee not so applied to the payment of
Series 2015B Bonds within two years after the date on which the same shall have become due
shall be repaid by the Trustee to the City, and thereafter the Registered Owners of such
Series 201 SB Bonds shall be entitled to look only to the City for payment, and then only to the
extent of the amount so repaid, and all liability of the Trustee with respect to such moneys shall
thereupon cease, and the City shall not be liable for any interest thereon and shall not be regarded
as a trustee of such moneys. The obligation of the Trustee under this Section to pay any such
funds to the City shall be subject, however, to any provisions of lavv applicable to the Trustee or
to such funds providing other requirements for disposition of unclaimed property.
Section 4.08. Moneys Held in Trust. All moneys required to be deposited with or paid to
the Trustee for the account of any fund or account referred to in any provision of this Indenture

-23-

 shall be held by the Trustee in trust as provided in Section 8.07 of this Indenture, and shall, while
held by the Trustee, constitute part of the Trust Estate and be subject to the lien or security
interest created hereby.
ARTICLE V
INVESTMENT OF MONEYS

Section 5.01. Investment of Moneys. Moneys held in the funds, accounts and subaccounts
established hereunder shall be invested and reinvested in accordance with the provisions
governing investments contained in this Indenture. All such investments shall be held by or
under the control of the Trustee and shall be deemed at all times a part of the fund, account or
subaccount for which they were made.
Section 5.02. Investment Income. The interest earned on any investment of moneys held
hereunder, any profit realized from such investment and any loss resulting from such investment
shall be credited or charged to the fund, account or subaccount for which such investment was
made.
ARTICLE V I
DISCHARGE OF L I E N

Section 6.01. Defeasance, (a) If the City shall pay to the Registered Owners of the
Series 201SB Bonds, or provide for the payment of, the principal, premium, if any, and interest
to become due on the Series 201SB Bonds, then this Indenture and the Bond Ordinance shall be
fully discharged and satisfied vvith respect to the Series 20I5B Bonds. Upon the satisfaction and
discharge of this Indenture, the Trustee shall, upon the request of the City, execute and deliver to
the City all such instruments as may be desirable to evidence such discharge and satisfaction, and
all fiduciaries shall pay over or deliver to the City all funds, accounts and other moneys or
securities held by them pursuant to this Indenture which are not required for the payment or
redemption of the Series 201 SB Bonds. If payment or provision for payment is made, to or for
the Registered Owners of all or a portion of the Series 20ISB Bonds, of the principal of and
interest due and to become due on any Series 20ISB Bond at the times and in the manner
stipulated therein, and there is paid or caused to be paid to the Trustee all sums of money due and
to become due according to the provisions of this Indenture, then these presents and the estate
and rights hereby and by the Bond Ordinance granted shall cease, terminate and be void as to
those Series 201SB Bonds or portions thereof except for purposes of registration, transfer and
exchange of Series 201 SB Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations. Any
Series 201 SB Bond shall be deemed to be paid within the meaning of Ihis Section when payment
of the principal of any such Series 20ISB Bond, plus interest thereon to the due date thereof
(whether such due date be by reason of maturity or upon redemption as provided in this
Indenture or otherwise), either (a) shall have been made or caused to have been made in
accordance with the terms thereof, or (b) shall have been provided for by irrevocably depositing
with the Trustee, in trust and exclusively for such payment, ( I ) moneys sufficient to make such

-24-

 payinent or (2) Defeasance Obligations, or (3) a combination of the investments described in
clauses (I) and (2) above, such amounts so deposited being available or maturing as to principal
and interest in such amounts and at such times, without consideration of any reinvestment
thereof, as will insure the availability of sufficient moneys to make such payment (all as
confirmed by a nationally recognized firm of independent public accountants). If the City shall
pay and discharge a portion of the Series 20I5B Bonds as aforesaid, such portion shall cease to
be entitled to any lien, benefit or security under this Indenture and the Bond Ordinance. The
liability of the City with respect to such Series 201SB Bonds shall continue, but the Registered
Owners thereof shall thereafter be entitled to payment (to the exclusion of all other Bondholders)
only out of the Defeasance Obligations deposited with the Trustee under this Article V I .
(b)
Nothing in this Indenture shall prohibit a defeasance deposit of escrow securities as
provided in this section from being subject to a subsequent sale of such escrow securities and
reinvestment of all or a portion of the proceeds of that sale in escrow securities which, together
with money to remain so held in trust, shall be sufficient to provide for payment of principal,
redemption premium, if any, and interest on any of the defeased Series 2015B Bonds. Amounts
held by the Trustee in excess of the amounts needed so to provide for payment of the defeased
Series 20ISB Bonds may be subject to withdrawal by the City.
A R T I C L E VII
D E F A U L T PROVISIONS; R E M E D I E S

Section 7.01.
of Default":

Defaults. Each of the following events is hereby declared to be an "Event

(a)
payment of the principal or Redemption Price, if any, of any Series 201 SB
Bonds shall not be made when and as the same shall become due, whether at maturity or
upon call for redemption or otherwise;
(b)
payment of any installment of interest on any Series 201SB Bonds shall
not be made when and as the same shall become due; or
(c)
the City shall fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this Indenture,
or shall default in the performance or observance of any of the covenants, agreements or
conditions on its part contained herein or in the Series 20I5B Bonds, which materially
affects the rights of the owners of the Series 2015B Bonds and such failure, refusal or
default shall continue for a period of 45 days after written notice thereof by the Trustee or
the owners of not less than 25 percent in principal amount of the Outstanding
Series 201 SB Bonds; provided, however, that in the case of any such default which can
be cured by due diligence but which cannot be cured within the 4S-day period, the time to
cure shall be extended for such period as may be necessary to remedy the default with all
diligence.
Seclion 7.02. Remedies, (a) Upon the happening and continuance of any Event of Default
specified in paragraph (a) or (b) of Section 7.01 hereof, the Trustee shall proceed, or upon the
-25-

 happening and continuance of any Event of Default (beyond the time periods specified therein)
specified in paragraph (c) of Section 7.01 hereof, the Trustee may proceed, and upon the written
request of the owners of not less than 25 percent in principal ainount of the Outstanding
Series 2015B Bonds, shall proceed, in its own name, subject to the provisions of this Section, to
protect and enforce its rights and the rights of the owners of the Series 20ISB Bonds by such of
the following remedies as the Trustee, being advised by counsel, shall deem most effectual to
protect and enforce such rights:
(i)
by mandamus or other suit, action or proceeding at law or in equity, to
enforce all rights of the owners of the Series 2015B Bonds including the right to require
the City to receive and collect taxes adequate to carry out the covenants and agreements
as to such taxes and to require the City to carry out any other covenant or agreement with
the owners of the Series 201 SB Bonds and to perform its duties under this Indenture;
(ii)

by bringing suit upon the Series 20I5B Bonds;

(iii)
by action or suit in equity, require the City to account as if it were the
trustee of an express trust for the owners of the Series 201 SB Bonds; and/or
(iv)
by action or suit in equity, enjoin any acts or things which may be
unlawful or in violation of the rights ofthe owners of the Series 201SB Bonds.
(b) In the enforcement of any rights and remedies under this Indenture, the Trustee shall
be entitled to sue for, enforce payment of and receive any and all amounts then or during any
default becoming, and at any time remaining, due from the City but only out of moneys pledged
as security for the Series 20I5B Bonds for principal. Redemption Price, interest or otherwise,
under any provision of this Indenture or of the Series 201SB Bonds, and unpaid, with interest on
overdue payments at the rate or rates of interest specified in such Series 201SB Bonds, together
with any and all costs and expenses of collection and of all proceedings hereunder and under
such Series 201 SB Bonds without prejudice to any other right or remedy of the Trustee or of the
owners of the Series 201 SB Bonds, and to recover and enforce a judgment or decree against the
City for any portion of such amounts remaining unpaid, with interest, costs and expenses, and to
collect from any moneys available under this Indenture for such purpose, in any manner
provided by law, the moneys adjudged or decreed to be payable.
(c) Under no circumstance may the Trustee declare the principal of or interest on any
Series 201 SB Bond to be due and payable prior to its Maturity Date following the occurrence of
an Event of Default under this Indenture.
ARTICLE

VIII

TRUSTEE AND PAYING AGENT

Section 8.01. Acceptance of Trusts. The Trustee hereby accepts the trusts imposed upon
it by this Indenture, and agrees to perform said trusts, but only upon and subject to the express
terms and conditions set forth herein. Except as otherwise expressly set forth in this Indenture.
-26-

 the Trustee assumes no duties, responsibilities or liabilities by reason of its execution of this
Indenture other than as set forth in this Indenture, and this Indenture is executed and accepted by
the Trustee subject to all the terms and conditions of its acceptance of the trust under this
Indenture. The Trustee shall make payments to Bondholders and effect optional and mandatory
redemptions when required, whether or not its fees and expenses have been fully paid.
Section 8.02. Dealing in Ser'ies 2015B Bonds. The Trustee, in its individual capacity,
may buy, sell, own, hold and deal in any of the Series 20I5B Bonds, and may join in any action
which the Registered Owner of any Series 201SB Bond may be entitled to take with like effect as
if it did not act in any capacity hereunder. The Trustee, in its individual capacity, either as
principal or agent, may also engage in or be interested in any financial or other function with the
City, and may act as depositary, trustee or agent for any committee or body of the Registered
Owners of Series 20ISB Bonds secured hereby or other obligations of the City as freely as if it
did not act in any capacity hereunder.
Section 8.03. Compensation of Trustee. The City shall pay to the Trustee from time to
time reasonable compensation for all services rendered under this Indenture and also all
reasonable expenses, charges, counsel fees and other disbursements, including those of their
attorneys, agents and employees incurred in and about the performance of their powers and
duties under this Indenture and, except as provided in Section 8.01 hereof the Trustee shall have
a lien therefor on any and all moneys at any time held by it under this Indenture. The City
further agrees to indemnify and save the Trustee harmless against any liabilities which it may
incur in the exercise and performance of its powers and duties hereunder, which are not due to its
negligence or default.
Section 8.04. Paying Agent. The Trustee may appoint a Paying Agent with power to act
on its behalf and subject to its direction (i) in the authentication, registration and delivery of
Series 201 SB Bonds in connection with transfers and exchanges hereunder, as fully to all intents
and purposes as though such Paying Agent had been expressly authorized by this Indenture to
authenticate, register and deliver Series 201SB Bonds, and (ii) for effecting purchases and sales
of Series 2015B Bonds pursuant hereto and accepting deliveries of Series 201SB Bonds, making
deliveries of Series 2015B Bonds and holding Series 201SB Bonds pursuant hereto. The
foregoing notwithstanding, the Trustee need not appoint a Paying Agent hereunder as long as the
Series 201 SB Bonds are held in book-entry form pursuant to Section 2.11 hereof; at any time the
Series 201SB Bonds are not held in book-entry form pursuant to Section 2.11 hereof, the Truslee
shall either maintain an office in New York. New York capable of handling the duties of Paying
Agent hereunder, or shall appoint a Paying Agent with an office in New York, New York
hereunder. Any Paying Agent appointed pursuant to this Section shall evidence its acceptance
by a certificate filed with the Trustee and the City. For all purposes of this Indenture, the
authentication, registration and delivery of Series 201SB Bonds by or to any Paying Agent
pursuant to this Section 8.04 shall be deemed to be the authentication, registration and delivery
of Series 20I5B Bonds "by or to the Trustee." Such Paying Agent shall at all times be a
commercial bank or trust company having an office in New York, New York, and shall at all
times be a corporation organized and doing business under the laws of the United States of
America or of any state vvith combined capital and surplus of at least $50,000,000 and in each
case authorized under such laws to exercise corporate trust powers and subject to supervision or

-27-

 examination by Federal or state authority. If such corporation publishes reports of condition at
least annually pursuant to law or the requirements of such authority, then for the purposes of this
Section the combined capital and surplus ofsuch corporation shall be deemed to be its combined
capital and surplus as set forth in its most recent report of condition so published.
Any corporation into which such Paying Agent may be merged or converted, or with
which it may be consolidated, or any corporation resulting from any merger, consolidation or
conversion to which such Paying Agent shall be a party, or any corporation succeeding to the
corporate trust business of such Paying Agent, shall be a successor of such Paying Agent
hereunder, if such successor corporation is otherwise eligible under this Section, without the
execution or filing or any further act on the part of the parties hereto or such Paying Agent or
such successor corporation.
Any Paying Agent may at any time resign by giving written notice of resignation to the
Trustee and the City, and such resignation shall take effect at the appointment by the Trustee of a
successor Paying Agent pursuant to the succeeding provisions of this Section and the acceptance
by the successor Paying Agent of such appointment. The Trustee may at any time terminate the
agency of any Paying Agent by giving written notice of termination to such Paying Agent and
the City, which termination shall not take effect until the acceptance by the successor Paying
Agent of such appointinent. Upon receiving such a notice of resignation or upon such a
termination, or in case at any time such Paying Agent shall cease to be eligible under this
Section, the Trustee shall promptly appoint a successor Paying Agent, shall give written notice of
such appointment to the City and shall mail notice of such appointment to all Registered Owners
of Series 201 SB Bonds.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any Paying Agent shall be entitled to
rely on information furnished to it orally or in writing by the Trustee and shall be protected
hereunder in relying thereon. The Trustee agrees to pay to any Paying Agent from time to time
its fees and expenses for its services, and the Trustee shall be entitled to be reimbursed for such
payments pursuant to Section 8.03 hereof.
Section 8.05. Qualification of Trustee. The Trustee hereunder shall be a bank, trust
company or national banking association having the powers of a trust company doing business
and having a corporate trust office in the City of Chicago, Illinois.
Section 8.06. Responsibilities of Trustee, (a) The recitals of fact herein and in the
Series 201 SB Bonds shall be taken as the statements of the City and the Trustee assumes no
responsibility for the correctness of the same. The Trustee makes no representations as to the
validity or sufficiency of this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture or of any Series 201SB
Bonds issued hereunder or thereunder or in respect of the security afforded by this Indenture or
any Supplemental Indenture and the Trustee shall not incur any responsibility in respect thereof.
The Trustee shall, however, be responsible for its representation contained in its certificate of
authentication on the Series 20ISB Bonds. 'The Trustee shall not be under any responsibility or
duty vvith respect to the issuance of the Series 201SB Bonds for value or the application of the
proceeds thereof except to the extent siich proceeds are paid to the Trustee in its capacity as
Trustee, or the application of any moneys paid to the City or others in accordance vvith this

28-

 Indenture or any Suppletnental Indenture. The Trustee shall not be under any obligation or duty
to perform any act that would involve it in expense or liability or to institute or defend any action
or suit in respect hereof, or to advance any of its own moneys, unless properly indemnified.
Subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this Section, the Trustee shall not be liable in
connection vvith the performance of its duties hereunder except for its own negligence or willful
misconduct or that of its agents.
(b) The Trustee, prior to the occurrence of an Event of Default and after the remedy of
all Events of Default that may have occurred, undertakes to perform such duties and only such
duties as are specifically set forth in this Indenture and each Supplemental Indenture. In case an
•Event of Default has occurred and has not been remedied, the Trustee shall exercise such of the
rights and powers vested in it by law, this Indenture and each Supplemental Indenture and shall
use the same degree of care and skill in their exercise as a prudent person would exercise or use
under the circumstances in the conduct of his or her own affairs. Any provision of this Indenture
and any Supplemental Indenture and any Supplemental Indenture relating to action taken or so to
be taken by the Trustee or to evidence upon which the Trustee may rely shall be subject to the
provisions of this Section.
Section 8.07. Funds Held in Trust and Security Therefor. Any moneys held by the
Trustee, as such, at any time pursuant to the terms of this Indenture or any Supplemental
Indenture shall be and hereby are assigned, transferred and set over unto the Trustee in trust for
the purposes and upon the terms and conditions of this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture.
Subject to the terms of this Indenture concerning Permitted Investments, all moneys (not
including securities) held by the Trustee, as such, may be deposited by the Trustee in its banking
department, or with such other banks, trust companies, or national banking associations, each
having a place of business in the City of Chicago, Illinois, as may be designated by the City and
approved by the Trustee. No such funds shall be deposited with any bank, trust company or
national banking association, other than the Trustee, in an amount exceeding 25 percent of the
amount which an officer of such bank, trust company or national banking association shall
certify to the Trustee and the City as the combined capital, surplus and undivided profits of such
bank, trust company or national banking association. No such funds shall be deposited or remain
on deposit with any bank, trust company or national banking association in excess of the amount
insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, unless (a) such bank, trust company or
national banking association shall have deposited in trust with the trust department of the Tru.stee
or with a Federal Reserve Bank or branch or. with the written approval of the Trustee and the
City, pledged to some other bank, trust company or national banking association, for the benefit
of the City and the appropriate fund or account, as collateral security for the moneys deposited.
Qualified Collateral having a current market value (exclusive of accrued interest) at least equal to
1 10 percent of the amount of such moneys, or (b) in lieu of such collateral security as to all or
any part of such moneys, there shall have been deposited in trust with the trust department of the
Trustee, for the benefit of the City and the appropriate fund, account, subfund or subaccount, and
remain in full force and effect as security for such moneys or part thereof, the indemnifying bond
or bonds of a surety company or companies qualified as surety for deposits of funds of the
United States of America and qualified to transact business in the State in a sum at least equal to
the amount of such moneys or part thereof. The Trustee shall allow and credit interest on any
such moneys held by it at such rate as it customarily allows upon similar moneys of similar size

-29-

 and under similar conditions or as required by law. Interest in respect of moneys or on securities
in any fund, account, subfund or subaccount shall be credited in each case to the fund, account,
subfund or subaccount in which such moneys or securities are held.
Section 8.08. Evidence on which Trustee May Act. The Trustee shall be protected in
acting upon any notice, resolution, request, consent, order, certificate, report, opinion, bond or
other paper or document believed by it to be genuine, and to have been signed or presented by
the proper party or parties. The Trustee may consult with counsel, who may or may not be
counsel to the City, and the opinion of such counsel shall be full and complete authorization and
protection in respect of any action taken or suffered by it hereunder in good faith and in
accordance therewith. Whenever the Trustee shall deem it necessary or desirable that a matter be
proved or established prior to taking or suffering any action hereunder, including payment of
moneys out of any fund or account, such matter (unless other evidence in respect thereof be
herein specifically prescribed) may be deemed to be conclusively proved and established by a
Certificate, and such Certificate shall be full warrant for any action taken or suffered in good
faith under the provisions of this Indenture upon the faith thereof, but in its discretion the Trustee
may in lieu thereof accept other evidence of such fact or matter or may require such further or
additional evidence as to it may seem reasonable. Except as otherwise expressly provided herein
or therein, any request, order, notice or other direction required or permitted to be furnished
pursuant to any provision hereof or thereof by the City to the Trustee shall be sufficiently
executed if executed in the name ofthe City by an Authorized Officer.
Section 8.09. Permitted Acts and Functions. The Trustee may become the Owner of any
Series 20ISB Bonds, with the same rights it would have if it were not the Trustee. To the extent
permitted by law, the Trustee may act as depositary for, and permit any of its officers or directors
to act as a member of, or in any other capacity with respect to, any committee formed to protect
the rights of the Owners of Series 201 SB Bonds or to effect or aid in any reorganization growing
out of the enforcement of the Series 20I5B Bonds or this Indenture, whether or not any such
committee shall represent the Ovvners of a majority in principal amount of the Series 2015B
Bonds then Outstanding.
Sect'ion 8.10. Resignation. The Trustee may at any time resign and be discharged of its
duties and obligations created by this Indenture by giving not fewer than 60 days' written notice
to the City and mailing notice thereof, to the owners of Series 201SB Bonds at their addresses
shown on the registration books kept by the Trustee within 20 days after the giving of such
written notice. Such resignation shall take effect upon the appointment and acceptance of
appointment of a successor by the City or the Owners of Series 201 SB Bonds as herein provided.
Section 8.11.
Removal. The Trustee may be removed at any time by the Owners of a
majority in principal amount of the Series 2015B Bonds then Outstanding, excluding any
Series 20ISB Bonds held by or for the account of the City, by an instrument or concurrent
instruments in writing signed and duly acknowledged by such Owners of Series 201 SB Bonds or
by their attorneys duly authorized in writing and delivered to the City. Copies of each such
instrument shall be delivered by the Cily to the Trustee and any successor. The City may remove
the Trustee at any time, except during the existence of an Event of Default, for such cause (or
upon 30 days' notice for any reason) as shall be determined in the sole discretion of the City by

-30-

 filing with the Trustee an instrument signed by an Authorized Officer and by mailing notice
thereof to the Owners of Series 2015B Bonds at their addresses shown on the registration books
kept by the Trustee. Any removal of the Trustee shall take effect upon the appointment and
acceptance of appointment of a successor Trustee.
Section 8.12. Appointment of Successor. In case at any time the Trustee shall resign or
shall be removed or shall become incapable of acting, or shall be adjudged a bankrupt or
insolvent, or if a receiver, liquidator or conservator of the Trustee or of its property shall be
appointed, or if any public officer shall take charge or control of the Trustee or of its property or
affairs, a successor may be appointed by the Owners of a majority in principal amount of the
Series 201SB Bonds then Outstanding, excluding any Series 2015B Bonds held by or for the
account of the City, by an instrument or concurrent instruments in writing signed by such
Owners or their attorneys duly authorized in writing and delivered to such successor Trustee,
notification thereof being given to the City and the predecessor Trustee. Pending such
appointment, the City shall forthwith appoint a Trustee to fill such vacancy until a successor
Trustee (if any) shall be appointed by the Owners of Series 201SB Bonds as herein authorized.
The City shall mail notice to Owners of Series 201SB Bonds of any such appointment within
20 days after such appointment. Any successor Trustee appointed by the City shall, immediately
and without further act, be superseded by a Trustee appointed by the Owners of Series 201 SB
Bonds. If in a proper case no appointment of a successor Trustee shall be made pursuant to the
foregoing provisions of this Section within 45 days after the Trustee shall have given to the City
written notice of resignation as provided in Section 8.10 hereof or after the occurrence of any
other event requiring or authorizing such appointment, the Trustee, any Owner of Series 201SB
Bonds may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction to appoint a successor. Said court may
thereupon, after such notice, if any, as said court may deem proper and prescribe, appoint such
successor Trustee. Any Trustee appointed under the provisions of this Section shall be a bank,
trust company or national banking association, in any such case having corporate trust powers,
doing business and having a corporate trust office in the City.
Sect'ion 8.13. Tran.sfer of Rights and Property to Successor. Any successor Trustee
appointed under this Indenture shall execute, acknowledge and deliver to its predecessor Trustee,
and also to the City, a written instrument of acceptance respecting such appointment, and
thereupon such successor Trustee, without any further act, deed or conveyance, shall become
fully vested with all moneys, estates, properties, rights, powers, duties and obligations of such
predecessor Trustee, with like effect as if originally named as Trustee; but the Trustee ceasing to
act shall nevertheless, on the request of the City, or of the successor Trustee, execute,
acknowledge and deliver such instruments of conveyance and further assurance and do such
other things as may reasonably be required for more fully and certainly vesting and confirming
in such successor Trustee all the right, title and interest of the predecessor Trustee in and to any
property held by it under this Indenture, and shall pay over, assign and deliver to the successor
Trustee any money or other property subject to the trusts and conditions herein set forth. Should
any deed, conveyance or instrument in writing from the City be required by such successor
Trustee for more fully and certainly vesting in and confirming to such successor Trustee any
such estates, rights, powers and duties, any and all such deeds, conveyances and instruments in
writing shall, on request, and so far as may be authorized by law, be executed, acknowledged and
delivered by the City.

-31

 Section 8.14. Merger or Consolidation. Any company into which the Trustee may be
merged or converted or with which it may be consolidated or any company resulting from any
merger, conversion or consolidation to which it shall be a party or any company to which the
Trustee may sell or transfer all or substantially all of its corporate trust business, provided such
company shall be a bank, trust company or national banking association which is qualified to be
a successor to the Trustee under Section 8.12 hereof and shall be authorized by law to perform
all the duties imposed upon it by this Indenture, shall be the successor to the Trustee without the
execution or filing of any paper or the performance of any further act.
Section 8.15. Adoption of Authentication. In ca.se any of the Series 201 SB Bonds
contemplated to be issued under this Indenture shall have been authenticated but not delivered,
any successor Trustee may adopt the certificate of authentication of any predecessor Trustee so
authenticating such Series 20I5B Bonds and deliver such Series 2015B Bonds so authenticated,
and in case any ofthe said Series 201SB Bonds shall not have been authenticated, any successor
Trustee may authenticate such Series 2015B Bonds in the name of the predecessor Trustee, or in
the name of the successor Trustee, and in all such cases such certificate shall have the full force
which it is anywhere in the Series 201 SB Bonds or in this Indenture provided that the certificate
of the Trustee shall have.
Section 8.16. Evidence of Signatures of Owners and Ownership of Series 2015B Bonds.
(a) Any request, consent or other instrument which this Indenture may require or permit to be
signed and executed by the Owners of Series 201SB Bonds may be in one or more instruments of
similar tenor, and shall be signed or executed by such Owners in person or by their attorneys
appointed in writing. Proof of (i) the execution of any such instrument, or of an instrument
appointing any such attorney, or (ii)the ownership by any person of the Series 201SB Bonds,
shall be sufficient for any purpose of this Indenture (except as otherwise herein expressly
provided) if made in the following manner, but the Trustee may nevertheless in its discretion
require further or other proof in cases where it deems the same desirable:
(1)
The fact and date of the execution by any Owner or his attorney of such
instrument may be proved by the certificate, which need not be acknowledged or verified,
of an officer of a bank or trust company satisfactory to the Trustee or of any notary public
or other officer authorized to take acknowledgments of deeds to be recorded in the
jurisdiction in which he purports to act, that the person signing such request or other
instrument acknowledged to him the execution thereof, or by an affidavit of a witness of
such execution, duly sworn to before such notary public or other officer.
(2)
The authority of the person or persons executing any such instrument on
behalf of a corporate Owner of Series 201SB Bonds may be established withoul further
proof if such instrument is signed by a person pui"poi'ting to be the president or vice
president of such corporation with a corporate seal affixed and attested by a person
purporting to be its secretary or an assistant secretary.
(b) The ownership of Series 20I5B Bonds and the amount, numbers and other
identification, and date of ownership of the same shall be proved by the Bond Register. Any
request, consent or vote of the Owner of any Series 20ISB Bond shall bind all future Owners of

-32-

 such Series 20I5B Bond in respect of anything done or suffered to be done by the City or the
Trustee in accordance therewith.
Section 8.17. Preservation and Inspection of Documents. All documents received by the
Trustee under the provisions of this Indenture shall be retained in its possession and shall be
subject at all reasonable times to the inspection of the City and any Owner of Series 2015B
Bonds and their agents and their representatives, any of whom may make copies thereof.
A R T I C L E IX
SUPPLEMENTAL INDENTURE

Section 9.01. Supplemental Indenlure Effective Upon E.Keciition by the Trustee. For any
one or more of the following purposes and the purposes enumerated in Section 9.04 hereof, and
at any time or from time to time, a Supplemental Indenture may be authorized by an ordinance
adopted by the City Council of the City, which, upon the filing with the Trustee of a copy of
such ordinance certified by the City Clerk and the execution and delivery of such Supplemental
Indenture by the City and the Trustee, shall be fully effective in accordance with its terms and
not subject to consent by the Registered Owners ofthe Series 201 SB Bonds:
(a)
to add to the covenants and agreements of the City in this Indenture other
covenants and agreements to be observed by the City which are not contrary to or
inconsistent with this Indenture as theretofore in effect;
(b)
to add to the limitations and restrictions in this Indenture other limitations
and restrictions to be observed by the City which are not contrary to or inconsistent with
this Indenture as theretofore in effect;
(c)
to surrender any right, power or privilege reserved to or conferred upon
the City by the terms of this Indenture, but only if the surrender of such right, power or
privilege is not contrary to or inconsistent with the covenants and agreements of the City
contained in this Indenture;
(d)
to confirm, as further assurance, the pledge herein, and the subjection of,
additional properties, taxes or other collateral to any lien, claim or pledge created or to be
created by, this Indenture;
(e)
to cure any ambiguity, supply any omission, or cure or correct any defect
or inconsistent provision in this Indenture;
- (f) to insert such provisions clarifying matters or questions arising under this
Indenture as are necessary or desirable and are not contrary to or inconsistent vvith this
Indenture as theretofore in effect; or
(g)

to provide additional duties of the Trustee under this Indenture.

-33-

 Section 9.02. Supplemental Indentures Effect'ive With Consent of Owners of Series 2015B
Bonds. At any time or from time to time, a Supplemental Indenture may be authorized by an
ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City, subject to consent by the Owners of
Series 2015B Bonds in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this Article, which
Supplemental Indenture, upon the filing with the Trustee of a copy of such ordinance certified by
the City Clerk, upon compliance with the provisions of this Article, and upon execution and
delivery of such Supplemental Indenture by the City and the Trustee, shall become fully
effective in accordance with its terms.
Section 9.03. General Provisions, (a) This Indenture shall not be modified or amended in
any respect except as provided in and in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this
Article. Nothing in this Article shall affect or limit the right or obligation of the City to adopt,
make, do, execute, acknowledge or deliver any ordinance, resolution, act or other instrument
pursuant to the provisions of this Article or the right or obligation of the City to execute and
deliver to the Trustee any instrument which elsewhere in this Indenture it is provided shall be
delivered to the Trustee.
(b) Any ordinance authorizing a Supplemental Indenture referred to and permitted or
authorized by Section 9.01 or 9.04 hereof may be adopted by the City Council of the City
without the consent of any of the Owners of Series 201SB Bonds, but such Supplemental
Indenture shall be executed and delivered by the City and the Trustee and shall become effective
only on the conditions, to the extent and at the time provided in this Article. Every Supplemental
Indenture delivered to the Trustee for execution shall be accompanied by an opinion of counsel
stating that such Supplemental Indenture has been duly and lawfully authorized by the City
Council ofthe City and executed by the City in accordance vvith the provisions of this Indenture,
is authorized or permitted by this Indenture, and will, when executed and delivered by the
Trustee, be valid and binding upon the City and enforceable in accordance with its terms.
(c) The Trustee is hereby authorized to enter into, execute and deliver any
Supplemental Indenture referred to and permitted or authorized by this Article and to make all
further agreements and stipulations vvhich may be therein contained, and the Trustee, in taking
such action, shall be fully protected in relying on an opinion of counsel that such Supplemental
Indenture is authorized or permitted by the provisions of this Indenture.
(d) No Supplemental Indenture shall change or modify any of the rights or obligations
of the Trustee without its written assent thereto.
Section 9.t)4. Additional Matters. Additionally, this Indentuie may. without the consent
of, or notice to, any of the Bondholders, be supplemented and amended, in such inanner as shall
not be inconsistent vvith the terms and provisions hereof, for any one or more of the following
purposes:
(a)

to provide for certificated Series 201 SB Bonds; and

(b)
to secure or maintain ratings from any Rating Agency in the highest long
term debt rating category, of such Rating Agency which are available for the

-34-

 Series 201 SB Bonds, which changes will not restrict, limit or reduce the obligation of the
City to pay the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the Series 201 SB Bonds as
provided in this Indenture or otherwise adversely affect the Registered Ovvners of the
Series 20ISB Bonds under this Indenture.
Section 9.05. Mailing of Notice of Amendment. Any provision in this Article for the
mailing of a notice or other paper to owners of Series 201 SB Bonds shall be fully complied with
if it is mailed postage prepaid only (i) to each Registered Owner of then Outstanding
Series 2015B Bonds at his address, if any, appearing upon the registration books maintained by
the City at the Designated Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee, and (ii) to the Trustee.
Section 9.06. Powers of Amendment. Any modification or amendment of this Indenture
or of the rights and obligations of the City and of the Owners of the Series 20I5B Bonds, in
particular, which requires the consent of the Bondholders, may be made by a Supplemental
Indenture, with the written consent given as provided in Section 9.07, (a) of the Owners of a
majority in principal amount of the Series 201 SB Bonds Outstanding at the time such consent is
given, or (b) in case less than all of the then Outstanding Series 201SB Bonds are affected by the
modification or amendment, of the Owners of a majority in principal amount of the then
Outstanding Series 20ISB Bonds so affected. No such modification or amendment shall permit
a change in the terms of redemption or maturity ofthe principal of any Outstanding Series 201SB
Bonds or of any installment of interest thereon or a reduction in the principal amount or the
applicable Redemption Price thereof or in the rate of interest thereon, or in terms of purchase or
the purchase price thereof, without the consent of the owner of such Series 201SB Bonds, or
shall reduce the percentages or otherwise affect the classes of Series 201 SB Bonds the consent of
the owners of which is required to effect any such modification or amendment, or shall change or
modify any of the rights or obligations of the Trustee without its written assent thereto. For the
purposes of this Section, a Series 201 SB Bond shall be deemed to be affected by a modification
or amendment of this Indenture if the same adversely affects or diminishes the rights of the
owners of such Series 201SB Bond.
Secrion 9.07. Consent of Owners of Series 2015B Bonds, (a) The City may at any time
authorize a Supplemental Indenture making a modification or amendinent permitted by the
provisions of Section 9.06, to take effect when and as provided in this Section. A copy of such
Supplemental Indenture (or brief summary thereof or reference thereto in fonn approved by the
Trustee), together with a request to the Owners of the Series 20I5B Bonds for their consent
thereto in form satisfactory to the Trustee, shall be mailed by the City to the Owners of the
Series 201 SB Bonds (but failure to mail such copy and request shall not affect the validity of the
Supplemental Indenture when consented to as in this Section provided). Such Supplemental
Indenture shall not be effective unless and until, and shall take effect in accordance with its terms
when, (i) there shall have been filed with the Trustee (1) the written consents of Owners of the
percentages of Outstanding Series 20ISB Bonds specified in Section 9.06 and (2) an opinion of
counsel stating that such Supplemental Indenture has been duly and lawfully executed and
delivered by the City and the Trustee in accordance with the provisions of this Indenture, is
authorized or permitted hereby and is valid and binding upon the City and enforceable in
accordance vvith its terms upon its becoming effective as in this Section provided, and (ii) a
notice shall have been mailed as hereinafter in this Section provided.

-35-

 (b) The consent of an Owner of Series 2015B Bonds to any modification or amendment
shall be effective only if accompanied by proof of the Ownership, at the date of such consent, of
the Series 201SB Bonds with respect to vvhich such consent is given, which proof shall be such
as is permitted by Section 8.16. A certificate or certificates signed by the Trustee that it has
examined such proof and that such proof is sufficient in accordance with Section 8.16 shall be
conclusive that the consents have been given by the Owners of the Series 201 SB Bonds
described in such certificate or certificates. Any such consent shall be binding upon the Owner
of the Series 20I5B Bonds giving such consent and upon any subsequent Owner of such
Series 201 SB Bonds and of any Series 201 SB Bonds issued in exchange therefor (whether or not
such subsequent Owner thereof has notice thereof) unless such consent is revoked in writing by
the Owner of such Series 201 SB Bonds giving such consent or a subsequent Owner thereof by
filing such revocation with the Trustee, prior to the time when the written statement of the
Trustee hereinafter provided for in this Section is filed. The fact that a consent has not been
revoked may likewise be proved by a certificate of the Trustee to the effect that no revocation
thereof is on file with the Trustee.
(c) At any time after the Owners of the required percentages of Series 201SB Bonds
shall have filed their consents to the Supplemental Indenture, the Trustee shall make and file
with the City a written statement that the Owners of such required percentages of Series 201 SB
Bonds have filed such consents. Such written statement shall be conclusive that such consents
have been so filed. At any time thereafter notice, stating in substance that the Supplemental
Indenture (which may be referred to as a Supplemental Indenture entered into by the City and the
Trustee as of a stated date, a copy of which is on file with the Trustee) has been consented to by
the Owners of the required percentages of Series 201 SB Bonds and will be effective as provided
in this Section, shall be given to Owners by the Trustee by mailing such notice to the Owners of
the Series 2015B Bonds (but failure to mail such notice shall not prevent such Supplemental
Indenture from becoming effective and binding as provided in this Section). The Trustee shall
file with the City proof of the mailing of such notice. A record, consisting of the papers required
or permitted by this Section to be filed with the Trustee, shall be proof of the matters therein
stated. Such Supplemental Indenture making such amendment or modification shall be deemed
conclusively binding upon the Trustee and the Owners of all Series 201SB Bonds at the
expiration of 40 days after the filing with the Trustee of proof of the mailing of such last
mentioned notice, except in the event of a final decree of a court of competent jurisdiction setting
aside such Supplemental Indenture in a legal action or equitable proceeding for such purpose
commenced within such 40-day period; except that the Trustee and the City, during such 40-day
period and any such further period during which any such action or proceeding may be pending,
shall be entitled in their absolute discretion to take such action, or to refrain from taking such
action, with respect to such Supplemental Indenture as they may deem expedient.
Section 9.08. Modifications by Unanimous Consent. The terms and provisions of this
Indenture and the rights and obligations of the City and of the Owners of the Series 20ISB
Bonds hereunder may be modified or amended in any respect upon the consent ofthe Ovvners of
all the then Outstanding Series 2015B Bonds to the execution and delivery ofsuch Supplemental
Indenture, such con.sent to be given as provided in Section 9.07 except that no notice to the
Ovvners of the Series 20ISB Bonds shall be required; but no such modification or ainendment

-36-

 shall change or modify any of the rights or obligations of the Trustee without its written assent
thereto.
Section 9.09. Exclusion of Series 2015B Bonds. Series 201 SB Bonds owned by or for the
account of the City shall not be deemed Outstanding for the purpose of consent or other action or
any calculation of Outstanding Series 20I5B Bonds provided for in this Article, and the City
shall not be entitled with respect to such Series 20ISB Bonds to give any consent or take any
other action provided for in this Article. At the time of any consent or other action taken under
this Article, the City shall furnish the Trustee with a Certificate upon which the Trustee may rely,
describing all Series 201 SB Bonds so to be excluded.
Section 9.10. Notation on Series 2015B Bonds. Series 201SB Bonds authenticated and
delivered after the effective date of any action taken as in this Article provided may, and, if the
Trustee so determines, shall, bear a notation by endorsement or otherwise in form approved by
the City and the Trustee as to such action, and in that case upon demand of the Owner of any
Series 2015B Bond Outstanding at such effective date and presentation of his Series 2015B Bond
for that purpose at the Designated Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee or upon any exchange or
registration of transfer of any Series 201SB Bond Outstanding at such effective date, suitable
notation shall be made on such Series 2015B Bond or upon any Series 201SB Bond issued upon
any such exchange or registration of transfer by the Trustee as to any such action. If the City or
the Trustee shall so determine, new Series 20ISB Bonds so modified as in the opinion of the
Trustee and the City to conform to such action shall be prepared, authenticated and delivered,
and upon demand of the Owner of any Series 2015B Bond then Outstanding shall be exchanged,
without cost to such Owner, for Series 201SB Bonds of the same maturity upon surrender of
such Series 2015B Bond.
ARTICLE X

MISCELLANEOUS

Section 10.01. Severability. If any provision of this Indenture shall be held or deemed to
be, or shall in fact be. illegal, inoperative or unenforceable, the same shall not affect any other
provision or provisions herein contained or render the same invalid, inoperative or unenforceable
to any extent whatever.
Section 10.02. Payments Due on Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays. If the date for making
any payment, or the last date for the performance of any act or the exercise of any right, as
provided in this Indenture, shall not be a Business Day, such payment may be made, act
performed or right exercised on the next Business Day vvith the sanie force and effect as if done
on the nominal date provided in this Indenture, and no interest shall accrue for the period after
such nominal date.
Seclion 10.03. Notices. Any notice, demand, direction, request or other instruments
authorized or required by this Indenture to be given to. delivered to or filed with the City or the

-37-

 Trustee shall be deemed to have been sufficiently given, delivered or filed for all purposes of the
Indenture if and when sent by registered mail, postage prepaid, return-receipt requested:
To the City, if addressed to:

City of Chicago
Office of the Chief Financial Officei

or at such other address as may be designated in writing by the City to the Trustee; and
To the Trustee, if addressed to:

Zions First National Bank

or at such other address as may be designated in writing by the Trustee to the City.
Section 10.04. Counterparrs. This Indenture may be simultaneously executed in several
counterparts, each of which shall be an original and all of which shall constitute but one and the
same instrument.
Secrion 10.05. Rules of Interpretation. Unless expressly indicated otherwise, references to
Sections or Articles are to be construed as references to Sections or Articles of this instrument as
originally executed. Use of the words "herein," "hereby," "hereunder," "hereof, "hereinbefore,"
"hereinafter" and other equivalent words refer to this Indenture and not solely to the particular
portion in which any such word is used. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of
this Indenture and the Bond Ordinance (including in the form of Series 201SB Bond attached
hereto as Exhibit A), the terms of this Indenture shall be deemed to control.
Section 10.06. Captions. The captions and headings in this Indenture are for convenience
only and in no way define, limit or describe the scope or intent of any provisions or Sections of
this Indenture.

[Signatures Appear on Following Page 

-38-

 If at hi. II

53?} 

a.

 

/

the City has caused these presents to be executed in its name and
with its official seal hereunto affixed and attested by its duly authorized officials; and to
evidence its acceptance of the trusts hereby created, the Trustee has caused these presents to be
executed in its corporate name and with its corporate seal hereunto affixed and attested by its
duly authorized officers, on the date first above written.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF,

larole L. Brown
Chief Financial Officer

City Clerk

ZIONS FIR.ST NATIONAL BANK,

as Trustee

By:
Name:
Authorized Signatory

[Signature Page - Trust Indenture 

 I N WITNESS WHEREOF, the City has caused these presents to be executed in its name and
with its official seal hereunto affixed and attested by its duly authorized officials; and to
evidence its acceptance of the trusts hereby created, the Trustee has caused these presents to be
executed in its corporate name and with its corporate seal hereunto affixed and attested by its
duly authorized officers, on ihe date first above written.
CITY OF CHICAGO

By:.
Carole L. Brown
Chief Financial Officer
[SEAL]

Attest:

By:
Susana A. Mendoza
City Clerk

ZIONS FIRST NATIONAL BANK,

ed Signatory
[SEAL]

[Signature Page - Trust Indenture]

  

ATTESTZ

  

By:
Name: Robert resident

[Attestation of? Trustee Trust Indenture]

EXHIBIT A

FORM O F BOND
REGISTERED

No.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
S T A T E OF ILLINOIS
C I T Y OF C H I C A G O
G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BOND
TAXABLE SERIES

2015B

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
Interest
Rate:

%

Maturity Date:
January 1,20_

Dated Date:
.,20_

CUSIP:

Registered Owner:
Principal Amount:
The City of Chicago (the "Ciry") hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for value
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date identified above, the Principal Amount identified
above and to pay interest (computed on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months) on
such Principal Amount from the later of the date of this Series 201 SB Bond or the most recent
interest payment date to which interest has been paid at the Interest Rate per annum set forth
above on January I and July I of each year commencing January 1, 2016, until said Principal
Amount is paid. Principal of this Series 201SB Bond and redemption premium, if any, shall be
payable in lawful money ofthe United States of America upon presentation and surrender at the
designated corporate trust office of Zions First National Bank, Chicago, Illinois, as trustee, bond
registrar and paying agent (the "Trustee"). Payinent of the installments of interest shall be made
to the Registered Owner hereof as shown on the registration books of the City maintained by the
Trustee at the close of business on the ISth day of the month next preceding each interest
payinent date and shall be paid by check or draft of the Trustee mailed to the address of such
Registered Owner as it appears on such registration books or at such other address furnished in
writing by such Registered Owner to the Trustee or. al the option of any Registered Owner of
$1.000,000 or more in aggregate principal ainount of the Series 201 SB Bonds, by wire transfer of

A-l

 immediately available funds to such bank in the continental United States of America as the
Registered Owner hereof shall request in writing to the Trustee.
Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Series 201 SB Bond set forth on
the reverse hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set
forth at this place.
It is hereby certified and recited that all conditions, acts and things required by law to
exist or to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this Series 201SB Bond did exist, have
happened, been done and performed in regular and due form and time as required by law; that
the indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Series 201SB Bonds of which this is one,
does not exceed any limitation imposed by lavv; and that provision has been made for the
collection of a direct annual tax sufficient to pay the interest hereon as it falls due and also to pay
and discharge the principal hereof at maturity.
This Series 201 SB Bond shall not be valid or become obligatory for any purpose until the
certificate of authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Trustee.
I N WITNESS WHEREOF, the

City of Chicago by the City Council has caused its corporate
seal to be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Series 2015B Bond to be signed by the duly
authorized facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City
Clerk, all as of the Dated Date identified above.
(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature)
City Clerk
City of Chicago
I SEAL!

Date of Authentication:

A-2

 CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Series 2015B Bond is one of the Series 2015B Bonds described in the
within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and Indenture and is one of the General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Series 201 SB, of the City of Chicago.
Zions First National Bank,
as Trustee
By;

A-3

(Manual Signature)
Authorized Officer

 (Form of Series 201 SB Bond — Reverse Side]
C I T Y OF C H I C A G O
G E N E R A L OBLiGA'riON BOND
TAXABLE SERIES

2015B

For the prompt payment of this Series 2015B Bond, both principal and interest, as
aforesaid, as the same become due, and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full
faith, credit and resources of the City are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Series 201SB Bond is one of a series of Series 20I5B Bonds aggregating the
principal amount of $742,860,000 issued pursuant to issued pursuant to, under authority of and
in full compliance with the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois, particularly Article V I I ,
Section 6(a) of the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois and an Ordinance adopted by the
City Council of the City on June 17, 2015 (the "Bond Ordinance"), and executed under a Trust
Indenture securing the City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 201SB, dated
July 1, 2015 (the "Indenture") from the City to the Trustee, for the purposes of paying (i) costs
ofthe Series 20I5B Debt Management Project described in the Indenture, (ii) certain interest to
become due on the Series 201 SB Bonds and (iii) expenses incidental to the issuance of the
Series 201 SB Bonds.
The Series 2015B Bonds maturing on or before January 1, 2033 are subject to optional
redeinption in whole or in part, on any Business Day, in such principal amounts as the City shall
determine, at a Redemption Price equal to the Make-Whole Redemption Price applicable thereto,
as provided in the Indenture.
The Series 201SB Bonds maturing on January 1, 2042 are subject to optional redemption
in whole or in part, on any date on or after January 1,2025, in such principal amounts as the City
shall determine, at a Redemption Price equal to the principal amount thereof and accrued interest
to the date of redemption.
The Series 20ISB Bonds maturing on January 1, 2033, are subject to mandatory
redeinption prior to maturity on Januaiy I of the years 2024 to 2032, inclusive, and the
Series 2015B Bonds maturing on January 1, 2042, are subject to mandatory redemption prior to
maturity on January 1 of the years 2034 to 2041, inclusive, in each case at a Redemption Price
equal to the principal amount thereof and accrued interest to the date of redemption.
In the event ofthe ledemption of less than all of the Series 201 SB Bonds of like maturity,
the Series 20ISB Bonds to be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner determined
pursuant to the Indenture.
Notice of any such redemption shall be .sent by first class mail not less than 30 days nor
more than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption to the Registered Owner of each
Series 201 SB Bond to be redeemed al the address shown on the registration books of the City
maintained by the Trustee or at such olher address as is furnished in writing by such Registered
Owner to the Trustee; provided that the failure to mail any such notice or any defect therein as to

A-4

 any Series 201SB Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any
other Series 20I5B Bond. When so called for redemption, this Series 20ISB Bond shall cea.se to
bear interest on the specified redemption Ame, provided that funds for redemption are on deposit
at the place of payment at that time, and shall not be deemed to be outstanding.
This Series 201 SB Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by
its attorney duly authorized in writing at the designated corporate trust office of the Trustee in
Chicago, Illinois, but only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Indenture, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Series 201SB
Bond. Upon such transfer a new Series 20I5B Bond or Bonds of authorized denominations, of
the same interest rate, series and maturity and for the same aggregate principal amount will be
issued to the transferee in exchange therefor. The Trustee shall not be required to transfer or
exchange this Series 201SB Bond during the period commencing on the Record Date next
preceding any Interest Payment Date for this Series 2015B Bond and ending on such Interest
Payment Date, or to transfer or exchange such Series 201SB Bond (A) after notice calling this
Series 2015B Bond for redemption has been mailed, or (B) during a period of IS days next
preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Series 2015B Bond.
'The Series 2015B Bonds are issued in fully registered form in the denomination of
$1,000 each or authorized integral multiples thereof. This Series 20ISB Bond may be exchanged
at the designated corporate trust office of the Trustee for a like aggregate principal amount of
Series 2015B Bonds of the same interest rate, series and maturity of other authorized
denominations, upon the terms set forth in the Indenture.
The City and the Trustee may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as the absolute
owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment of or on account of principal hereof and
interest due hereon and redemption premium, if any, and for all other purposes and neither the
City nor the Trustee shall be affected by any notice to the contrary.

A-5

 (ASSIGNMENT)
FOR VALUE RECEIVED,

the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)

the within Series 201 SB Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Series 2015B Bond on the books kept for registration thereof with
full power of substitution in the premises.
Dated:
Signature guaranteed:
NOTICE:

The signature to this assignment must correspond vvith the name of the Registered
Owner as it appears upon the face of the within Series 201SB Bond in every
particular, without alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

A6

 EXHIBIT B
SERIES

2015B DEBT MANAGEMENT PRO.IECT

I.
For the payment or the refunding of all or a portion of the Outstanding Line and CP
Indebtedness as follows:

EXPIRATION

OUT.STAND1NG
LINE ("LINE")

OR

SERIES

AND CP ("CP")

OR YEAR

INDEBTEDNESS

TERMINATION
DATE

AMOUN T TO
BE PAID

9/30/2015
11/30/2015
6/30/2016
9/30/2015

$95,105,000.00
86,369,144.78
68,735,765.42
36,505,000.00

4/25/2016
9/30/2015

63,353,500.00
34,181,361.72

2002C/D
2013
2014
2014

CP
Line
;Line
Line

2014
2015

Line
Line

'

FINANCIAL PROVIDER

Bank of Montreal, acting through
its Chicago Branch
Bank of America, N.A.
Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A.
Barclays Bank PLC
JPMorgan Chase Bank, National
Association
DNT Asset Trust

II.
For the reimbursement of the Corporate Fund of the City of amounts expended in
connection with the Sales Tax Swap Termination in the amount of $24,500,000.00.

III.

For the termination of the Financing Transaction (Orange Line), $181,000,000.00.

 

TERMS AND AUTHORIZATION

S C H E D U L E IA

$345^30,000 G E N E R A L OBLIGATION B O N D S , S E R I E S 2015A
1.

Aggregate Principal Amount: $345,530,000

2.

Dated: July 21,2015

3.

Maturities, Principal Amounts, Interest Rates, Prices and CUSIP Numbers:

MATURITY

PRINCIPAL

JANUARY J

AMOUNT ($)

2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2026
2027
2028
2029
2033
2034
2035
2039
4.

4,965,000
7,380,000
7.870,000
8,320,000
8,845,000
5,415,000
19,390,000
24,925,000
33,585,000
35,275,000
88,100,000
36,430,000
16,420,000
48,610,000

INTEREST R A T E ( % )

PRICE

CUSIP

5.000
5.000
5.000
5.000
5.000
5.000
5.000
5.250
5.250
5.375
5.500
5.500
5.500
5.500

103.511
103.579
102.874
101.537
100.366
99.385
97.692
98.980
98.206
98.539
98.454
98.179
98.008
97.553

167486 WC9
167486 WD7
167486 WES
167486 WF2
167486 WGO
167486 WH8
167486 WJ4
167486 WKl
167486 WL9
167486 WM7
167486 WNS
167486 WPO
167486 WQ8
167486 WR6

Interest Payment Dates: January 1 and July 1 of each year, commencing January 1.

2016.
5. Redemption: The Series 20I5A Bonds are subject to both optional and mandatory
redemption prior to maturity, as described below. The Series 201SA Bonds shall be redeemed
only in principal amounts of .$5,000 and integral multiples thereof.
Optional Redemption ofthe Series 20I5A Bonds. The Series 201 SA Bonds maturing on
and after January 1, 2026, are subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the City, in
whole or in part, on any date on or after January 1, 2025. and if less than all of the outstanding
Series 2015A Bonds of a single maturity are to be redeemed, the Series 2015A Bonds to be
called shall be called by lot in such principal amounts and from such maturities as the City shall
determine at a redemption price equal to the principal amount of the Series 201SA Bonds being
redeemed plus accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call any of the
Series 2015A Bonds for optional redemption, in whole or in part; provided, that such sale or

 waiver will not adversely affect the excludability of interest on the Series 201SA Bonds from
gross income for federal income tax purposes.
Mandatory Redemption ofthe Series 2015A Bonds. The Series 20 ISA Bonds maturing
on January 1, 2033 are subject to mandatory redemption at a redemption price equal to the
principal amount thereof, plus accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption, on January 1 of
the following years and in the following principal amounts:
YEAR

2031
2032
2033*

PRINCIPAL AMOUNT

$ 6,205,000
8,275,000
73,620,000

Fina\ Maturity

The Series 2015A Bonds maturing on January I , 2039 are subject to mandatory
redemption at a redemption price equal to the principal amount thereof, plus accrued interest to
the date fixed for redemption, on January I of the following years and in the following principal
amounts:
YEAR

2036
2037
2038
2039*

PRINCIPAL AMOUNT

$16,135,000
12.620.000
15,875.000
3,980,000

Final Malurity

Selection of Series 2015A Bonds for Redemption. If less than all of the Series 201 SA
Bonds of a maturity are to be redeemed prior to maturity, the particular 2015A Bonds being
redeemed, or portions thereof to be redeemed, will be selected by lot in such manner as The
Depository Trust Company ("DTC") or such successor securities depository may determine.

 S C H E D U L E IB

$742,860,000 G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS,
T A X A B L E S E R I E S 2015B
1.

Aggregate Principal Amount: $742,860,000

2.

Dated: July 21,2015

3.

Maturity, Principal Amount, Interest Rale, Price and CUSIP Number:

MATURITY

PRINCIPAL

JANUARY 1

AMOUNT ($)

INTEREST R A T E ( % )

PRICE

CUSIP

2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2033
2042

5,020,000
5,290,000
5,585,000
5,920,000
6,290,000
321,695,000
393,060,000

5.383
5.633
5.962
6.212
6.361
7.375
7.750

100.000
. 100.000
100.000
100.000
100.000
99.309
97.666

167486 VX4
167486 VY2
167486 VZ9
167486 WA3
167486 WBl
167486 VV8
167486 VW6

4.

Interest Payment Dales. January 1 and July 1 of each year, commencing January 1,

2016.
5. Redemption. The Taxable Series 2015B Bonds are subject to both optional and
mandatory redemption prior to maturity, as described below. The Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds
shall be redeemed only in principal amounts of $1,000 and integral multiples thereof.
Optional Redemption. Optional Redeinption of the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds with
Make Whole Payment. The Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds maturing on or before January 1,2033,
are subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole or in part, on any
Business Day (as defined below) at a redemption price (the "Make-Whole Redemption Price")
equal to the greater of: (A) the principal amount of the Taxable Series 201SB Bonds to be
redeemed, or (B) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal
and interest on the Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds to be redeemed, not including any portion of
those payments of interest accrued and unpaid as of the date such 'Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds
are to be redeemed, discounted to the date of redemption of the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds to
be redeemed on a semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day
months) at the Treasury Rate (defined below) plus SO basis points, plus accrued interest on the
Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds being redeemed to the date fixed for redemption.
The Make-Whole Redeinption Price ofthe Taxable Series 20I5B Bonds to be redeemed
will be calculated by an independent accounting firm, investment banking firm or financial
advisor (the "Calculalion Agent") retained by the City at the City's expense. The Trustee and
the City may rely on the Calculation Agent's detennination of the Make-Whole Redemption

 Price and will not be liable for such reliance. An authorized officer of the City shall confirm and
transmit the Make-Whole Redemption Price as so calculated on such dates and to such parties as
shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.
The "Treasury Rate" is, as of any redemption date, the yield to maturity as of such
redemption date of U.S. Treasury securities vvith a constant maturity (as compiled and published
in the most recent Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.IS (519) that has become publicly
available four Business Days (as defined below) prior to the redemption date (excluding inflation
indexed securities) (or, if such Statistical Release is no longer published, any publicly available
source of similar market data)) most nearly equal to (i) in the case of the Taxable Series 201SB
Bonds maturing on January 1 of the years 2019 through 2023, inclusive, the,period from the
redemption date to the maturity date of such Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds to be redeemed and
(ii) in the case of the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds maturing on January 1, 2033, the thenremaining average life of such maturity of the Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds to be redeemed;
provided, however, that if the period from the redemption date to such maturity date is less than
one year, the weekly average yield on actually traded U.S.Treasury securities adjusted to a
constant maturity of one year will be used.
"Business Day" means any day other than (a) a Saturday or Sunday, (ii) a day on which
banks located in the city where the Designated Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee is located
are authorized or required by law to close, and (iii) a day on which The New York Stock
Exchange, Inc.. is closed.
The Treasury Rate will be determined by an independent accounting firm, investment
banking firm or financial advisor retained by the City at the City's expense.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call the Taxable
Series 201 SB Bonds for optional redemption.
Optional Redemption of the Ta.\able Ser'ies2015B Bonds. The Taxable Series 201 SB
Bonds maturing on January 1, 2042, are subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of
the City, in whole or in part, on any date on or after January 1, 2025, and if less than all of the
outstanding 'Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds of such maturity are to be redeemed, the Taxable
Series 201SB Bonds to be called shall be called in such principal amounts as the City shall
determine, at a redemption price equal to the principal amount of the Taxable Series 20ISB
Bonds being redeemed plus accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call any of the
Taxable Series 20ISB Bonds for optional redemption, in whole or in part.
Mandalory Redemption of the Ta.xable Series 2015B Bonds. The Taxable Series 201 SB
Bonds maturing on January 1, 2033. are subject to mandatory redeinption prior to maturity on
January I of the years and in the amounts set forth below, at a redemption price equal to the
principal amount thereof and accrued interesl to the dale of redemption:

-2-

 YEAR

2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033*

PRINCIPAL AMOUNT

$ 10,665,000
9,990,000
3,050,000
3,300,000
3.620,000
3,950,000
45,105,000
55,175,000
154,145,000
32,695,000

'Final Maturity

The Taxable Series 201 SB Bonds maturing on January 1, 2042, are subject to mandatory
redemption prior to maturity on January 1 of the years and in the amounts set forth below, at a
redemption price equal to the principal amount thereof and accrued interest to the date of
redemption:
YEAR

2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042*

PRINCIPAL AMOUNT

$ 73,925,000
173,680,000
18,845,000
15,495,000
16,800,000
25.525,000
32,385,000
17,505,000
18,900,000

"hnal Matunty

Selection of Taxable Series 2015B Bonds for Redemption. If less than all of the Taxable
Series 20I5B Bonds of a maturity are to be redeemed prior to maturity, the particular Taxable
Series 20ISB Bonds being redeemed, or portions thereof to be redeemed, will be selected on a
pro-rata pass-through distribution of principal basis to the extent permitted by and in accordance
with procedures of DTC. If the DTC operational arrangements do not allow for the redemption
of the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds on a pro-rata pass-through distribution of principal basis,
then the Taxable Series 2015B Bonds to be redeemed will be selected for redemption in
accordance with DTC procedures, by lot.

 SCHEDULEIC
SERIES

2015A D E B T MANAGEMENT P R O J E C T

For the payment or the refunding of all or a portion of the Outstanding Line and CP
Indebtedness as follows:

OU'TSTANDING

EXPIRATION

LINE ("LINE")

OR
TERMINATION
DATE

AND CP
YEAR

INDEBTEDNESS

2013
2014
2014
2014

Line
Line
Line
Line

2015

Line

FINANCIAL PROVIDER

Bank of America, N.A.
Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A.
Barclays Bank PLC
JPMorgan Chase Bank,
National Association
DNT Asset Trust

AMOUNT
To B E PAID

11/30/2015
6/30/2016
9/30/2015
4/25/16

$ 86,170,855.22
31,264,234.58
62.360,000.00
43,740.45

9/30/2015

117,405,638.28

 SCHEDULE ID
SERIES

2015B DEBT MANAGEMENT PROJECT

I.
For the payment or the refunding of all or a portion of the Outstanding Line and CP
Indebtedness as follows:

OUTSTANDING

EXPIRATION

LINE ("LINE")

OR

SERIES

AND CP ("CP")

OR YEAR

INDEBTEDNESS

2002C/D
2013
2014
2014

CP
Line
Line
Line

2014
2015

Line
Line

FINANCIAL PROVIDER

Bank of Montreal, acting through
its Chicago Branch
Bank of America, N.A.
Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A.
Barclays Bank PLC
JPMorgan Chase Bank, National
Association
DNT Asset Trust

TERMINATION

AMOUNT T O

DATE

B E PAID

9/30/2015
11/30/2015
6/30/2016
9/30/2015

$95,105,000.00
86,369,144.78
68,735.765.42
36,505,000.00

4/25/2016
9/30/2015

63,353,500.00
34,181,361.72

II.
For the reimbursement of the Corporate Fund of the City of amounts expended in
connection with the Sales Tax Swap Termination in the amount of $24,500,000.00.

111.

For the termination ofthe Financing Transaction (Orange Line), $181,000,000.00.

 SCHEDULEII

NOTIFICATION OF TAX ABATEMENT

S TA TE OF ILLINOIS

)

)SS
COUNTY OF COOK

)

NOTIFICATION OF T A X ABATEMENT

$345,530,000
G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS, S E R I E S

2015A

$742,860,000
G E N E R A L OBLIGATION BONDS, T A X A B L E S E R I E S 2015B
OF T H E C I T Y O F C H I C A G O

To:

The City Council of the City of Chicago and the County Clerks of The Counties of Cook
and DuPage, Illinois

Please be advised that responsive to authority contained in an Ordinance (the
"Ordinance") adopted by the City Council (the "City Council") of the City of Chicago (the
"Ciry") on June 17, 2015, authorizing the issuance of up to $1,100,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of general obligation bonds of the City, plus original issue discount, on July 21,2015 the
City issued its $345,530,000 General Obligation Bonds, Scries 201 SA (the "Ser'ies 20I5A
Bonds"), having the terms described in that certain Bond Purchase Agreement, dated July 16,
2015 (the "Series 2015A Bond Purchase Agreemenr"), between the City and Morgan Stanley &
Co. LLC, acting on behalf of itself and as representative of certain underwriters named therein
(the "Underwriters"), and its $742,860,000 General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 2015B
(together vvith the Series 20ISA Bonds, the "Bonds"), having the terms described in that certain
Bond Purchase Agreement, dated July 15,2015, between the City and the Underwriters (together
with the Series 20I5A Bond Purchase Agreement, the "Bond Purchase Agreements").
Capitalized terms used herein without definition have the meanings assigned to such
terms in the Ordinance.
Notification of the sale of the Bonds to the City Council and of the determinations made
by the Chief Financial Officer of the City with respect to the sale of the Bonds, the filing of the
Bond Purchase Agreements, and the Official Statement for the Bonds, all as provided for or
required by the Ordinance was made by the filing with the City Clerk of a Notification of Sale
executed and delivered by the Chief Financial Officer on the date of issuance of the Bonds.
Please be further advised that Section 7 of the Ordinance provides for a direct annual tax
in and for each of the years 2015 to 2055, inclusive, to pay the interest on the Bonds promptly
when and as the same falls due and to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity.
Pursuant to Section 12 of the Ordinance, please be further advLsed that the amount of the annual
tax levy requirements for the payinent of the principal of and interest on the Bonds resulting
from the sale ofthe Bonds is less than the levy of taxes authorized in Section 7 of the Ordinance.
.?8l9l24 0l.03.doc
: 2.10746

 I have determined that a reduction in the amount of the tax levy in the years 2015 to 2055,
inclusive, is deemed desirable in connection with the sale of the Bonds. The amount of the taxes
levied in the Ordinance to pay debt service on the Bonds, the amount of the taxes to be abated
resulting from the sale of the Bonds, and the remainder of the taxes levied which is to be
extended for collection are as follows:
AMOUN T LEVIED
INTHE
LEVY YEAR

2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
2051
2052
2053
2054
2055

ORDINANCE

$250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
250,000,000.00
450.000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000.000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000.000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000.000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000.000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000.000.00
450,000.000.00
450.000,000.00

EXCESS LEVY

TO BE A B A TED
$248,392,282.46
248,392,282.46
165,655,940.18
163,489,416.78
163,371,402.48
163,312,880.18
163,201,630.58
163,098,987.48
170,246,281.24
158,533,043.74
153,942,481.24
146,514,418.74
146324,606.24
142.831,950.00
129,883,443.74
33,253,875.00
101,182,193.74
103,602,550.00
31390,387.50
201,073,687.50
410,286.600.00
407,621,562.50
412,966,687 50
412,283.775.00
429,673,612.50
429.635,250.00
450,000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450.000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000,000.00
450,000.000.00
450,000.000.00
450,000.000.00
450.000.000.00
450,000.000.00
450.000.000.00
450.000.000.00
450.000.000.00

T A X TO BE
EXTENDED
FOR PAYMENT OF
THE BONDS

$

1,607,717.54
1,607,717.54
84,344,059.82
86,510,583.22
86,628397.52
86,687,119.82
86,798.369.42
86,901,012.52
79,753,718.76
91,466,956.26
96,057,518.76
103,485,581.26
103,475,393.76
107,168.050.00
120,116,556.26
216,746,125.00
148,817,806.26
146,397,450.00
218,409.612.50
48,926,312.50
39,713,400.00
42,378,437.50
37,033,312.50
37,716,225.00
20,326,38750
20,364,750.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

 Respectfully submitted as of this 16th day of July, 2015.

Carole L. Brown
Chief Financial Officer

ISIGNATURE PAGL TO NOTIFICAI ION OTTAX AHA TLMLNTI

 ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF F I L I N G
NOTIFICATION OF T A X ABATEMENT

The foregoing Notification of Tax Abatement relating to $345^30,000 General
Obligation Bonds, Series 201 SA, and $742,860,000 General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series
201SB, ofthe City of Chicago (the "City") has been filed in my office as City Clerk of the City
and is part of the official files and records of my office.
I have hereunto affixed my signature and caused to be affixed
hereto the corporate seal of the City this
day of
, 2015.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF,

Susana A. Mendoza
City Clerk
ISEALI

 ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF F I L I N G
NOTIFICATION OF T A X ABATEMENT

The foregoing Notification of Tax Abatement relating to $345,530,000 General
Obligation Bonds, Series 201 SA, and $742,860,000 General Obligation Bonds. Taxable Series
20I5B, of the City of Chicago (the "C/0^") has been filed in my office as City Clerk of the City
and is part of the official files and records of my office.
I N WI'TNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto affixed my signature and caused to be affixed
hereto the corporate seal of the City this U/^day of vAolv^
2015.

jusana.
City Clerk
[SEAL]

 Respectfully submitted as of this t^^dav of s)vjk

,2015.

..arole L. Brown
Chief Financial Officer

ISiGNA TURk PACK TO

NOTITICA I ION OT T A X A B A I LMFIN T 

 ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF F I L I N G NOTIFICATION OF SALE

The foregoing Notification of Sale of $345330,000 aggregate principal amount of
General Obligation Bonds, Series 201SA, and $742,860,000 aggregate principal amount of
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Series 20ISB, of the City of Chicago (the "C//v") lias been •
filed in my office as City Clerk of the City and is part of the official files and records of my
office.

 I N WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto affixed my signature and caused to be affixed
hereto the corporate seal of the City this
day of
, 2015.

Susana A. Mendozai
City Clerk
[SEAL]

-2-

 