City of Chicago
Office of the City Clerk

F2014-69

Document Tracking Sheet

; Meeting Date:

9/10/2014

I Sponsor(s):

City Clerk (transmitted by)

i

I Type:

Communication

i

I Title:
Committee(s) Assignment:

Letter of support from Barbara Blackwell for reparations to
victims and family members of torture by Chicago Police
Department

 Barbara Blackwell
2401 Carpenter Ave
Hephzibah, GA 30815-4666
Chicago City Council
121 N LaSalle St
# 107A
Chicago, TL 60602
August, 2014
1 support passage of the Ordinance to provide reparations to survivors of torture by
the Chicago's police.
From 1972 to 1991, officers of the Chicago Police Department systematically
tortured over 100 suspects, under the direction of Police Commander Jon Burge at
Area 2 and 3 police stations. In addition to beatings, individuals alleged that they
were subjected to electric shocks; had plastic bags placed over their heads and
threatened with mock executions.
Although Burge was convicted in federal court for perjury and obstruction of
justice, neither he nor any of the detectives he supervised have been prosecuted for
committing torture.
j
;
I

Statutes of limitations not only prevent the ability to obtain justice for these crimes
but also fmancial reparations for survivors. Intemational law strictly prohibits the
use of torture and other ill-treatment, and stipulates that governments are
responsible for investigating torture allegations; bringing criminal proceedings in
torture cases and compensating the victims.
It has been more than twenty years since these allegations of tortLire first came to
light. For all of that time, survivors and their family members have been denied
prosecutions of the crimes alleged and many have been denied reparations to make
them whole as required under international law. Now is the time to take steps to
make these survivors of torture and their families whole again. Please pass the
Reparations Ordinance for Chicago Police Torture Survivors to help take that step.

Alio.
3Hi iO 30U
Barbara Blackwell

:

-sji

a3Al333M'

  

 

 

 



I .

I.

