City of Chicago
Office of the City Clerk

F2015-105

Document Tracking Sheet

Meeting Date:

9/24/2015

Sponsor(s):

Dept./Agency

Type:

Communication

Title:

City Comptroller's - Concerning The City of Chicago
Employee Wellness Program

Commlttee(s) Assignment:

 DEPAETMENT

OF

FINANCE

CITY OF CHICAGO
I
3=»

VIA ELEC1 RONic MAIL

g

.::.^-:

July 28,2015

co

"
cn

Joseph M. Ferguson
Inspector General
Office of the Inspector General
740 N. Sedgwick Street, Suite 200
Chicago, Illinois 60654
We appreciate the Office of the Inspector General's (OIG) work on the advisory concerning the
City of Chicago Employee Wellness Program. We agree that the City must be vigilant in its
stewardship of taxpayer resources and are always striving for efficiency, cost reduction and
program improvements. We have reviewed the OIG's suggestions for establishing a performance
measurement framework, included below in buUeted form, and provide responses following each
suggestion.
•

Setting health status and healthcai-e savings targets as well as a timeline for achieving
them / Incorporating specific health status and healthcare savings targets into the next
wellness program Request for Proposal.

Lifestyle changes influenced by wellness programs result in gradual, rather than immediate,
improvements to an individual's health, and consequently, gradual impacts on healthcare
expenses. Benefit design changes coupled with the increasing cost of healthcare over time will
necessarily complicate cost and savings projections directly attributable to the wellness program.
For these reasons, the City will continue to monitor program data and healthcare expenses to
determine if targets would improve wellness program outcomes.
•

Connecting existing health performance measures, such as participants' aggregate
biometric data, to targeted health performance outcomes.

The City regularly reviews biometric and claims data to identify opportunities to improve the
health of the City's insured population. For instance, the City's contracted disease management
provider contacts employees directly who may benefit from specific disease management
programs, such as diabetes management and other chronic disease programs.

33 NORTH L.^SALLK STRKKT, SUITE fiOO, CH.ICAGO, I L L I N O I S G0G()2

 •

Implementing a study designed to identify and measure any causal relationship between
CLH and health status improvements and healthcare savings.

As the OIG notes, academic and industry research on wellness programs is active and ongoing.
The City will continue to review studies of wellness programs conducted by organizations with
the breadth of data and statistical tools necessary to reach conclusive results in this area. Where
those studies are able to provide guidance on successful aspects of a wellness program, the City
will evaluate whether changes should be made to its own program.
•

Monitoring CLH performance on an ongoing basis to ensure that the program meets the
City's wellness and cost-savings objectives.

The City and its vendor communicate on an ongoing basis to ensure participation and that the
vendor is meeting its obligations in regards to the contract.
•

Reporting publicly and routinely on the outcomes.

The City reports regularly as to enrollment and program participation but does not discuss
individual health status data. The City is mindful of maintaining the privacy of employees while
providing the opportunity for employees to improve their health.
Sincerel^,

Dan Widawsky /
Comptroller

 