City of Chicago
Office of the City Clerk

F2014-82

Document Tracking Sheet

Meeting Date:

10/8/2014

Sponsor(s):

City Clerk (transmitted by)

Type:

Communication

Title:

Letter of support from Nina Benedetto for reparations to
victims and family members of torture by Chicago Police
Department

Committee(s) Assignment:

 Nina Benedetto
224 Main St
Kingston, MA 02364-1929
Chicago City Council
121N LaSalle St
# 107A
Chicago, IL 60602

August, 2.014

I.

0"^"1

CO

—1-~

-a

Po

^
CD

^^__l_x:':!Ix^ Lr:

.-^x,-^ ro_ ^

I support passage of the Ordinance to provide reparations to survivors o'f torture byr—
the Chicago's police.
From 1972 to 1991, officers of the jGhicago Police Department;;systematically
tortured over 100 suspects, under the direction of Police Commander Jon Burge at
Area 2 and 3 police stations. In addition to beatings, individuklscyiVeged'-tKat they
were subjected to electric shocks; had plastic bags placed over their heads and
threatened with mock executions.
Although Burge was convicted in federal court for perjury and obstruction of
justice, neither he nor any^of the detectives he supervised have been prosecuted for
committing torture.
!
*

I

Statutes of limitations not only prevent the ability to obtain justice for these crimes
but also financial reparations for survivors. International law strictly prohibits the
use of torture and other ill-treatment, and stipulates that governments are
responsible for investigating torture allegations; bringing criminal proceedings in
toiture cases and compensating the victims.
It has been more than twenty years since these allegations of torture first came to
light. For all of that time, survivors and their family members have been denied
prosecutions of the crimes alleged,and many have been denied reparations to make
them whole as required under international law. Now is the time to take steps to
make these survivors of torture and their families whole again. Please pass the
Reparations Ordinance for Chicago Police Torture Survivors,to help take that step.

Nina Benedetto

 RECEIVEQ
#2

mass? IS an B: 

ICE OF THE
EIIY CLERK

