City of Chicago
Office of the City Clerl<

F2011-7

Document Tracking Siieet

Meeting Date:

1/13/2011

Sponsor(s):

Dept./Agency

Type:

Communication

Title:

General Obligation Bonds Taxable Project Series, 201 OB
Build America Bonds Direct Payment

Committee(s) Assignment:

 December 14, 2010

City of Chicago
Richard M. Daley, Mayor
GeneR.SalTold
ChierFinancial Officer
Suite 600
33 North LaSalle Street
Chicago, Illinois 60602
(312)744-1034
(312)744-0014 (FAX)
http://www.cityofchicago.org

Miguel Del Valle
Cily Clerk
121 North LaSalle Street
Room 107
Chicago, Illinois 60602
RE:

Cily of Chicago, Illinois
$213,555,000
General Obligation Bonds
Ta.xable Project Series 201 OB
(Build America Bonds - Direct Payment)

Dear Mr. Del Valle:
Attached is the Notification of Sale which is required lo be filed with
your office pursuant to Section 12 of the ordinance authorizing the
issuance of General Obligation Refunding Bonds Series 2010, which
was passed by the City Council on July 28, 2010.

Please direct this filing to the Cily Council

Very Truly Yours,

Chief Financial Officer

3HJ.

GUIIDINCCHICAGO TOCETHER

 RECtiVtO

,
NOTIFICATION OF SALE

2010 DEC IU PH3:31
^,
QPfiCtOi' int.
CITY C L E R ^

$213,555,000
GENERAL O B L I G A T I O N BONDS,
T A X A B L E PROJECT SERIES 20lOB
(BUILD AMERICA BONDS - DIRECT PAYMENT)
BEING ISSUED B Y T H E C I T Y O F CHICAGO

STATE OF ILLINOIS)
) SS
COUNTY OF COOK )
To: The City Council of the City of Chicago
Please be advised that responsive to authority contained in an Ordinance (the
""Ordinance'') adopted by the City Council (the "C/Yy Councir), of the City of Chicago (the
"City") on July 28, 2010, authorizing the issuance of up to $900,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of general obligation bonds of the City, a Bond Purchase Agreement dated December 1,
2010 (the ""Bond Purchase Agreement") providing for the sale of $213,555,000 aggregate
principal amount of General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project Series 201 OB (Build America
Bonds - Direct Payment) (the "Series 201 OB Bonds" ), was entered into by me as the Chief
Financial Officer of the City, with the concurrence of the Chaimian of the Committee on Finance
of the City Council, and the purchasers thereof named below (the ""Underwriters"). The Series
2010B Bonds were sold at a purchase price of $212,374,652.27 (representing the aggregate
principal amount of the Series 201 OB Bonds less an Underwriters' discount of $1,180,347.73).
The Underwriters for the Series 201 OB Bonds are Loop Capital Markets LLC,
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, Duncan Williams, Inc., Estrada, Hinojosa & Company,
Inc., In Capital LLC, Melvin & Company LLC, Robert W. Baird & Co., Inc., and Stifel Nicolaus
& Co. The compensation (including all fees) being paid to the Underwriters in connection with
the sale of the Series 2010B Bonds of $1,180,347.73 represents less than 1% of the aggregate
principal amount of the Series 201 OB Bonds.
Capitalized terms used herein without definition have the meanings assigned to
such terms in the Ordinance.
The Series 201 OB Bonds are being issued for the purpose of (i) paying a portion
of the costs of the Project, (ii) funding capitalized interest on a portion of the Series 201 OB
Bonds and (iii) paying the costs of issuance of the Scries 201 OB Bonds (including the
Underwriters' discount).
Attached hereto as Exhibits A and B, respectively, are executed copies of the
Bond Purchase Agreement and the Official Statement dated December 1, 2010.
Pursuant to Section 12 of the Ordinance, the undersigned hereby makes the
following determinations: (a) the aggregate principal amount of the Series 2010B Bonds is
$213,555,000, the Scries 2010B Bonds are issued in fully registered form in the denominations

 of $5,000 or any integral multiple thereof and the designation of the Series 201 OB Bonds is set
forth in the first paragraph hereof, (b) the Series 201 OB Bonds are issued as Current Interest
Bonds and as Build America Direct Payment Bonds, (c) the Series 201 OB Bonds mature and arc
subject to mandatory redemption as set forth in Schedule I attached hereto, (d) the Series 201 OB
Bonds are subject to optional redemption as provided in Schedule 1 attached hereto, (e) the
principal amount and interest rate on the Series 201 OB Bonds are set forth in Schedule I attached
hereto, (f) the Series 201 OB Bonds are issued in book-entry fomi; the book entry depository is
The Depository Trust Company, (g) the Underwriters of the Series 201 OB Bonds are as set forth
above, and (h) the Bond Registrar for the Series 201 OB Bonds and Bond Fund depository is
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association.
Pursuant to Section 12 of the Ordinance and on behalf of the City, the
undersigned hereby makes the following elections under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (the
"Code"). Pursuant to Section 54AA(d)(l)(C) of the Code, the City irrevocably elects to have
Section 54AA of the Code apply to the Series 201 OB Bonds. Pursuant to Section 54AA(g)(2)(B)
of the Code, the City irrevocably elects to have subsection (g) of said Section 54AA apply to the
Series 2010B Bonds. Pursuant to the foregoing elections, the Series 2010B Bonds will be issued
as "build America bonds" as defined in Section 54AA(d)(l) of the Code and as "qualified
bonds" as defined in Section 54AA(g)(2) of the Code.
Notification to the City Council of the disposition of collections of the tax levy
authorized in Section 7 of the Ordinance in excess of any amount required for the payment of the
principal and interest on the Series 201 OB Bonds and for the payment of the principal and
interest on any other Bonds to be issued pursuant to the Ordinance, will be made upon the sale of
the final series of Bonds authorized by the Ordinance and as provided in Section 12 of the
Ordinance.

[REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]

 Respectfully submitted as of,his (*^d..
as of (his
day of December, 2010.

Chief Financial Officer

 EXHIBIT A

- BOND PURCHASE AGREEMENT

BOND PURCHASE AGREEMENT
CITY OF CHICAGO
$213,555,000
General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project Series 2010B
(Build America Bonds—Direct Payment)
December 1,2010
City of Chicago
Office of the City Comptroller
33 North LaSalle Street, 6"* Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602
Attention: Chief Financial Officer
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The undersigned. Loop Capital Markets LLC (the "Representative"), on behalf of itself and
the other underwriters listed below (the ""Underwriters"), hereby offers to enter into this Bond
Purchase Agreement (the ""Agreement') with the City of Chicago (the ""City"), for the purchase by
the Underwriters, and sale by the City, of all but not less than all of the City's General Obligation
Bonds, Taxable Project Series 201 OB (Build America Bonds—Direct Payment) (the ""Bonds").
This offer is made subject to the acceptance by the City on or before 5:00 P.M., Chicago time on the
date hereof, and upon such acceptance this Agreement shall be in fiill force and effect in accordance
with its terms and shall be binding on the City and the Underwriters.
The Representative is authorized, and hereby represents and warrants that it is authorized, to
act as Representative of the Underwriters and to execute this Agreement and has fidi authority to
take such action as it may deem advisable with respect to all matters pertaining to this Agreement.
Each Underwriter hereby severally represents to the City that it is registered and in good standing
under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, as a municipal securities dealer.
Capitalized terms not otherwise defmed herein shall have the meanings ascribed thereto
in the Preliminary Official Statement, as defined herein.
1.

Agreement to Sell and Purchase.

(a)
Upon the terms and conditions and based upon the representations,
warranties and covenants herein set forth, the Underwriters, jointly and severally, hereby agree to
purchase from the City and the City hereby agrees to sell to the Underwriters $213,555,000
aggregate principal amount of the Bonds, at the purchase price of $212,374,652.27 (representing the
aggregate principal amount of the Bonds less an underwriters' discount of $1,180,347.73.
(b)
It shall be a condition to the City's obligation to sell and deliver the Bonds
that all the Bonds be purchased and paid for by the Underwriters at the Closing (as defined herein)
1

 and a condition to the Underwriters' obligation to purchase and pay for the Bonds that all Bonds be
issued, sold and delivered by the City at the Closing.
2.
The Ordinance. The Bonds are authorized by an ordinance of the City adopted by
the City Council of the City (the ""City Councif) on July 28, 2010 (the ""Ordinance") and will be
issued and secured as provided thereunder. The Bonds will mature, bear interest and have such
other terms and conditions as are set forth on Schedule I hereto.
3.
The Preliminary Official Statement. Attached hereto as Exhibit A is a copy of the
Preliminary Official Statement of the City, dated October 26, 2010 relating to the Bonds (the
'"Preliminary Official Statemenf). For purposes of Rule 15c2-12 (^"Rule 15c2-12") of the
Securities and Exchange Commission (""SEC"), the Preliminary Official Statement is "deemed
final" by the City as of its date except for the omission of such information as is pennitted by Rule
15c2-12.
4.
Public Offering Price. The Underwriters have agreed to make a bona fide public
offering of the Bonds at the initial offering prices set forth on Schedule I . The Representative will
provide the City and Co-Bond Counsel (as defmed herein) with a closing certificate confirming the
reoffering yields and prices of the Bonds and the Underwriters acknowledge that the City and CoBond Counsel will rely on such certificate to establish the yield on the Bonds and that such reliance
is material to the City in entering into this Agreement and in connection with the delivery of the
Bonds.
5.

The Official Statement.

(a)
The City shall provide, or cause to be provided, at its expense, to the
Underwriters within seven (7) business days after the City's acceptance of this Agreement, three
copies of the Official Statement of the City, dated the date hereof, relating to the Bonds (the
""OJjficial Statemenf), signed on behalf of the City by the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer and
the Official Statement so delivered shall be "fmal" for purposes of Rule 15c2-12. Such delivery of
the Official Statement shall occur in sufficient time to accompany any confirmation that requests
payment from any customer and in sufficient quantity to comply with the rules of the SEC and the
Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board (""MSRB").
(b)
If on or prior to the Closing or within twenty-five (25) days after the "end of
the underwriting period" (as hereinafter defmed) any event known to the City relating to or affecting
the City, the Ordinance or the Bonds, shall occur which would cause any statement of a material
fact contained in the Official Statement to be materially incorrect or materially incomplete, the City
will promptly notify the Representative in writing of the circumstances and details of such event. If,
as a result of such event, it is necessary, in the joint opinion of the City and the Representative to
amend or supplement the Official Statement by stating or restating any material fact necessary in
order to make the statements made therein, in hght of the circumstances under which they were
made, not misleading, the City will forthwith prepare and fumish to the Underwriters a reasonable
number of copies of an amendment of or a supplement to such Official Statement in form and
substance satisfactory to the City and the Representative, at the City's sole cost and expense, which
will so amend or supplement such Official Statement so that, as amended or supplemented, the
Official Statement will not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any

 material fact necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in light of the circumstances
under which they were made, not misleading. For purposes of this Agreement, the term "end of the
underwriting period" shall mean the later of the date of Closing or the date on which an Underwriter
no longer retains an unsold balance of the Bonds for sale to the public. The Underwriters agree that
the date on which the end of the underwriting period shall occur shall be the date of the Closing,
unless the Underwriters otherwise notify the City in writing prior to twenty-five (25) days after the
date of the Closing that, to the best of their knowledge, the Underwriters retain for sale to the public
an unsold balance of the Bonds, in which case the end of the underwriting period shall be extended
for additional periods of thirty (30) days each upon receipt of additional written notification from
the Underwriters that, to the best of their knowledge, there exists an unsold balance of the Bonds,
but in no event shall the end of the underwriting period be extended longer than sixty (60) days after
the date of Closing.
(c)
At or prior to the Closing, the Representative shall file, or cause to be filed,
the Official Statement with die MSRB in compliance with the rules of the SEC and the MSRB.
Promptly after the date after which the Underwriters are no longer obligated under Rule 15c212(b)(4) to deliver to potential customers the Official Statement, the Representative shall notify the
City of such date.
6.
Representations, Warranties and Covenants of the City. The City represents and
warrants to the Underwriters as of the date hereof that:
(a) The City is a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local govemment,
existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois (the ""State").
(b) The City Council has: (i) duly adopted the Ordinance, which remains in full
force and effect; (ii) duly authorized the use of the Preliminary Official Statement prior to
the date hereof in connection with the public offering and sale of the Bonds and duly
authorized the execution, delivery and distribution of the Official Statement in connection
with the public offering and sale of the Bonds; and (iii) duly authorized and approved the
execution and delivery of the Bonds, this Agreement and a continuing disclosure
undertaking pursuant to the provisions of Section (b)(5) of Rule 15c2-12 (the
""Undertaking").
(c) The City has full legal right, power and authority to: (i) adopt the Ordinance;
(ii) execute and deliver this Agreement and the Undertaking; (iii) issue, sell and deliver the
Bonds to the Underwriters pursuant to the Ordinance and as provided in this Agreement;
and (iv) pay for the Bonds from the sources pledged under the Ordinance for their payment. ,
(d) The adoption of the Ordinance and compliance with the provisions thereof
do not, and the execution and delivery of this Agreement and the Undertaking will not, in
any material manner, violate any applicable law or administrative regulation of the State or
any department, division, agency or instrumentality thereof or of the United States of
America (the ""United States") or of any department, division, agency or instrumentality
thereof or any applicable judgment or decree to which the City is subject, or conflict with,
in a material manner, or constitute a material breach of, or a material default under, any
ordinance, agreement or other instrument to which the City is a party or is otherwise bound.
(e) All approvals, consents and orders of, and filings (except, i f any, under
applicable state "blue sky" laws) with, any govemmental authority, board, agency or

 commission having jurisdiction which would constitute a condition precedent to the
performance by the City of its obligations under this Agreement, the Undertaking, the
Ordinance and the Bonds have been obtained or made.
(f) The fmancial statements of the City contained in the Official Statement fairly
present the financial position and resuhs of operations of the City as of the date and for the
periods therein set forth and the City has no reason to believe that such financial statements
have not been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as
applied to govemmental units, consistently applied except as otherwise noted therein.
(g) The Official Statement (excluding any description of The Depository Tmst
Company {""DTC), Clearstream, Luxembourg (""Clearstream"), Euroclear Bank
{""Euroclear"), information under the captions "THE BONDS - Book-Entry System,"
"CERTAIN VERIFICATIONS", "RATINGS", "UNDERWRITING," and "TAX
MATTERS," Appendices D thereto, information sourced in Appendices A and B from
sources other than the City or departments thereof, and any infonnation in or omitted from
the Official Statement relating to DTC, Clearstream or Euroclear, all information and
notices set forth under the caption "Information Concerning Offering Restrictions in
Certain Jurisdictions Outside the United States," and information fiimished by the
Underwriters for use in the Official Statement) does not contain any untme statement of a
material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements therein, in light
of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading in any material respect.
(h) The Ordinance, this Agreement and the Undertaking, when duly executed
and delivered by the parties thereto, as appropriate, will constitute legal, valid and binding
obligations of the City enforceable in accordance with their terms (except to the extent that
enforceability may be limited by bankmptcy, insolvency and other laws affecting creditors'
rights or remedies and the availability of equitable remedies generally).
(i) When delivered to the Representative, and paid for by the Underwriters at
the Closing in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, the Bonds will be duly
authorized, executed and delivered and will constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of
the City enforceable in accordance with their terms (except to the extent that enforceability
may be limited by bankmptcy, insolvency and other laws affecting creditors' rights or
remedies and the availability of equitable remedies generally).
(j) Except as disclosed in the Official Statement, there is no action, suit or
proceeding, at law or in equity, or before or by a court, public board or body, pending or, to
the City's knowledge, threatened, against the City wherein an unfavorable decision, ruling
or finding would materially adversely affect the validity or enforceability of the Bonds, the
Ordinance, this Agreement or the Undertaking.
(k) Any certificate signed by any Authorized Officer of the City and delivered to
the Representative at the Closing in connection with the issuance or sale of the Bonds shall
be deemed to be a representation and warranty by the City to the Underwriters as to the
statements made therein as of the date so delivered.
(1) fhe City will make available such information, execute such instruments and
take such other action in cooperation with the Underwriters as the Representative may
reasonably request to qualify the Bonds for offering and sale under the "blue sky" or other

 securities laws and regulations of such states and other jurisdictions of the United States as
the Underwriters may designate in writing; provided, however, that nothing in this Section
6(a) shall require the City to consent to general service of process in any state or jurisdiction
other than the State of Illinois.
(m)The City will apply the proceeds of the Bonds in accordance with the
Ordinance.
(n) The City acknowledges and agrees that (i) the purchase and sale of the
Bonds pursuant to this Purchase Contract is an arm's-length commercial transaction between
the City and the Underwriters, (ii) the Underwriters have not assumed an advisory or
fiduciary responsibility in favor of the City with respect to the purchase and sale of the
Bonds or the discussions, undertakings and procedures leading thereto (irrespective of
whether the Underwriters have provided other services or are currently providing other
services to the City on other matters) and (iii) it has consulted its own legal, financial and
other advisors to the extent it has deemed appropriate.
7.
Closing. Subject to the conditions set forth in this Agreement, the closing (the
""Closing") of the sale of the Bonds by the City and the purchase of the Bonds by the Underwriters,
shall take place at approximately 9:00 a.m., Chicago time, on December 14, 2010, at the offices of
Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP, 525 West Monroe Street, Suite 1900, Chicago, Illinois 60661 (or at
such other time, date and place as the City and the Representative mutually agree).
(a)
At the Closing, the City shall deliver or cause to be delivered to DTC, as
securities depository, for the account of the Underwriters one fully registered certificate for each
maturity (Bonds with the same maturities but different interest rates will have separate certificates)
of the Bonds in the aggregate principal amount thereof, registered in the name of Cede & Co., as
nominee for DTC.
(b)
Upon delivery of the Bonds to the Representative at the Closing, the City
will deliver to the Representative the closing documents as set forth in Section 10 hereof
(c)
The Representative will accept delivery of the Bonds and pay the purchase
price therefor at the Closing by delivering federal funds checks or making federal fimds wire
transfers or otherwise confirming deposits of same day fiinds, as the City shall direct, to the City's
account at a bank specified by the City, in an aggregate amount equal to the purchase price of the
Bonds pursuant to Section 1 hereof
8.
Reliance and Further Condifions of the Underwriters. The Underwriters have
entered into this Agreement in reliance upon the representations, warranties and agreements of the
City herein and the performance by the City of its obligations hereunder, both as of the date hereof
and as of the date of the Closing. The Underwriters' obligations under this Agreement are and shall
be subject to the fi)llowing further condition that at the time of the Closing, the Ordinance, the
Undertaking and this Agreement shall be in full force and effect and the Ordinance and the Official
Statement shall not have been amended, modified or supplemented except as may have been agreed
to with respect to the Official Statement pursuant to Section 5 hereof and the City shall have duly
adopted and there shall be in full force and effect such ordinances as, in the opinion of Katten
Muchin Rosenman LLP, Chicago, Illinois and Cotillas and Associates, Chicago, Illinois, as co-bond
counsel (""Co-Bond CounseF') shall be necessary in connection with the transactions contemplated
hereby and thereby.
5

 9.

Termination of Agreement.

(a)
The Underwriters shall have the right to cancel their obligations to purchase the
Bonds and have the further right to terminate this Agreement, without liability therefor, by written
notice to the City from the Representative, if, between the date hereof and the Closing:
(i)
legislation shall have been enacted by the Congress of the United
States to become effective on or prior to the Closing, or a decision of a court of the United
States shall be rendered, or a stop order, mling, regulation or proposed regulation by or on
behalf of the SEC or other agency having jurisdiction over the subject matter shall be issued
or made, to the effect that the issuance, sale and delivery of the Bonds, or any similar
obligations of any similar public body of the general character of the City, is in violation of,
or has the effect of requiring the contemplated offering, sale and distribution of the Bonds to
be registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the enactment of the
Ordinance or any ordinance of similar character is in violation of the Trust Indenture Act of
1939, as amended, or with the purpose or effect of otherwise prohibiting the issuance, sale
or delivery of the Bonds as contemplated hereby or by the Official Statement or of
obligations of the general character of the Bonds which, in fhe Representative's reasonable
opinion, does materially adversely affect the market price or marketability of the Bonds, or
(ii)
there shall have occurred any event which in the Representative's
reasonable opinion, after consultation with its legal counsel, makes the Official Statement
either (A) contain an untme statement of a material fact' or (B) omit to state a material fact
required to be stated therein or necessary to make the statements contained therein not
misleading in any material respect, and the City fails to prepare or ftimish or fails to cause to
be prepared or fumished to the Underwriters an amendment or supplement to the Official
Statement, pursuant to Section 5 hereof, which will amend or supplement the Official
Statement so that, as amended or supplemented, the Official Statement will not contain any
untme statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated
therein or necessary to make the statements contained therein not misleading in a material
respect, or
(iii)
there shall be in force a general suspension of trading on The New
York Stock Exchange, Inc., or minimum or maximum prices for trading shall have been
fixed and be in force, or maximum ranges for prices for securities shall have been required
and be in force on The New York Stock Exchange, Inc., whether by virtue of a
detemiination by that Exchange or by order of the SEC or any other govemmental authority
having jurisdiction, or
(iv)
a general banking moratorium shall have been declared by either
federal. State or New York authorities having jurisdiction and be in force, or
(v)
any legislation, ordinance, rule or regulation shall be enacted by the
City or State, or any department or agency thereof, or a decision by any court of competent
jurisdiction within the State shall be rendered which, in the reasonable opinion of the
Representative, would have a material adverse effect on the market price or marketability of
the Bonds, or
(vi)
a war involving the United States, an outbreak or escalation of or
adverse development in hostilities or terrorist activities or other national or international

 calamity or crisis shall have occurred which, in the reasonable opinion of the
Representative, materially adversely affects the market price or marketability of the Bonds,
or
(vii)
there shall be any proceeding or threatened proceeding by the SEC
against the City and such proceeding or threatened proceeding, in the reasonable opinion of
the Representative, materially adversely affects the market price or marketability of the
Bonds.
(b)
I f the City shall be unable to satisfy the conditions contained in this
Agreement or if the Underwriters' obligations shall be terminated for any reason pemiitted by this
Agreement, this Agreement shall terminate and neither the City nor the Underwriters shall have any
fiirther obligations hereunder.
10.

Closing Conditions.

(a)
The Underwriters' obligations to purchase, to accept delivery of and to pay
for the Bonds at the Closing shall be conditioned upon the City's performance of its obligations
under Sections 7 and 8 hereof and the Underwriters' receipt of the following documents:
(i)
three copies of the Official Statement manually executed by the
Chief Financial Officer;
(ii)
the approving opinions, dated the date of the Closing, of Co-Bond
Counsel to the City, substantially in the form attached to the Official Statement as Appendix
D;
(iii)
the opinions, dated the date of the Closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters and to the City, of Co-Bond Counsel,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit B;
(iv)
an opinion, dated the date of the Closing and addressed to the
Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, of the Corporation Counsel of the City,
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit C;
(v)
an opinion or opinions, dated the date of the Closing and addressed
to the Representative on behalf of the Underwriters, of McGaugh & Associates, Chicago,
Illinois, counsel for the Underwriters (herein collectively ""Underwriters' Counsef),
substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit D;
(vi)
a certificate, dated the date of the Closing, signed by the Chief
Financial Officer, to the effect that (A) the representations and warranties of the City
herein are correct in all material respects as of the date of the Closing; and (B) to his
knowledge, there has been no material adverse change in the financial condition of the
City since December 31, 2009, as reflected in Appendix C to the Official Statement,
except as set forth in the Official Statement;
(vii)
a certificate of Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as bond
registrar and paying agent (""Bond Registrar"), to the effect that the Bond Registrar has full
legal right, power and authority to act as the Bond Registrar imder the Ordinance;
(viii)

a certificate, dated the date of the Closing, signed by the

7

 Representative, in form and substance satisfactory to the City and Co-Bond Counsel;
(ix)
an executed copy of the Undertaking substantially in the form
summarized in the Official Statement under the heading "SECONDARY MARKET
DISCLOSURE";
(x)
a copy of an agreement between the City and DTC relating to the
safekeeping and book-entry form of the Bonds;
(xi)
a copy, duly certified by the City Clerk of the City, of the Ordinance,
as passed by the City Council and approved by the Mayor;
(xii)
evidence satisfactory to the Representative that the Bonds have
ratings of A+ from S&P, Aa3 from Moody's arid AA- from Fitch;
(xiii)
such additional closing certificates and agreements, as Co-Bond
Counsel shall reasonably determine to be necessary to deliver their opinions as provided
hereinabove.
(b)
All of the opinions, letters, certificates, instruments and other documents
mentioned above or elsewhere in this Agreement will be deemed to be in compliance with the
provisions hereof if, but only if, they are in form and substance satisfactory to the Representative, in
its reasonable judgment. Payment for the Bonds and acceptance of the Bonds by the Underwriters
shall constitute acknowledgment by the Underwriters of the City's full performance hereimder.
11.
Expenses. The Underwriters shall be under no obligation to pay, and the City shall
pay, any and all expenses incident to the performance of the City's obligations hereunder, including
but not limited to: (a) the cost of the preparation and printing or other reproduction of the
Ordinance, the Preliminary Official Statement and the Official Statement, as well as the cost of
shipping the Official Statement; (b) the cost of the preparation and printing of the Bonds; (c) the
fees and disbursements of Co-Bond Counsel; (d) the fees and disbursements of any experts or
consultants retained by the City; (e) the fees of DTC and the Bond Registrar; and (f) the fees for the
municipal bond ratings on the Bonds. The Underwriters will pay the expenses incurred by them or
any of them in connection with their public offering and distribution of the Bonds, including, but not
limited to, the CUSEP Service Bureau charges, the fees and expenses of Underwriters' Counsel and
advertising expenses directly incurred by the Underwriters.
12.
Notices. Any notice or other communication to be given to the City under this
Agreement shall be given by delivering the same in writing at the address set forth above, and any
such notice or other communication to be given to the Underwriters shall be given by delivering the
same in writing to the Representative at the following address:

'

Loop Capital Markets LLC
200 West Jackson Blvd, Suite 1600
Chicago, Illinois 60606
Attention: Clarence Boume, Senior Vice President

13.
No Third Party Beneficiaries, Survival, Etc. This Agreement is made solely for the
benefit of the City and the Underwriters (including the successors or assigns of any Underwriter),
8

 and no other person, partnership, association or corporation including any purchaser of the Bonds
shall acquire or have any right hereunder or by virtue hereof All of the representations and
agreements by the City in this Agreement shall remain operative and in full force and effect
regardless of any investigation made by or on behalf of the Underwriters and shall survive the
delivery of and payment for the Bonds.
14.
Governing Law. The rights and obligations of the parties to this Agreement shall be
governed by, constmed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the State, without giving effect
to the conflict of laws provisions thereof
15.
Representations and Warranties of the Underwriters. The Underwriters represent
and warrant that:
(a)
They have heretofore authorized the Representative to execute any
document on behalf of or exercise any authority of and otherwise to act for, the Underwriters in
all matters under or pertaining to this Agreement. Each Underwriter has warranted and
confirmed to the Representative, and the Representative warrants and confirms to the City that:
(i) it is duly registered under the Securifies Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the ""1934 A c f ) ,
as a broker/dealer or municipal securities dealer and has duly paid the fee prescribed by MSRB
Rule A-12 or is exempt from such requirements, (ii) it is (a) a member in good standing of the
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (""FINRA") or (b) otherwise eligible under FINRA mies
to receive underwriting discounts and concessions available to such members with respect to
underwriters of municipal securities, and (iii)' it has complied with the dealer registration
requirements, i f any, of the various jurisdictions in which it offers Bonds for sale. The
Underwriters represent, warrant and covenant that they are and will be in compliance with all
applicable laws, mles and regulations in connection with the offering, issuance and sale of the
Bonds.
(b)
To the knowledge of the Underwriters, no person holding office of the
City, either by election or appointment, is in any manner financially interested, either directly in
the officer's ov/n name or indirectly in the name of any other person, association, tmst or
corporation, in any contract being entered into or the performance of any work to be carried out
in connection v/ith the issuance and sale of the Bonds upon which said officer may be called
upon to act or vote.
(c)
Each Underwriter severally represents to the City that neither the
Underwriter, nor any Affiliate thereof is listed on any of the following lists maintained by the
Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Bureau of Industry
and Security of the U.S. Department of Commerce, the U.S. Department of State or their
successors, or on any other list of persons or entities wath which the City may not do business
under any applicable law, mle, regulation, order or judgment: the Specially Designated Nationals
List, the Denied Persons List, the Unverified List, the Entity List, the List of Statutorily
Debarred Parties and the Excluded Parties List. Such representation shall be provided to the City
in the form attached hereto as Exhibit E.
For purposes of this representation, "Affiliate, " when used to indicate a
relationship with a specified person or entity, means a person or entity that, directly or

 indirectly, through one or more intermediaries, controls, is controlled by or is under common
control with such specified person or entity, and a person or entity shall be deemed to be
controlled by another person or entity, if controlled in any manner whatsoever that results in
control in fact by that other person or entity (or that other person or entity and any persons or
entities with whom that other person or entity is acting jointly or in concert), whether directly or
indirectly and whether through share ownership, a trust, a contract or otherwise.
(d)
The Underwriters may enter into distribution agreements with certain
financial institutions for the retail distribution of municipal securities, including the Bonds, at the
public offering price. In accordance with such arrangements, the Underwriters may share a
portion of its underwriting compensation.
(e)
Each of the Underwriters undertakes to the City that it will comply with
all applicable laws and regulations in each country or jurisdiction in which it purchases, offers,
sells or delivers Bonds or has in its possession or distributes the Preliminary Official Statement
or the Official Statement or any related offering material, in all cases at its own expense and each
underwriter undertakes and agrees to comply with the applicable selling restrictions as set forth
in the Official Statement.
(f)
To the knowledge of the Underwriters after commercially reasonable and
appropriate due diligence, the Underwriters have formed an independent reasonable belief that
the City is currently in compliance v/ith, and will provide ongoing, continuing disclosure in
accordance with Rule 15c2-12 adopted by the SEC under the 1934 Act, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
(g)

They have offered the Bonds for sale only in the United States of America.

16.
Approval. The approval of the Underwriters when required hereunder or the
determinafion of their satisfaction as to any document referred to herein shall be in writing
signed by the Representative and delivered to the City.
17.
Successors and Assigns. This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be binding
upon the parties and their successors and assigns, and will not confer any rights upon any other
person. The terms "successors" and "assigns" shall not include any purchaser of any Bond or
Bonds from the Underwriters merely because of such purchase.
18.
Enforceability. If any provision of this Agreement shall be held or deemed to be or
shall, in fact, be invalid, inoperative or unenforceable as applied in any particular case in any
jurisdiction or jurisdictions, or in all jurisdictions, because it conflicts with any provisions of any
constitution, statute, rule or public policy, or for any other reason, such circumstances shall not have
the effect of rendering the provision in question invalid, inoperative or unenforceable in any other
case or circumstances, or of rendering any other provision or provisions of this Agreement invalid,
inoperative or unenforceable to any extent whatsoever.
19.
Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in several counterparts, each of
which shall be regarded as the original and all of which shall constitute one and the same document.
20.
Business Relationships with Citv Elected Officials. Each Underwriter understands
and agrees that it is required to and will comply with the provisions of Chapter 2-56 and 2-156 of
10

 the Municipal Code of Chicago (the ""Municipal Code"). Pursuant to Section 2-156-030(b) of the
Municipal Code, it is illegal for any elected official of the City, or any person acting at the direction
of such official, to contact, either orally or in writing, any other City official or employee with
respect to any matter involving any person with whom the elected official has a business
relationship, or to participate in any discussion in any City Council committee hearing or in any
City Council meeting or to vote on any matter involving the person with whom an elected official
has a business relationship. Violation of Section 2-156-030(b) of the Municipal Code by any
elected official with respect to this Agreement shall be grounds for termination of this Agreement.
The term "business relationship" shall be defined as set forth in Section 2-156-080 of the Municipal
Code.

11

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Bond Purchase Agreement in
connection with the City of Chicago General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project Series 201 OB
(Build America Bonds—Direct Payment), to be executed by their duly authorized representatives as
of the datefirstabove written.
Very tmly yours,
THE UNDERWRITERS
Loop Capital Markets LLC
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
Duncan Williams, Inc.
Estrada Hinojosa & Company, Inc.
Incapital LLC
Melvin & Company LLC
Robert W. Baird & Co., Inc.
Stifel Nicolaus & Co.
By: Loop Capital Markets LLC
As Representative
By

Clarence Bourne
Senior Vice President
Accepted by the City:
CITY OF CHICAGO
By:
Gen/R. Saffol

Edward M. Burke
Chairman, Committee on
Finance of the City Council

12

 SCHEDULE I
TERMS OF BONDS
1.

Aggregate Principal Amount: $213,555,000

2.

Dated: December 14, 2010

3.

Maturities, Principal Amounts, Interest Rates, Yields, Prices and CUSIP Numbers:
$213,555,000 General Obligation Bonds
Taxable Project Series 2010B (Build America Bonds—Direct Payment)

$213,555,000 7.517% Tenn Bonds due January 1,2040, Price 100.000% CUSIP: 167486MK2

13

 Redemption
The Bonds are subject to both optional and mandatory redemption prior to maturity, as
described below. The Bonds shall be redeemed only in principal amounts of $5,000 and integral
multiples thereof.
Optional Redemption. The Bonds shall be subject to redempfion prior to maturity at the
option of the City, in whole or in part, on any date at a redemption price equal to the greater of:
(A) the principal amount of Bonds of such series to be redeemed, or (B) the sum of the present
values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on the Bonds of such series
to be redeemed (exclusive of interest accmed to the date fixed for redemption) discounted to the
date of redemption on a semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day
months) at the Treasury Rate (defined below) plus 50 basis points plus accrued interest on the
Bonds of such series being redeemed to the date fixed for redemption. The City's Chief
Financial Officer or the City Comptroller (each such officer being hereinafter referred to as an
""Authorized Officer") shall confirm and transmit the redemption price as so calculated on such
dates and to such parties as shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.
The "Treasury Rate" is, as of any redemption date, the yield to maturity as of such
redemption date of Treasury securities with a constant maturity (as compiled and published in
the most recent Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.I5 (519) that has become publicly
available four Business Days (as defined below) prior to the redemption date (excluding inflation
indexed securities) (or, if such Statistical Release is no longer published, any publicly available
source of similar market data)) most nearly equal to the period from the redemption date to the
maturity date of the Bonds of such series to be redeemed; provided, however, that if the period
from the redemption date to such maturity date is less than one year, the weekly average yield on
actually traded Treasury securities adjusted to a constant maturity of one year will be used.
"Business Day" means any day other than a day on which banks in New York, New York,
Chicago, Illinois, or the city in which the Bond Registrar maintains its designated office are
required or authorized to close. The Treasury Rate will be determined by an independent
accounting firm, investment banking firm or financial advisor retained by the City at the City's
expense.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call the Taxable
Bonds for optional redemption.
Extraordinary Optional Redemption. The Bonds shall be subject to redemption prior
to maturity at the opdon of the City, in whole or in part on any date upon the occurrence of an
"Extraordinary Event" (as defined below), at a redemption price equal to the greater of: (A) the
principal amount of Bonds of such series to be redeemed, or (B) the sum of the present values of
the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on the Bonds of such series to be
redeemed (exclusive of interest accrued to the date fixed for redemption) discounted to the date
of redemption on a semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day
months) at the Treasury Rate plus 100 basis points plus accmed interest on the Bonds of such
series being redeemed to the date fixed for redemption.
14

 An "Extraordinary Event" means any determination by the City that a material adverse
change has occurred to Section 54AA or 6431 of the Code or any other applicable Section of the
Code or there is any guidance published by the Intemal Revenue Service or the Treasury with
respect to such Sections or any other determination by the Intemal Revenue Service or the
Treasury, pursuant to which the Subsidy Payments from the Treasury with respect to the Taxable
Series 201 OB Bonds is reduced, eliminated or adversely adjusted.
Mandatory Redemption of the Bonds. The Bonds are subject to mandatory
redemption, in part and by lot, at a redemption price equal to the principal amount thereof, on
January 1 of the following years and in the following principal amounts, provided, however, i f
less than all of the Taxable Bonds of a single maturity within such series are to be redeemed
prior to maturity, the particular Taxable Bonds or portions thereof to be redeemed will be
selected on a pro-rata pass-through distribution of principal basis in accordance with DTC
procedures.
,

Taxable Series 201 OB Bonds due January 1,2040
Year
Principal Amount
2036
$38,735,000
2037
40,630,000
2038
42,615,000
2039
44,695,000
2040*
46,880,000
*Final Maturity

15

 EXHIBIT A

PRELIMINARY OFFICIAL STATEMENT

A-I

PRELIMINARY OFFICIAL STATEMENT DATED OCTOBER 26, 2010
E

o

m o

S5 5
•s-g
03 —
oj.!

0 <a

'o..e
0) Q>

NEW ISSUE-GLOBAL BOOK ENTRY

RATINGS: See "RATINGS" herein.

In Ike opinion of Co-Bond Counsel, under existing law, if Ihere is continuing compliance with certain
requirements of the Intemal Revenue Code of 1986, interest on the Series 2010A Bonds will nol be includable
in gross income for federal income tax purposes.
Interest on the Series 2010A Bonds is nol required lo be
included as an item of lax preference for purposes of computing individual or corporate "alternative
minimum
taxable income." However, interest on the Series 2010A Bonds is includable in corporate earnings and profits
and therefore must be taken into account when computing corporate alternative minimum
taxable income for
purposes of llie corporate alternative minimum
tax. Interest on the Taxable Series 2010B Bonds and Taxable
Series 20 IOC Bonds is not excludable from gross income for federal income tax purposes. Interest on the Bonds
is 7iot exempt from Illinois income taxes. See "TAX MATTERS" hei ein.

CO
=>.OJ
13 .C
J3 ^
£ o
« a>

$804,285,000*
CITY OF CHICAGO

01 *^

«

o >N
CO ™
O

$123,155,000*
General Obligation Bonds,
Refunding Series 2010A

.S3

Dated: Date of Delivery

Si «•
• o
O «
O "O

5 o
3 "
o

^

CD CD
E ca ^

CO o D
._ _ U)
o a; CO
3 .2 " o

o

$213,590,000*
$467,540,000*
General Obligation Bonds,
General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project Series 2010B
Taxable Project and Refunding
(Build America Bonds - Direct Payment)
Series 2010C

c .2

Due: As shown on the inside f r o n t cover page

The General Obligation Bonds, Refunding Series 2010A (the "Series 2010A Bonds"), the General Obligation
Bonds, Taxable Project Series 2010B (Build America Bonds - Direct Payment) (the "Taxable Series 2010B Bonds"), and
the General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2010C (the "Taxable Series 2010C Bonds," and
collectively, with the Series 2010A Bonds and the Taxable Series 2010B Bonds, the "Bonds") will be issuable as fiilly
registered bonds and will be registered in the name of Cede & Co., as registered owner and nominee of The Depository
Trust Company, New York, New York ("DTC"). DTC will act as securities depository for the Bonds. Purchasers of the
Bonds will not receive certificates representing their interests in the Bonds purchased. Ownership by the beneficial
owners of the Bonds will be evidenced by book-entry only.
Interest on the Bonds will accrue from the date of issuance and be payable on each January 1 and July 1,
conmiencing July 1,2011. Principal of and interest on the Bonds will be paid by Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
as bond registrar and paying agent (the "Bond Registrar"), to DTC, which in tun\ will remit such principal and interest
payments to its participants for subsequent disbureement to the beneficial owners of the Bonds. As long as Cede & Co.
is the registered owner as nominee of DTC, payments on the Bonds will be made to such registered owner, and disbursal
of such payments will be the responsibility of DTC and its participants. See "THE BONDS — Book-Entry System."

" o 3

OS S
SCO
CO —

The Bonds are direct and general obligations of the City of Chicago (the "City"). The Cily has pledged its full faith
and credit for the payment of the principal of and interest on tlie Bonds.

.a>. a 5

The Bonds are subject to redemption prior to maturity as described herein. See "THE BONDS — Redemption."

9?
to Q Q

§ «
OJ ^
o
(U (D ^
ffl CO a -

i£ °
5 ™ .2
O cn cd

o s i
mc o
.S 3 3

For maturities, principal amounts, interest rates, prices or yields and CUSIP numbers of the Bonds,
see the inside f r o n t cover page.
The Bonds are being offered when, as and if issued, and subject lo the delivery ofappixwing legal opinions by
Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP, Chicago, Illinois, and Cotillas and Associates, Chicago, Illinois, Co-Bond Counsel,
and to certain other conditions.
Certain legdl matters will be passed upon for the City by its Corporation Counsel
and for the Underwriters by their counsel McGaugh & Associates, Chicago, Illinois. It is expected that the Bonds will
be available for delivery through Die facilities of DTC on or about
, 2010.

Loop Capital Markets
Duncan-Williams, Inc.
Incapital LLC
BAIRD

CD S

s

—

o

£ 5S

Q- = iS

Dated:

_, 2010

* Preliminary; subject to change

Wells Fargo Securities
Estrada Hinojosa & Company, Inc.
Melvin & Company
Stifel Nicolaus & Co.

 MATURITIES, AMOUNTS, INTEREST RATES, PRICES OR YIELDS
AND CUSIP NUMBERS'
5123,155,000*
General Obligation Bonds, Refunding Series 2010A

Maturity
(January I)

Principal
Amount

Interest
Rate

Price
or
Yield*

CUSIP

Maturity
(January 1)

Principal
Amount

Interest
Rate

Price
or
Yield

CUSIP

_% Term Bonds due January 1, 2 0 _ , Price 100.000% CUSIP*:

5213,590,000*
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project Series 2010B (Build America Bonds - Direct Payment)

Maturity
(January 1)

Principal
Amount

Interest
Rate

Price
or
Yield*

CUSIP

Maturity
(January 1)

Principal
Amount

Interest
Rate

Price
or
Yield

CUSIP

% Term Bonds due January 1, 2 0 _ , Price 100.000% CUSIP*:

$467,540,000*
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding Series 2010C

Maturity
(January 1)

Principal
Amount

Interest
Rate

Price
or
Yield

CUSIP

Maturity
(January 1)

Principal
Amount

Interest
Rate

Price
or
Yield

CUSIP

% Term Bonds due January 1, 2 0 _ , Price 100.000% CUSIP*:

Copynghi 2010, Amcncan Bankers Associalion, CUSIP data herein are provided by CUSIC Global Services LLC, managed on behalf of the American Bankets Association by Standard & Poor's, a
subsidiary of The McGnw-Ddl Companies, Inc. The CUSIP numbers liMcd arc being pruvutcd solely for the convenience of ihe Oonilholdcr3 only at the time of issuance of the Bonds and the City docs
not nxike any representation with respect to such numbers or undertake any responsibility for their accut:icy now or at any time in the future The CUSfP number for a speciHc matunty is subject to being
changed after the issuance of the Bonds as a result of vanous subsct^uent actions including, but not limited to. a refunding in whole or in part of such matunty or as a result of the procurement of
secondary maikct portfolio insurance or other similar cnhaTiccmciit by investors that is applicable to all or a poriion of certain maturities of the Bonds.

Preliminary, subject to change.

 C I T Y OF CHICAGO
MAYOR
Richard M. Daley
C I T Y TREASURER
Stephanie D. Neely
CITY CLERK
Miguel del Valle
C I T Y COUNCIL
C O M M I T T E E ON FINANCE
Edward M. Burke, Chairman
C H I E F FINANCIAL OFFICER
Gene R. Saffold
C I T Y COMPTROLLER
Steven J. Lux
BUDGET DIRECTOR
Eugene L. Munin
CORPORATION COUNSEL
Mara S. Georges, Esq.
CO-BOND COUNSEL
Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP
Chicago, Illinois
Cotillas and Associates
Chicago, Illinois
FINANCIAL ADVISOR
Gardner, Underwood & Bacon-Illinois, L L C
Chicago, Illinois

  PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
INTRODUCTION

I

THE CITY
Corporate Fund
Annual Budget Process
Collective Bargaining Agreements
Pension Plans and Other Post-Employment Benefits
City Investment Policy

2
2
3
4
4
5

PLAN OF FINANCING
General
Refunding of Certain General Obligation Bonds
Financing of the Project
Build America Bonds

6
6
6
6
7

SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS

8

THE BONDS
General
Payment of the Bonds
Redemption
Book-Entry System
Global Clearance Procedures
Bonds Not Presented for Payment
Defeasance
Registration and Transfers
Registered Owner Treated as Absolute Owner

8
8
9
9
13
15
20
20
21
22

SECURITY FOR THE BONDS
General Obligation of the City
Property Tax Limits
Additional General Obligation Debt

22
22
22
23

LITIGATION
Property Tax Objections: 2004-2007
E2 Nightclub Litigation
Parking Meters Litigation
Automatic Red-Light Ticketing Litigation
Firefighter Hiring Process Litigation

23
23
23
23
24
24

INDEPENDENT AUDITORS

24

CERTAIN VERIFICATIONS

24

RATINGS

24

 FINANCIAL ADVISOR

25

UNDERWRITING

25

TAX MATTERS
Series 201 OA Bonds
Taxable Bonds
Circular 230 Disclaimer
Change of Law

26
26
28
31
31

APPROVAL OF LEGAL MATTERS

31

SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE
Annual Financial Information Disclosure
Events Notification; Material Events Disclosure
Consequences of Failure of the City to Provide Information
Amendment; Waiver
Termination of Undertaking
Additional Information
Corrective Action Related to Certain Bond Disclosure Requirements

32
32
33
33
33
34
34
34

MISCELLANEOUS

35

APPENDIX A — REAL PROPERTY TAX SYSTEM AND LIMITS
APPENDIX B — FESIANCIAL AND OTHER CITY INFORMATION
APPENDIX C — CITY OF CHICAGO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR
THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009
APPENDIX D — FORMS OF OPINIONS OF CO-BOND COUNSEL
APPENDIX E — DESCRIPTION OF REFUNDED BONDS

 Certain information contained in, or incorporated by reference in, this Official Statement has been
obtained by the City of Chicago (the "City") from The Depository Trust Company and other sources that
are deemed reliable. No representation or warranty is made, however, as to the accuracy or completeness
of such information by the Underwriters or the City. The Underwriters have provided the following'
sentence for inclusion in this Official Statement: The Underwriters have reviewed the information in this
Official Statement in accordance with and as part of their responsibilities to investors under the federal
securities laws as applied to the facts and circumstances of this transaction, but the Underwriters do not
guarantee the accuracy or completeness of such information and nothing contained in this Official
Statement is or shall be relied upon as a promise or representation by the Underwriters. This Official
Statement is being used in connection with the sale of securities as referred to herein and may not be used,
in whole or in part, for any other purpose. The delivery of this Official Statement at any time does not
imply that information herein is correct as of any time subsequent to its date.
No dealer, broker, salesperson or any other person has been authorized by the City or the
Underwriters to give any information or to make any representation other than as contained in this
Official Statement in connection with the offering described herein and, i f given or made, such other
information or representation must not be relied upon as having been authorized by any of the foregoing.
This Official Statement docs not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy any
securities other than those described on the inside cover page, nor shall there be any offer to sell,
solicitation of an offer to buy or sale of such securities in any jurisdiction in which it is unlawful to make
such offer, solicitation or sale. Neither this Official Statement nor any statement that may have been
made verbally or in writing is to be construed as a contract with the registered or beneficial owners of the
Bonds.
Any statements made in this Official Statement, including the Appendices, involving matters of
opinion or estimates, whether or not so expressly stated, are set forth as such and not as representations of
fact, and no representation is made that any of such estimates will be realized. This Official Statement
contains certain forward-looking statements and information that are based on the City's beliefs, as well
as assumptions made by and information currently available to the City. Such statements are subject to
certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties
materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from
those anticipated, estimated or expected.
These securities have not been recommended by any federal or state securities commission or
regulatory authority. Furthermore, the foregoing authorities have not confirmed the accuracy or
determined the adequacy of this Official Statement. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal
offense.
IN CONNECTION WITH THE OFFERING OF THE BONDS, THE UNDERWRITERS MAY
OVERALLOT OR EFFECT TRANSACTIONS THAT STABILIZE OR MAINTAIN THE MARKET
PRICES OF THE BONDS AT LEVELS ABOVE THOSE WHICH MIGHT OTHERWISE PREVAIL IN
THE OPEN MARKET. SUCH STABILIZING, IF COMMENCED, MAY BE DISCONTINUED AT
ANY TIME. THE PRICES AND OTHER TERMS RESPECTING THE OFFERING AND SALE OF
THE BONDS MAY BE CHANGED FROM TIME TO TIME BY THE UNDERWRITERS AFTER THE
BONDS ARE RELEASED FOR SALE, AND THE BONDS MAY BE OFFERED AND SOLD AT
PRICES OTHER THAN THE INITIAL OFFERING PRICES, INCLUDING SALES TO DEALERS
WHO MAY SELL THE BONDS INTO INVESTMENT ACCOUNTS.

 INFORMATION CONCERNING OFFERING RESTRICTIONS
IN CERTAIN JURISDICTIONS OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES
MINIMUM UNIT SALES
THE BONDS WILL TRADE AND SETTLE ON A UNIT BASIS (ONE UNIT EQUALING
ONE BOND OF $5,000 PRINCIPAL AMOUNT). FOR ANY SALES MADE OUTSIDE THE
UNITED STATES, THE MINIMUM PURCHASE AND TRADING AMOUNT IS 20 UNITS
(BEING 20 BONDS IN AN AGGREGATE PRINCIPAL AMOUNT OF $100,000).
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS LOCATED IN AUSTRALIA
This Official Statement is not a prospectus, disclosure document or product disclosure statement
for the purposes of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) (the "Act"). It is not required to contain, and does
not contain, all the information which would be required in a prospectus, disclosure document or product
disclosure statement. It has not been lodged with the Australian Securities and Investments Commission
("ASIC").
The offer or invitation contained in this Official Statement is only made to persons to whom an
offer of securities can be made in Australia without a disclosure document in accordance with Chapter 6D
of the Act as either:
1.

a "sophisticated investor" who is exempt from the disclosure requirements under section
708(8) of the Act; or

2.

a "professional investor" who is exempt from the disclosure requirements under section
708(11) of the Act.

This Official Statement and any other documents provided in connection with it are fumished
solely on the basis that the recipient in Australia is a "sophisticated investor" or a "professional investor".
The information may not be reproduced or redistributed to any other persons except with the City's prior
written consent. This Official Statement and any other documents provided in connection with it are
strictly confidential.
An investor may not transfer or offer to transfer or sell their securities to any person where the
offer is received in Australia unless the transfer or the offer can be made without a disclosure document in
accordance with Chapter 6D of the Act (for example, as an offer to either a "sophisticated investor" or
"professional investor" who. is exempt from the disclosure requirements under section 708(8) or (11)
(respectively) of the Act).
NOTICE TO RESIDENTS OF BRAZIL
THE SECURITIES HAVE NOT BEEN AND WILL NOT BE REGISTERED WITH THE
BRAZILIAN SECURITIES COMMISSION (COMISSAO DE VALORES MOBILIARIOS - "CVM").
ANY PUBLIC OFFERING, AS DEFINED UNDER BRAZILIAN LAWS AND REGULATIONS OF
THE SECURITIES IN BRAZIL IS NOT LEGAL WITHOUT SUCH PRIOR REGISTRATION UNDER
LAW NO. 6.385/76.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN THE PEOPLES REPUBLIC OF CHINA
This Official Statement has not been and will not be circulated or distributed in the Peoples
Republic of China ("PRC"), and the securities may nol be offered or sold, and will not be offered or sold
iv

 to any person for re-offering or resale, directly or indirectly, to any residents of the PRC except pursuant
to applicable laws and regulations of the PRC. For the purposes of this paragraph, the PRC does not
include Taiwan, Hong Kong or Macau.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN DENMARK
This Official Statement does not constitute a prospectus under any Danish law and has not been
filed with or approved by the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority as this Official Statement has not
been prepared in the context of a public offering of securities in Denmark within the meaning of the
Danish Securities Trading Act or any Executive Orders issued pursuant thereto. Pursuant to Section 11
(1) of the Danish Prospectus Order No. 223 of 10 March 2010 and Secfion 2 of the Danish Executive
Order No. 222 of March 10, 2010, this Official Statement will only be directed to:
(i) qualified investors as defined in Section 2 of the Danish Prospectus Order No. 223 of 10
March 2010, and/or
(ii) fewer than 100 natural or legal persons in Denmark, and/or
(iii) investors who acquire securities for a total consideration of at least EUR 50,000 per investor
for each single offer of securities,'and/or
(iv) securities which are subject to a minimum denomination equivalent to at least EUR 50,000
per security.
Accordingly, this Official Statement may not be made available nor may the securities otherwise
be marketed and offered for sale in Denmark other than in circumstances which are deemed not to be
considered as marketing or an offer to the public in Denmark.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN DUBAI
This Official Statement relates to an Exempt Offer in accordance with the Offered Securities
Rules of the Dubai Financial Services Authority.
This Official Statement is intended for distribution only to persons of a type specified in those
rules. It must not be delivered to, or relied on by, any other person.
The Dubai Financial Services Authority has no responsibility for reviewing or verifying any
documents in connection with Exempt Offers. The Dubai Financial Services Authority has not approved
this Official Statement nor taken steps to verify the information set out in it, and has no responsibility for
it.
The securities to which this Official Statement relates may be illiquid and/or subject to
restrictions on their resale. Prospective purchasers of the securities offered should conduct their own due
diligence on the securities.
I f you do not understand the contents of this Official Statement you should consult an authorised
financial adviser.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AREA
This Official Statement has been prepared on the basis that all offers of the securities will be
made pursuant to an exemption under Article 3 of Directive 2003/7 j/EC (the "Prospectus Directive"), as

 implemented in member states of the European Economic Area (the "EEA"), from the requirement to
produce a prospectus for offers of the securities. Accordingly, any person making or intending to make
any offer within the EEA of the securities should only do so in circimistanccs in which no obligation
arises for the City or any of the initial purchasers to produce a prospectus for such offer. Neither the City
nor the initial purchasers have authorized, nor do they authorize, the making of any offer of securities
through any financial intermediary, other than offers made by the initial purchasers, which constitute the
final placement of the securities contemplated in this Official Statement.
In relation to each Member State of the EEA that has implemented the Prospectus Directive
(each, a "Relevant Member State"), with effect from and including the date on which the Prospectus
Directive is implemented in that Relevant Member State, the offer of any securities which is the subject of
the offering contemplated by this Official Statement is not being made and will not be made to the public
in that Relevant Member State, other than: (a) to legal entities which are authorized or regulated to
operate in the financial markets or, if not so authorized or regulated, whose corporate purpose is solely to
invest in securities; (b) to any legal entity which has two or more of (i) an average of at least 250
employees during the last financial year, (ii) a total balance sheet of more than Euro 43,000,000, and (iii)
an annual net turnover of more than Euro 50,000,000, as shown in its last aimual or consolidated
accounts; or (c) in any other circumstances falling within Article 3(2) of the Prospectus Directive;
provided that no such offer of the securities shall require the City or the initial purchasers to publish a
prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus Directive.
For the purposes of this provision, the expression an "offer of securities to the public" in relation
to the securities in any Relevant Member State means the communication in any form and by any means
of sufficient information on the terms of the offer and the securities to be offered so as to enable an
investor to decide to purchase the securities, as the same may be varied in that Relevant Member State by
any measure implementing the Prospectus Directive in that Relevant Member State and the expression
"Prospectus Directive" means Directive 2003/7 I/BC and includes any relevant implementing measure in
each Relevant Member State.
NOTICE TO RESIDENTS OF FRANCE
The securities have not been offered or sold and will not be offered or sold, directly or indirectly,
by way of a public offer in France (offre au public, as defined in articles L. 411-1 et seq., of the Code
Monetaire el Financier (the "Monetary and Financial Code")).
The securities may not lawfully be offered or sold to persons in France nor may any offering
material be distributed in connection therewith, except to (i) qualified investors (inve.stisseurs qualifies)
and/or (ii) a restricted circle of investors each investing for their own account and/or (iii) to persons
carrying out the activity of portfolio management on behalf of third parties (gestion de portefeuille pour
compte de tiers) in compliance with Articles L. 411-1 ct seq. of the Code Monetaire et Financier and the
General Regulation of the Autorite des Marches Financiers.
Pursuant to Article 211-3 of the General Regulation of the Autorite des Marches Financiers,
residents of France are hereby informed that:
1.

the offer does not require a prospectus to be submitted for approval to the AMF. Neither this
Official Statement nor any other offering document has been or will be submitted to the "Autorite
des Marches Financiers" for approval;

2.

persons or entities referred to in Point 4°, Section 11 of Article L.41l-2'of the Monetary and
Financial Code (qualified investors and/or restricted circle of investors) may take part in the offer

 solely for their own account, as provided in Articles D. 411-1, D. 411-2, D. 734-1, D. 744-1, D.
754-1 and D. 764-1 of the Monetary and Financial Code; and
3.

the securities thus acquired cannot be distributed directly or indirectly to the public otherwise
than in accordance with Articles L. 411-1, L. 411-2, L. 412-1 and L. 621-8 to L. 621-8-3 of the
Monetary and Financial Code.

This Official Statement is fumished to potential qualified investors solely for their information
and may not be reproduced or redistributed to any other person. It is strictly confidential and is solely
destined for qualified investors to which it was initially supplied.
This Official Statement or any other .material relating to the securities may not be distributed to
the public in France or used in connection with any offer for subscription or sale of securities in France
other than in accordance with articles L. 411-2, D. 411-1 and D. 411-2 of the Code Monetaire et
Financier. Any contact with potential qualified investors in France does not and will not constitute
financial and banking solicitation (Demarchage Bancaire et Financier) as defined in articles L. 341-1 et
seq. of the Code Monetaire et Financier.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN GERMANY
The securities have not been, will not be and may not be offered, promoted or sold, either directly
or indirectly, in Germany by v/ay of an offer to the public within the meaning of section 2 No. 4 of the
Securities Prospectus Act (Wertpapierprospektgesetz).
This Official Statement does not constitute an offer to subscribe for or buy any of the securities
offered hereby to any person to whom it is unlawful to make such offer or solicitation in Germany. This
Official Statement is given to potential investors solely for their information and may not be distributed to
any other person. It is confidential and solely targeted at the recipients, i.e. qualified investors within the
meaning of section 2 No. 6 of the Seciu"ities Prospectus Act, to which it has been initially supplied.
NOTICE TO RESIDENTS OF HONG KONG
The securities have not been authorised by the securities and fiitures commission in Hong Kong
for public offering in Hong Kong, nor has a copy of this Official Statement been registered with the
registrar of companies in Hong Kong.
The securities may not be offered or sold by means of any document other than (i) in
circumstances which do not constitute, or form part of, an offer to the public within the meaning of the
companies ordinance (Cap.32 of the laws of Hong Kong), or (ii) to "professional investors" within the
meaning of the securities and futures ordinance (Cap.571 of the laws of Hong Kong) and any rules made
thereunder, or (iii) in other circumstance which do not result in the document being a "prospectus" within
the meaning of the companies ordinance (Cap.32 of the laws of Hong Kong), and that no advertisement,
invitation or document relating to the securities may be issued or may be in the possession of any person
for the purpose of issue (in each case whether in Hong Kong or elsewhere), which is directed at, or the
contents of which are likely to be accessed or read by, the public in Hong Kong (except if permitted to do
so under the laws of Hong Kong) other than with respect to the securities which are or arc intended to be
sold or otherwise disposed of only to persons outside Hong Kong or only to "professional investors"
within the meaning of the securities and fiitures ordinance (cap.571 of the laws of Hong Kong) and any
rules made thereunder.

vu

 NOTICE TO RESIDENTS OF .JAPAN
The securities have not been and will not be registered under the financial instruments and
exchange law of Japan (law no. 25 of 1948, as amended, the "FIEL"). The securities may not be offered
or sold, directly or indirectly, in Japan or to, or for the benefit of, any resident of Japan (which term as
used herein means any person resident in Japan, including any corporation or other entity organized under
the laws of Japan), or to others for re-offering or resale, directly or indirectly, in Japan or to, or for the
benefit of, any resident of Japan, except pursuant to an exemption from the registration requirements of,
and otherwise in compliance with, the FIEL and any other applicable laws, regulations and ministerial
guidelines of Japan.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN KOREA
The securities have not been and will not be registered under the Financial Investments Services
and Capital Markets Act of Korea and the decrees and regulations thereunder (the "FSCMA") and the
securities are offered in Korea only by way of private placement in conformance with the conditions
required for exemption from registration under the FSCMA. Neither the City nor any of the Underwriters
is making any representation with respect to the eligibility of any recipient of this Official Statement to
acquire the securities under the laws of Korea. None of the securities may be offered, sold and delivered
directly or indirectly, or offered or sold to any person for re-offering or resale, directly or indirectly, in
Korea or to any resident of Korea except pursuant to the applicable laws and regulations of Korea,
including the FSCMA and the Foreign Exchange Transaction Law tif Korea and the decrees and
regulations thereunder (the "FETL"). For a period of one year from the issue date of the securities, the
denomination of the securities may not be sub-divided. Furthermore, the purchaser of the securities shall
comply with all applicable regulatory requirements (including but not limited to requirements under the
FETL) in connection with the purchase of the securities.
Each Underwriter will represent and agree that it has not offered, sold or delivered the securities
directly or indirectly to any person for re-offering or resale, directly or indirectly, in Korea or to any
resident of Korea and will not offer, sell or deliver the securities direcdy or indirectly to any person for reoffering or resale, directly or indirectly, in Korea or to any resident of Korea, except pursuant to an
exemption from the registration requirements of, and otherwise in compliance with, the FSCMA, the
FETL and other relevant laws and regulations of Korea.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN THE NETHERLANDS
1.
In accordance with the Dutch Financial Supervision Act ("Wet op het Financieel
Toezicht" or "Wft") and the Wft Exemptions Regulation (in Dutch: "Vrijstellingsregeling Wft") a straight
forward offering of the securities to the public in the Netherlands requires publication of a prospectus that
is duly approved by the competent Dutch authority (i.e. Netherlands Authority for the Financial Markets,
in Dutch: "Autoriteit Financiele Marktcn" or "AFM") or by a competent authority of another European
Member State, unless:
(a)

the securities are offered exclusively to qualified investors as defined in the Wft; and/or

(b)
the securities are offered to less than 100 people, not being qualified investors as defined
in the Wft; and/or
(c)
the securities are offered in minimum lots of EUR 50,000 in terms of nominal value or
subscription price; and/or

VIII

 (d)
the total consideration value of the offering of securities involves a total amount of less
than EUR 100,000 calculated over a 12-month-period; and/or
(e)
the offering of securities forms part of an offer under which the total consideration value
of the offer, calculated over a period of twelve months, does not exceed EUR 2.5 million, provided that in
all relevant documentation and advertisements the offeror mentions that the offer in question is exempted
from the statutory requirement to publish a prospectus; and/or
(f)
the securities are offered to investors, not being qualified investors, who have concluded
a written mandate agreement ("schriftelijke overeenkomst van lastgeving") with an asset manager entitled
to provide investment services under the law of the Netherlands and who is entitled in terms of that
agreement to undertake or realise transactions at his own discretion without taking orders from or
consulting with the investors who granted the mandate.
2.
In light of the above, the securities that are offered to you without publication of a
prospectus that is duly approved by the AFM or by a competent authority of another European Member
State shall not be deemed to be in violation of the Wft and the Wft Exemption Regulation, if and insofar
as:
(a)

you are a qualified investor as defined in the Wft; and /or

(b)
you are not a qualified investor as defined in the Wft, but you have concluded a written
mandate agreement ("schriftelijke overeenkomst van lastgeving") with an asset manager entitled to
provide investment services under the law of the Netherlands and who is entitled in tenns of that
agreement to undertake or realise transactions in the securities at his own discretion without being
required to take orders from or consult with you; and/or
(c)

you invest at least EUR 50,000 in the acquisition of the securities.

3.
The offering of securities is only aimed at, directed and made to prospective investors in
The Netherlands who fall within the scope of par. 2 above and, therefore, any response to an offer of
securities made by an investor that does not fall within the scope of par. 2 above shall not be deemed to
constitute nor imply acceptance of the offer and the offeror shall in that case not be held to sell the
securities to that investor.
4.
This notice is fiimished to prospective investors in The Netherlands only in connection
with this Official Statement and is solely for their information. This opinion is not to be used, circulated,
quoted or otherwise relied upon by any other person or entity or. for any purpose.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN NEW ZEALAND
No action has been taken to authorize the offer of any of the securities to the public in New
Zealand. Accordingly, the securities may not be offered or sold, or re-offered or resold, and this Official
Statement or any other material in connection with the securities may not be issued, circulated, delivered
or distributed, in New Zealand, either directly or indirectly, other than to:
(a)
persons whose principal business is the investment of money or who, in the course of and
for the purposes of their business, habitually invest money;
(b)
persons who are each required to pay a minimum subscription price of at least $500,000
for the securities before the allotment of those securities;

IX

 (c)
persons who have each, in a single transaction, previously paid the City a minimum
subscription price of at least $500,000 for other securities issued by the same entity before the allotment
of such other securities and provided that the offer of the current securities is made within 18 months of
the date of the first allotment of the previous securities; or
(d)
persons who are "eligible persons" (as defined in Section 5(2CC) of the Securities Act
1978 (NZ)), in each case as interpreted in accordance with the Securities Act 1978 (NZ) and the laws of
New Zealand.
All persons into whose possession this material may come must inform themselves about and
strictly observe the restrictions detailed in the preceding sentence.
This Official Statement is not a New Zealand registered prospectus or investment statement, the
content of which is prescribed by the Securities Act 1978 (NZ) and other laws, and does not contain the
information that such documents would be required to contain.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN NORWAY
This Official Statement has not been produced in accordance with the prospectus requirements
laid down in the Norwegian Securities Trading Act 2007, nor in accordance with the prospectus
requirements laid down in the Norwegian Securities Fund Act of 1981 as amended. This Official
Statement has not been approved or disapproved by, or registered with, the Oslo Stock Exchange, the
Norwegian FSA (Finanstilsynet) nor the Norwegian Registry of Business Enterprises. The interests
described herein have not been and will not be offered or sold to the public in Norway and no offering or
marketing materials relating to the shares may be made available or distributed in any way that would
constitute, directly or indirectly, an offer to the public in Norway. This Official Statement is for the
recipient only and may not in any way be forwarded to any other person or to the public in Norway.
SELLING RESTRICTIONS FOR OFFER OF SECURITIES IN SINGAPORE TO
ACCREDITED INVESTORS AND INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS
Neither this Official Statement nor any other document or material in connection with any offer
of the securities has been or will be lodged or registered as a pro.spectus with the Monetary Authority of
Singapore (MAS) under the Securities and Futures Act (Cap.289) of Singapore (SFA). Accordingly,
MAS assumes no responsibility for the contents of this Official Statement. This Official Statement is not
a prospectus as defined in the SFA and statutory liability under the SFA in relation to the contents of
prospectuses would not apply.
This Official Statement and any other documents or materials in connection with this offer and
the securities may not be directly or indirectly issued, circulated or distributed, nor may the securities be
offered or sold, or be made the subject of an invitation for subscription or purchase, whether directly or
indirectly, to persons in Singapore other than (i) to an institutional investor under section 274 of the SFA;
(ii) to a relevant person (as defined in section 275(2) of the SFA) pursuant to section 275(1) of the SFA;
(iii) to any person pursuant to the conditions of section 275(1 A) of the SFA; or (iv) otherwise pursuant to,
and in accordance with, the conditions of any other applicable provisions of the SFA.
Any subsequent offers in Singapore of securities acquired pursuant to an initial offer made in
reliance on an exemption under section 274 of the SFA or section 275 of the SFA may only be made,
pursuant to the requirements of section 276 of the SFA, for the initial six month period after such
acquisition to persons who arc institutional investors (as defined in section 4A of the SFA) or to
accredited investors and certain other persons (as set out in section 275 of the SFA). Any transfer after
such initial six month period in Singapore shall be made, pursuant to the requirements of section 257 of

 the SFA, in reliance on any applicable exemption under Subdivision (4) of Division 1 of Part XIII of the
SFA.
In addition to the above, pursuant to the requirements of section 276(3) of the SFA, where the
securities are acquired pursuant to an offer made in reliance on the exemption under section 275 of the
SFA by a corporation (other than a corporation that is an accredited investor (as defined in section 4A of
the SFA)) whose sole business is to hold investments and the entire share capital of which is owned by
one or more individuals each of whom is an accredited investor (as defined in section 4A of the SFA),
securities of such corporation shall not be transferred within 6 months after the corporation has acquired
the securities pursuant to an offer made in reliance on the exemption under section 275 of the SFA unless
that transfer is made only to institutional investors (as defined section 4A of the SFA) or relevant persons
(as defined in section 275(2) of the SFA); or arises from an offer referred to in section 275(1 A) of the
SFA; or no consideration is or will be given for the transfer; or the transfer is by operation of law. This
restriction does not apply to securities previously made in or accompanied by a prospectus and which are
of the same class as other securities of a corporation listed on the Singapore Exchange Securities Trading
Limited.
Pursuant to the requirements of section 276(4) of the SFA, where the securities are acquired
pursuant to an offer made in reliance on the exemption under section 275 of the SFA for a trust (other
than a trust the tmstee of which is an accredited investor (as defined in section 4A of the SFA)) whose
sole purpose is to hold investments and each beneficiary of the tmst is an individual who is an accredited
investor (as defined in section 4A of the SFA), the beneficiaries' rights and interest (howsoever
described) in the tmst shall not be transferred within 6 months after the securities are acquired for the tmst
pursuant to an offer made in reliance on the exemption under section 275 of the SFA unless that transfer
is made only to institutional investors (as defined in section 4A/of the SFA) or relevant persons (as
defined in section 275(2) of the SFA); or arises from an offer that is made on temis that such rights or
interest are acquired at a consideration of not less than S$200,000 (or its equivalent in a foreign currency)
for each transaction, whether such amount is to be paid for in cash or by exchange of securities or other
assets; or no consideration is or will be given for the transfer; or the transfer is by operation of law. This
restriction does not apply to securities previously made in or accompanied by a prospectus and which are
of the same class as other securities of a corporation listed on the Singapore Exchange Securities Trading
Limited.
NOTICE TO SWEDISH INVESTORS
This Official Statement has not been, and will not be, registered with or approved by the Swedish
Financial Supervisory Authority (Sw. Finansinspektionen). Accordingly, this Official Statement is not
intended for and may not be made available to the public in Sweden. Nor may the securities otherwise be
marketed and offered for sale, other than under circumstances that are deemed not to be an offer to the
public in Sweden under the Swedish Financial Instmments Trading Act (1991:980). Notwithstanding the
above, if the offer is deemed as an offer to the public in Sweden, please note that the offer is directed
solely to qualified investors.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN SWITZERLAND
This Official Statement together with the any accompanying documents does not constitute an
issue prospectus to Art. I 156 and Art. 652a of the Swiss Federal Code of Obligations. The securities may
not be offered to the public in or from Switzerland, but only to a selected and limited circle of investors.
This Official Statement together with any accompanying documents and any other supplement hereto are
personal to each offeree and do not constitute an offer to any other person. This Official Statement
together with any accompanying documents may only be used by those persons to whom they have been

 distributed in connection with the offering of the securities and may neither be copied nor directly or
indirectly be distributed nor be made available to other persons without the express prior written consent
of the City.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN TAIWAN
The offer of the securities has not been and will not be registered with the Financial Supervisory
Commission of Taiwan pursuant to relevant securities laws and regulations of Taiwan and the securities,
including any copy of this Official Statement or any other documents relating to the securities, may not be
offered, sold, delivered or distributed within Taiwan through a public offering or in circumstances which
constitute an offer within the meaning of the Securities and Exchange Act of Taiwan that requires the
prior registration with or approval of the Financial Supervisory Commission of Taiwan. Taiwan investors
who subscribe and purchase the securities shall comply with all relevant securities, tax and foreign
exchange laws and regulations in effect in Taiwan.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS FROM THE KINGDOM OF THAILAND
Warnings:
Prior to making an investment decision, investors should exercise their own judgment when
considering information relating to a party issuing securities or bonds as well as the terms and conditions
of the securities or bonds, including the suitability of such securities or bonds for investment and their
relevant risk exposure. Nothing in this Official Statement should be read to represent or even suggest that
the Securities and Exchange Commission or the Office of the Securities and Exchange Commission have
recommended investment in the offered securities or bonds; nor does this Official Statement contain any
assurance in relation to the value or retums on the offered securities or bonds; nor has the Securities and
Exchange Commission or the Office of the Securities and Exchange Commission noted, acknowledged or
certified the accuracy and completeness of information contained in this Official Statement. The liability
for certification of the accuracy and completeness of information contained in this Official Statement is
vested in the offeror of the securities or bonds.
If this Official Statement contains any false statements or omits to state any material information
which should have been disclosed, the securities or bond holders shall be entitled to claim damages from
the securities or bond offeror or the securities or bond owners pursuant to section 82 of the Securities and
Exchange Act B.E. 2535 (1992).
Risks and restrictions:
In respect of investing in securities or bonds in this Official Statement, investors shall be entitled
to rights and protections similar in nature to those provided by any foreign jurisdiction to investors
making direct investments in the securities or bonds offered. Accordingly, investors are strongly
encouraged to review and update themselves on the pertinent laws and regulations of the Kingdom of
Thailand, the foreign offeror's home jurisdiction and of any jurisdiction where the securities or bonds of
the foreign offeror are traded on an exchange.
This Official Statement is not intended to be distributed or offered in the Kingdom of Thailand
and nothing in this Official Statement shall be constmed as an invitation or a solicitation to investors in
Thailand. Should an investor from Thailand be interested in the securities or bonds herein, it is at one's
own free-will and one's endeavor to make a decision to invest in such securities or bonds, conceming
proceedings including settlement shall be conducted in the jurisdiction of the securities or bonds issuer or
any other jurisdiction except in the Kingdom of Thailand.

xn

 NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN THE UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
This Official Statement has not been reviewed, approved or licensed by the UAE Central Bank or
any other relevant licensing authorities or govemmental agencies in the United Arab Emirates. This
Official Statement is strictly private and confidential and has not been reviewed, deposited or registered
with any licensing authority or govemmental agency in the United Arab Emirates, and is being issued to a
limited number of institutional or private investors and must not be provided to any person other than the
original recipient and may not be reproduced or used for any other purpose. The securities may not be
offered or sold directiy or indirectly to the public in the United Arab Emirates.
NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
This Official Statement is for distribution only to, and is directed solely at, persons who (i) are
outside the United Kingdom, (ii) are investment professionals, as such term is defined in Article 19(5) of
the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Financial Promotion) Order 2005, as amended (the
"Financial Promotion Order"), (iii) are persons falling within Article 49(2)(a) to (d) of the Financial
Promotion Order, or (iv) are persons to whom an invitation or inducement to engage in investment
banking activity (within the meaning of Section 21 of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000) in
connection with the issue or sale of any securities may otherwise be lawfully communicated or caused to
be communicated (all such persons together being referred to as "relevant persons"). This Official
Statement is directed only at relevant persons and must not be acted on or relied on by persons who are
not relevant persons. Any investment or investment activity to which this Official Statement relates is
available only to relevant persons and will be engaged in only with relevant persons. Any person who is
not a relevant person should not act or rely on this Official Statement or any of its contents.

XIII

  PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

5804,285,000
CITY OF CHICAGO
5123,155,000*
General Obligation Bonds,
Refunding Scries 2010A

$213,590,000*
5467,540,000*
General Obligation Bonds,
General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project Scries 2010B
Taxable Project and Refunding Scries
(Build America Bonds - Direct Payment)
2010C

INTRODUCTION
This Official Statement (including the cover page and Appendices hereto) is fiimished by the City
of Chicago (the "City") to provide information with respect to $123,155,000* aggregate principal amount
of General Obligation Bonds, Reftinding Series 201 OA (the "Series 201 OA Bonds"), $213,590,000*
aggregate principal amount of General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project Series 201 OB (Build America
Bonds - Direct Payment) (the "Taxable Series 201 OB Bonds") and $467,540,000* aggregate principal
amount of General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding Series 20IOC (the "Taxable Series
20I0C Bonds," and together with the Series 2010A Bonds and the Taxable Series 2010B Bonds, the
"Bonds").
The proceeds from the sale of the Series 2010A Bonds will be used to (i) refund certain
outstanding general obligation bonds of the City described in APPENDIX E — "DESCRIPTION OF
REFUNDED BONDS — Bonds Reftinded by the General Obligation Bonds, Refiinding Series 201 OA"
(the "Series 201 OA Refunded Bonds"), and (ii) pay the costs of issuance of the Series 201 OA Bonds
(including the underwriters' discount). See "PLAN OF FINANCING" and "SOURCES AND USES OF
FUNDS."
The proceeds from the sale of the Taxable Series 201 OB Bonds will be used to (i) pay a portion of
the costs of the Project (as defined herein), (ii) fund capitalized interest on a portion of the Taxable Series
201 OB Bonds and (iii) pay the costs of issuance of the Taxable Series 201 OB Bonds (including the
underwriters' discount). Sec "PLAN OF FINANCING" and "SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS."
The proceeds from the sale of the Taxable Series 20 IOC Bonds will be used to (i) pay a portion of
the costs of the Project, (ii) refund certain outstanding general obligation bonds of the City described in
APPENDIX E — "DESCRIPTION OF REFUNDED BONDS — Bonds Refunded by the General
Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding Series 20IOC' (the "Series 20IOC Refunded Bonds"
and together with the Series 2010A Refunded Bonds, the "Refunded Bonds"), (iii) refund principal
amounts of certain outstanding commercial paper notes of the City to pay certain Project costs, (iii) fund
capitalized interest on a ponion of the Taxable Series 2010C Bonds and^iv) pay the costs of issuance of
the Taxable Series 20IOC Bonds (including the underwriters' discount). See "PLAN OF FINANCING"
and "SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS."
i
The City intends to designate the Taxable Series 2010B Bonds as "Build America Bonds." See
"PLAN OF FINANCING — Build America Bonds."
The Bonds are authorized by an ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City (the "City
Council") on July 28, 2010 (the "Ordinance").
" Preliminary, subject lo change

 THE CITY
The City was incorporated in 1837. The City is a municipal corporation and home mle unit of
local govenmient under the Illinois Constitution of 1970 and as such, "may exercise any power and
perform any function pertaining to its govemment and affairs including, but not limited to, the power to
regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare; to license; to tax; and to incur
debt" except that it can "impose taxes upon or measured by income or earnings or upon occupation" only
if authorized by statute.
The General Assembly of the State of Illinois (the "State") may, by a three-fifths vote of each
house, limit the ability of a home mle municipality to levy taxes. The General Assembly may similarly
limit the debt that the City may incur, except that the General Assembly does not have the power to limit
the debt payable from property taxes to less than three percent of the assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the City. To date, the General Assembly has not imposed limits on the City's ability to levy
taxes under its home mle powers or to incur debt payable from real property taxes. See APPENDIX A —
"REAL PROPERTY TAX SYSTEM AND LIMITS — Property Tax Limits — State of Illinois."
Corporate Fund
The Corporate Fund of the City is used to account for all financial resources of the City except
those required to be accounted for in special revenue or enterprise ftinds. Information for the Corporate
Fund is presented in the City's basic financial statements. The basic financial statements of the City for
the year ended December 31, 2009 arc included as APPENDIX C to this Official Statement.
2009 Corporate Fund Operations
Under generally accepted accounting principles, actual revenues and other financing sources of
approximately $3,036.2 million exceeded expenditures and other financing uses of approximately
$3,031.5 million for the City's fiscal year ending December 31, 2009. On December 31, 2009, the
Corporate Fund balance was approximately $54.7 million including an unreserved balance of
approximately $2.7 million.
20/0 Corporate Fund Budget
The City's 2010 Corporate Fund budget was approved by the City Council on December 2, 2009.
The budget totals $3,179.7 million, reflecfing a decrease of $6.8 million or less than 1% of the 2009
Corporate Fund budget. The 2010 budget includes $114.0 million in expense reductions, some of which
are extensions of those implemented in 2009. Reductions include the elimination of 220 vacant positions
across all departments and the elimination of cost-of-living increases for non-union employees.
Additional cost-saving measures include fuel cost savings, equipment rental savings, real estate lease
renegotiations, debt refunding and the closure of tax increment financing districts. The City will also use
some of its existing asset concession proceeds to manage revenue decline brought on by the national
economic recession. See "Use of Nonrecurring Revenue Sources for Budgetary Purposes" below.
20// Budget Reccommendations
On October 13, 2011, the Mayor presented balanced 2011 budget recommendations to the Cily
Council for consideration. The City's Corporate Fund budget recommendation totals $3,260.2 million,
reflecting an increase of $80.5 million or approximately 2.5% of the 2010 Corporate Fund budget. The
2011 budget recommendations balance a preliminary shortfall of $654.7 million by reducing costs, better
managing resources and utilizing strategic financial options, including the reduction of 277 full time

 budgeted positions. The City Council will hold hearings on the proposed budget and by law must pass a
balanced budget before December 31,2010.
Use of Nonrecurring Revenue Sources for Budgetaiy Purposes
Due to severe economic conditions over recent years, the City has needed to utilize nonrecurring
revenue sources for budgetary purposes. This has taken the form of expending asset concession reserves;
for the 2011 Corporate Fund budget, the City also intends to utilize tax increment funds (by declaring a
surplus in 25 tax increment financing districts). In 2009, the City transferred approximately 35% of the
proceeds from reserves created from the parking meters concession transaction into the Corporate Fund to
offset declining revenues. The City's 2010 budget contemplates that another 48% of these proceeds
would be transferred to the Corporate Fund for 2010. The 2011 budget recommendations would, i f
enacted, make certain changes to the 2010 transfers of parking meters concession reserve proceeds and
provide for another transfer of such proceeds to the Corporate Fund for 2011, resulting in 92% of such
proceeds having been transferred to the Corporate Fund by the end of 2011. The 2011 budget
recommendations also provide for the City to declare a surplus in 25 tax increment financing districts
within the City and transfer an expected amount of $38.5 million to the Corporate Fund for 2011.
There can be no assurance that the City's final budget as approved for 2011 will reflect the 2011
budget recommendations.
Annual Budget Process
Prior to August 1 of each year, the Budget Director prepares the Preliminary Budget Estimate
Report for the following fiscal year. The Preliminary Budget Estimate Report includes a statement of
expenditures and revenues for the most recently completed calendar year, a statement of the amounts
received and expended during the first six months of the current calendar year, an estimate of year-end
expenditures and revenues for the current calendar year, and a statement of estimated expenditures and
revenues for the following fiscal year. The Preliminary Budget Estimate Report forecasts a gap (or
surplus) of revenues versus expenses and sets the stage for the formal budget process.
The Budget Director considers the proposed annual budgets requested by all of the departments
and agencies whose budgets become part of the City's proposed annual budget. The Budget Director
reviews each requested liudget with the respective department head. During the same time, the Budget
Director forecasts the level of resources available to the City to fiind requested budgets. The final
recommendation compiles a budget recommendation that balances expenditures to forecasted available
resources, and is submitted to the Mayor. Once it is approved by the Mayor, it is then submitted as the
Mayor's Recommendation to City Council for consideration through the City Council's Committee on
Budget and Govemmental Operations. The City's proposed budget may be changed by the City Council
through amendments made in the Committee on Budget and Govemmental Operations. The Committee
and then the full City Council vote on the budget and any amendments. When the City Council has
approved the proposed annual budget as the armual appropriation ordinance, it is forwarded to the Mayor
for approval.
Should the Mayor veto the approved annual appropriation ordinance, the City Council, with a
two-thirds vote, may override the veto. The City Council may also refuse to approve the Mayor's
proposed aiuiual budget. In such a case, the appropriate process for passage of the City budget may have
to be judicially determined. By law, the City must have a balanced budget approved by December 31 of
the year preceding the budget year.

 Collective Bargaining Agreements
The City has collective bargaining agreements with a coalition of various trade unions (including
Laborers, Teamsters, Carpenters, and Electricians), representing approximately 7,800 employees. The
agreements cover the period from July I , 2007 through June 30, 2017, and provide for aimual wage
increases. The agreements were ratified by the City Council and went into effect on December 12, 2007.
The City also has a collective bargaining agreement with the Illinois Nurses Association,
covering approximately 120 public health nurses employed by the City. The agreement covers the period
from July 1, 2007 through June 30, 2012, and provides for annual wage increases. The agreement was
ratified by the City Council and went into effect on March 14, 2008. The City also has a collective
bargaining agreement with the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, covering
approximately 3,900 administrative, clerical, professional, human services and library employees. The
agreement covers the period from July 1, 2007 through June 30, 2012, and provides for annual wage
increases. The agreement was ratified by the City Council and went into effect on August 5, 2008.
The City reached agreement with the Public Safety Employees Bargaining Unit/Unit II, covering
approximately 2,500 non-sworn, non-Fire Department public safety employees. The agreement covers
the period from July 1, 2007 through December 31, 2010, and provides for annual wage increases
beginning in 2009. The agreement was ratified by the City Council effective August 6, 2009. The City
also reached agreements with the Police Lieutenants and Captains Associations on collective bargaining
agreements covering approximately 241 Police Lieutenants and 66 Police Captains. Each agreement
covers the period from July 1, 2007 through June 30, 2012. Under both agreements, any increases in
wages are to be determined by the outcome of the City's negofiations with the Fratemal Order of Police
("FOP") and the Chicago Fire Fighters Union, Local 2. These two agreements were ratified by the City
Council in Febmary, 2010. The City concluded negotiations with the FOP, covering approximately
11,300 employees, and submitted the dispute to binding arbitration pursuant to the Illinois Public Labor
Relations Act. In April 2010, the arbitrator issued his award, the terms of which were ratified by the City
Council on June 30, 2010. The City also reached agreement with the Police Sergeants Association, and
that agreement was also ratified by the City Council on June 30, 2010. The arbitrator's award for the FOP
contract provides for wage increases effective in each of the years 2007 through 2012. The 2010
Corporate Fund budget includes funds for the 2010 wage increases mandated by the arbitrator's award.
These same increases in base salary for the members of FOP will be applied to the three separate
bargaining units representing approximately 1,258 Police Sergeants, 241 Police Lieutenants, and 66
Police Captains. The retroactive wage increases for the years 2007 through 2009 for the members of the
FOP and the other three separate bargaining units were paid as a lump-sum payment on or about August
9, 2010 in the amount of approximately $151,200,000 (the "Retroactive Police Payment").
The City remains in negotiations with the Chicago Fire Fighters Union, Local 2 (covering
approximately 5,000 employees) for a successor agreement to the collective bargaining agreement
covering the period July I , 2003 through June 30, 2007, and which has remained in effect during
negotiations for the successor agreement. The 2010 Corporate Fund budget includes funds for wage
increases and anticipated wage increases with respect to this successor agreement.
Pension Plans and Other Post-Employment Benefits
Pension Plans
Eligible City employees participate in one of four single-employer defined benefit pension plans
(the "Pension Plans"). For a description of the Pension Plans and of the Pension Plans' assets and

 liabilities, see APPENDIX C — "CITY OF CHICAGO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 — Note (11)."
Other Post-Employment Benefits
In 1987, the City sued the Pension Plans with respect to the alleged obligation on the part of the
City to provide healthcare benefits to certain retired City employees. The City maintained that it is not
obligated to provide healthcare benefits to such retired employees. Certain retired employees intervened
as a class in the litigation, and the Pension Plans countersued the City. To avoid the risk and expense of
protracted litigation, the City and the other parties entered into a settlement (the "Settlement"), the terms
of which have been renegotiated over time. The Settlement expires on June 30, 2013. Pursuant to the
Settlement, the City administers a single-employer defined benefit healthcare plan (the "Health Plan"), for
which the City pays a portion of the costs. The Health Plan provides healthcare benefits for certain
eligible retired City employees during the term of the Settlement (the "Settlement Period"). The Health
Plan does not issue a publicly available financial report.
The City contributes, on a pay-as-you-go method, the amount required to fiind the City's share of
current year costs for the Health Plan. For 2009, the City contributed approximately $87.8 million to the
Health Plan (calculated on a basis net of pension and retiree contributions as well as Medicare Part D
subsidy payments received by the City). Health Plan members receiving benefits contribute to the Health
Plan based upon a schedule which takes into account their years of employment at the City and their
projected dates of retirement. The City expects to continue to fiind its share of costs of retiree healthcare
benefits for each remaining year of the Settlement Period, on a pay-as-you-go basis.
The Govemmental Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 45, Accounting and Financial
Reporting by Employers for Postemployment Benefits Other Than Pensions ("Statement 45"), was
applied by the City for retiree healthcare benefits in its financial reports beginning in fiscal year 2007.
An actuarial valuation of the Health Plan under Statement 45 provided that the unfunded actuarial
accmed liabilities for the Health Plan for the 2009 fiscal reporting period, based upon the valuation date
of December 31, 2008, was $787.4 million.
These actuarial accrued liabilities represent the amount of healthcare benefits under the Health
Plan, payable during the remainder of the Settlement Period and assume, among other things, that no
health benefits are paid by the City on behalf of any retired City employees following expiration of the
Settlement Period.
City Investment Policy
The investment of City fiinds is governed by the Municipal Code of Chicago (the "Municipal
Code"). The City Council has adopted a Statement of Investment Policy and Guidelines for the purpose
of establishing written cash management and investment guidelines to be followed by the Office of the
City Treasurer in the investment of City fiinds in accordance with the Municipal Code. See APPENDIX C
— "CITY OF CHICAGO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED
DECEMBER 31, 2009 — Notes (1) and (4)."

 PLAN OF FINANCING
General
The proceeds from the sale of the Bonds will be used as described below. For additional
infomiation, see "SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS."
Refunding of Certain General Obligation Bonds
To provide for the refunding of the Refunded Bonds, a portion of the net proceeds of the Series
201 OA Bonds and a portion of net proceeds of the Taxable Series 20IOC Bonds will be used to purchase
obligations of the United States Treasury (the "Treasury") and obligations of agencies of the United
States guaranteed as to timely payment of principal and interest by the United States (collectively, the
"Govemment Securities"), the principal of which, together with interest to be earned thereon and any
initial cash balances, shall be sufficient to pay (i) the interest on the Refiinded Bonds when due, and (ii)
the principal amount or redemption price of the Refiinded Bonds on the applicable maturity date or
redemption date. The principal of, redemption premium (if any) and interest on the Refiinded Bonds shall
be payable from the separate escrow accounts established and administered for the benefit of the City and
the holders of the outstanding Refiinded Bonds.
Neither the maturing principal of the Govemment Securities purchased to refund the Refunded
Bonds nor the interest earned thereon will serve as security or be available for the payment of the
principal of or interest on the Bonds.
The arithmetical computations of (i) the sufficiency of the escrow accounts to provide for
payments on the Refunded Bonds as described above and (ii) the actuarial yields on the Series 2010A
Bonds and the Govemment Securities providing for the refunding of the Series 201 OA Refunded Bonds
will be verified at the time of the delivery of the Bonds by Robert Thomas CPA, LLC, Shawnee Mission,
Kansas, independent certified public accountants. See "CERTAIN VERIFICATIONS."
The City will notify the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board ("MSRB") of the Refiinded
Bonds to be refunded in accordance with the continuing'disclosure undertaking of the City with respect to
each series of Refimded Bonds, as and to the extent required by Rule 15c2-12 (the "Rule") adopted by the
Securities and Exchange Commission (the "Commission") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended (the "Exchange Act").
Financing of the Project
A portion of the net proceeds of the Taxable Series 201 OB Bonds and Taxable Series 20IOC
Bonds will be used by die City to finance one or more of the following projects (collectively, the
"Project"): (i) public right-of-way infrastmcture improvements in City neighborhoods, including street
and alley constmction and improvements, lighting improvements, sidewalk improvements and
replacement, and curb and gutter repairs and replacement; (ii) infrastmcture improvements to enhance the
development of economic activity, including industrial street constmction and improvements,
streetscaping, median landscaping, demolition of hazardous, vacant or dilapidated buildings that pose a
threat to public safety and welfare, shoreline reconstmction and riverbank stabilization, residential and
commercial infrastmcture redevelopment
and railroad viaduct clearance improvements;
(iii) transportation improvements, including street resurfacing, bridge and freight tunnel rehabilitation,
traffic signal modernization, new traffic signal installation, intersection safety improvements and transit
facility improvements; (iv) grants to assist not-for-profit organizations or educational or cultural
institutions, or to assist other municipal corporations, units of local govemment, school districts, the State

 of Illinois or the United States of America; (v) cash flow needs of the City; (vi) the acquisition of personal
property, including, but not limited to, computer hardware and software, vehicles or other capital items
useftil or necessary for City purposes; (vii) the duly authorized acquisition of improved and unimproved
real property within the City for municipal, industrial, commercial or residential purposes, or any
combination thereof, and the improvement, demolition and/or remediation of any such property;
(viii) constmcting, equipping, altering and repairing various municipal facilities including fire stations,
police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and other municipal facilities; (ix) the enhancement of
economic development within the City by making direct grants to, or deposits to .ftinds or accounts to
secure the obligations of, not-for-profit or for-profit organizations doing business or seeking to do
business in the City; (x) the funding of (A) judjgments entered against the City, (B) certain settlements or
other payments required to be made by the City as a condition to the resolution of litigation or threatened
litigation or arbitration and (C) such escrow accounts or other reserves as shall be deemed necessary for
any of said purposes; (xi) the payment of certain contributions (the "Pension Contributions") to the
Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund, the Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund, the Municipal
Employees', Officers' and Officials' Annuity and Benefit Fund and the Laborers' and Retirement Board
Employees''Annuity and Benefit Fund, (xii) the provision of facilities, services and equipment to protect
and enhance public safety, including, but not limited to, increased costs for police and fire protection
services, emergency medical services, staffing at the City's emergency call center and other City
facilities, and enhanced security measures at airports and other major City facilities, (xiii) any expenditure
qualifying as a "quajified economic development purpose" pursuant to the provisions of the hereinafter
defined Code, including expenditures for public infrastmcture and constmction of public facilities, and
(xiv) acquiring motor vehicles for a term of years or lease period.
Build America Bonds
The City intends to designate the Taxable Series 201 OB Bonds as taxable "Build America Bonds"
pursuant to Section 54AA of the Intemal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code"). Build
America Bonds may generally be issued by a governmental entity lo finance capital expenditures for
which it could otherwise issue tax-exempt bonds and, at the election of the issuer, either provide for tax
credits to the holders of such bonds or for certain direct payments lo the govemmental issuer from the
Treasury.
The City intends to elect under Section 54AA(g) of the Code lo receive cash subsidy payments
from the Treasuty under Section 6431 of the Code ("Subsidy Payments") equal to 35% of the interest
payable on the Taxable Scries 2010B Bonds. No lax credit or other tax benefits will be available to
holders of the Taxable Series 201 OB Bonds.
The Subsidy Payments with respect lo the Taxable Series 201 OB Bonds are nol pledged to the
payment of the Bonds and may be applied to any lawful purpo.se of the City.

 SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS
The following table sets forth the estimated sources and uses of Bond proceeds.
Senes 201 OA
Bonds

Taxable
Series 2010B
Bonds

Taxable
Series 20IOC
Bonds

Total

SOURCE OF FUNDS:
Principal Amounl of the Bonds
Plus: Nel Original Issue Premium
Total Sources of Funds
USES OF FUNDS:
Costs of Project
, Refunding of Commercial Paper
Refunding of Refunded Bonds
Capitalized Interest on the Bonds
Costs of Issuance (including the
underwriters' discount)
Total Uses of Funds

THE BONDS
General
Each series of Bonds will be dated their date of issuance, will mature on January 1 of the years
and in the amounts set forth on the inside front cover page of this Official Statement, and will bear
interest from their date of issuance.
Interest on the Bonds will be payable on January 1 and July 1 of each year, commencing July 1,
2011. Each Bond will bear interest from the later of its date of issuance or the most recent interest
payment date to which interest has been paid until the principal amount of such Bond is paid on the basis
of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months.
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, Chicago, Illinois (the "Bond Registrar"), will serve as
bond registrar and paying agent for the Bonds. Principal of and interest on the Bonds will be payable in
lawful money of the United States at the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar.
The Bonds will be initially registered through the book-entry system (the "Book-Entry System")
operated by The Depository Tmst Company, New York, New York ("DTC"). Details of payments of the
Bonds when in the book-entry form and the Book-Entry System are described below under the subcaption
"— Book-Entry System." Except as described under the subcaption "— Book-Entry System — General"
below, beneficial owners of the Bonds will not receive or have the right to receive physical delivery of
Bonds, and will not be or be considered to be the registered owners thereof Accordingly, beneficial
owners must rely upon (i) the procedures of DTC and, if such beneficial owner is not a Direct or Indirect
Participant (as defined below), the Direct or Indirect Participant who will act on behalf of such beneficial
owner to receive notices and payments of principal and interest or redemption price of the Bonds and to
exercise voting rights, and (ii) the records of DTC and, if such beneficial owner is not a Direct or Indirect
Participant, such beneficial owner's Direct or Indirect Participant, lo evidence its beneficial ownership of
the Bonds. So long as DTC or its nominee is the registered owner of the Bonds, references herein to the
owners of the Bonds shall mean DTC or its nominee and shall not mean the beneficial owners of such
Bonds. The laws of some states may require that certain purchasers of securities take physical delivery of

 such securities in definitive form. Such limits and laws may impair the ability lo transfer beneficial
interests in a Bond.
Payment of the Bonds
Principal of each Bond will be payable in lawful money of the United States upon presentation
and surrender of such Bond at the designated corporate tmst office of the Bond Registrar.
Each Bond shall be payable as to interest as follows:
(i)
Payments of the installments of interest on the Bonds will be paid lo the registered owner
of such Bond as shown on the registration books of the City maintained by the Bond Registrar at the close
of business on the 15th day of the month next preceding such interest payment date.
(ii)
All payments of interest on the Bonds will be paid to the persons entitled thereto by the
Bond Registrar on the interest payment dale (A) at the option of any registered owner of Bonds of a series
in the principal amount of $ 1,000,000 or more, by wire transfer of immediately available fiinds, to such
bank in the continental United Slates as such registered owner requests in writing to the Bond Registrar,
or (B) by check or draft of the Bond Registrar mailed lo the persons entitled thereto at such address
appearing on the registration books of the Bond Registrar or such other address as has been fumished to
the Bond Registrar in writing by such person.
Redemption
The Bonds are subject to both optional and mandatory redempfion prior lo maturity, as described
below. The Bonds shall be redeemed only in principal amounts of $5,000 and integral multiples thereof
Optional Redemption of the Series 201 OA Bonds. The Series 2010A Bonds due on and after
January 1, 20 are subject to redemption prior lo maturity, at the option of the City, in whole or in part,
on any date on or after January 1, 20 at a redemption price equal to the principal amounl of the Series
201 OA Bonds being redeemed plus accmed interest to the dale fixed for redemption.
The City is authorized lo sell or waive any right the City may have lo call any of the Series
201 OA Bonds for optional redemption, in whole or in part; provided, that such sale or waiver shall not
adversely affect the exclusion of interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds for federal income tax purposes.
Optional Redemption of the Taxable Series 20 J OB Bonds and Taxable Series 20 IOC Bonds. The
Taxable Series 2010B Bonds and Taxable Series 2010C Bonds (collectively, the "Taxable Bonds") shall
be subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole or in part, on any date at a
redemption price equal lo the greater of (A) the principal amounl of Bonds of such series to be redeemed,
or (B) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on the
Bonds of such series to be redeemed (exclusive of interest accmed lo the date fixed for redemption)
discounted to the dale of redemption on a semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve
30-day months) at the Treasury Rale (defined below) plus
basis points plus accmed and unpaid interest
on the Bonds of such series being redeemed lo the dale fixed for redemption. The City's Chief Financial
Officer or the Cily Comptroller (each such officer being hereinafter referred to as an ""Authorized
Officer") shall confirm and transmit the redemption price as so calculated on such dates and to such
parties as shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.
The "Treasury Rate" means, as of any redemption dale, the yield to maturity as of such
redemption date of United States Treasury securities with a constant maturity (as compiled and published

 in the most recent Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.15 (519) that has become publicly available four
Business Days (as defined below) prior lo the redemption date (excluding inflation indexed securities)
(or, i f such Statistical Release is no longer published, any publicly available source of similar market
data)) most nearly equal to the period from the redemption dale to the maturity dale of the Bonds of such
series to be redeemed; provided, however, that if the period from the redemption date to such maturity
date is less than one year, the weekly average yield on actually traded United Stales Treasury securities
adjusted to a constant maturity of one year will be used. "Business Day" means any day other than a day
on which banks in New York, New York, Chicago, Illinois, or the city in which the Bond Registrar
maintains its designated office are required or authorized to close. The Treasury Rate will be determined
by an independent accounting firm, investment banking firm or financial advisor retained by the Cily at
the City's expense.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call the Taxable Bonds for
optional redemption.
Extraordinary Optional Redemption of the Taxable Series 20/05 Bonds. The Taxable Series
201 OB Bonds shall be subject lo redemption prior lo maturity at the option of the City, in whole or in part
on any date upon the occurrence of an "Extraordinary Event" (as defined below), at a redemption price
equal to the greater ofi (A) the principal amounl of Taxable Series 201 OB Bonds to be redeemed, or (B)
the sum of ihe present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest on the
Taxable Series 201 OB Bonds to be redeemed (exclusive of interest accmed to the dale fixed for
redemption) discounted lo the dale of redemption on a semiatmual basis (assuming a 360-day year
consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury Rale plus
basis points plus accmed interest on the
Taxable Series 2010B Bonds being redeemed lo the date fixed for redemption.
An "Extraordinary Event" means any determination by the City that a change has occurred lo
Section 54AA or 6431 of the Code or any other applicable Section of the Code or there is any guidance
published by the Intemal Revenue Service or the United States Treasury with respect to such Sections or
any other determination by the Internal Revenue Service or the United Stales Treasury, pursuant lo which
the Subsidy Payments from the United Stales Treasury with respect lo the Taxable Series 201 OB Bonds is
reduced, eliminated or adversely adjusted.
Mandatory Redemption of the Bonds. The Bonds are subject to mandatory redemption, in part, at
a redemption price equal to the principal amount thereof, on January I of the following years and in the
following principal amounts, and, if less than all of the Bonds of a single maturity within a series are to be
redeemed prior to maturity, the particular Series 2010A Bonds will be selected by lot and the Taxable
Bonds of a series being redeemed, or portions thereof lo be redeemed, will be selected on a pro-rata passthrough distribution of principal basis to the extent permitted by and in accordance with DTC procedures
(see "THE BONDS — Redemption — Selection of Bonds for Redemption"):

10

 Series 20I0A Bonds due January I , 20
Year
Principal Amount

Taxable Series 20I0B Bonds due January 1, 20
Year
Principal Amount

Taxable Series 2010C Bonds due January I , 20
Year
Principal Amount

Final maturity.
Reduction of Mandatoiy Redemption Amounts. In connection with any mandatory redemption of
Bonds of a series as described above, the principal amounts of Bonds of such series to be mandatorily
redeemed in each year may be reduced through the eariier optional redemption thereof, with any partial
optional redemptions of such Bonds of such series credited against future mandatory redemption
requirements in such order of the mandatory redemption dates as an Authorized Officer may detennine.
In addition, on or prior to the 60th day preceding any mandatory redemption date of Bonds of a series, the
Bond Registrar may, and i f directed by an Authorized Officer shall, purchase Bonds of such series
required to be retired on such mandatory redemption date at such prices as an Authorized Officer shall
determine. Any such Bonds so purchased shall be cancelled and the principal amount thereof shall be
credited against the payment required on such next mandatory redemption date with respect to such series
of Bonds.
Selection of Bonds for Redemption. I f fewer than all of the outstanding Series 201 OA Bonds are
to be optionally redeemed, the Series 20I0A Bonds to be called shall be called from such maturities and
interest rales as may be determined by the City and within any Series 2010A Bonds of the same maturity
and interest rate by lot. In the event of the redemption of fewer than all Series 201 OA Bonds of the same
maturity and interest rate, the aggregate principal amount thereof to be redeemed shall be $5,000 or an
integral multiple thereof, and the Bond Registrar shall assign to each Series 20IOA Bond of such maturity
11

 and interest rate a distinctive number for each $5,000 principal amount of such Series 201 OA Bond and
shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as, at $5,000 for each number, shall
equal the principal amount of such Scries 201 OA Bonds to be redeemed. The Series 201 OA Bonds to be
redeemed shall be those to which were assigned numbers so selected; provided that only so much of the
principal amount of each Series 201 OA Bond shall be redeemed as shall equal $5,000 for each number
assigned to it and so selected. The City shall, at least 45 days prior to the redemption date (unless a
shorter time period shall be satisfactory to the Bond Registrar), notify the Bond Registrar of such
redemption date and of the principal amount of Series 2010A Bonds to be redeemed. So long as DTC or
its nominee is the registered owner of the Series 201 OA Bonds, i f fewer than all of the Series 201 OA
Bonds of the same maturity and interest rate are called for redemption, the particular Bonds or portions of
such Series 2010A Bonds will be selected by lot by DTC in such manner as DTC may determine. See
"THE BONDS — Book-Entry System."
If fewer than all of the outstanding Taxable Bonds of a series are lo be optionally redeemed, the
Taxable Bonds of such series to be called shall be called from such maturities and interest rates as may be
determined by the City. While the Taxable Bonds are registered in the Book-Entry System and so long as
DTC or a successor securities depository is the sole registered owner of such Taxable Bonds, i f less than
all of the Taxable Bonds of the same maturity and interest rate within such series are to be redeemed prior
to maturity, the particular Taxable Bonds or portions thereof to be redeemed will be selected on a pro-rata
pass-through distribution of principal basis in accordance with DTC procedures, provided that, so long as
the Taxable Bonds are registered in the Book-Entry System, the selection for redemption of such Taxable
Bonds will be made in accordance with the operational arrangements of DTC then in effect and, if the
DTC operational arrangements do not allow for redemption on a pro-rata pass-through distribution of
principal basis, the Bonds subject to redemption will be selected for redemption, in accordance with DTC
procedures, by lot.
It is the City's intent that redempfion allocations made by DTC be made on a pro-rata passthrough distribution of principal basis as described above. However, none of the City, the Underwriters
or the Bond Registrar can provide any assurance that DTC, DTC's Direct Participants, Indirect
Participants or any other intermediary will allocate the redemption of Bonds on such basis. I f the DTC
operational arrangements do not allow for the redempfion of the Taxable Bonds on a pro-rata passthrough distribution of principal basis as discussed above, then the Taxable Bonds will be selected for
redemption in accordance with DTC procedures, by lot.
If the Taxable Bonds are not registered in the Book-Entry System, any redemption of less than all
of a maturity of the Taxable Bonds will be allocated by the Bond Registrar among the registered owners
of such Taxable Bonds on a pro-rata basis.
Notice of Redemption. Unless waived by any owner of the Bonds lo be redeemed, notice of
redemption of such Bonds will be given by the Bond Registrar on behalf of the City and in accordance
with the provisions of the Ordinance by first class mail at least 30 days and not more than 45 days prior to
the redemption date to each registered owner of the Bonds to be redeemed at the address shown on the
registration books of the Bond Registrar or at such other address as is fiimished in writing by such
registered owner to the Bond Registrar. Failure to give such notice of redemption as to any Bond, or any
defect therein as lo any Bond, will not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any
other Bond of the same series. Any notice mailed as described in this paragraph will be conclusively
presumed to have been given whether or not actually received by the addressee. With respect to an
optional redemption of any Bonds, such notice may, at the option of the City, state that said redemption is
conditioned upon the receipt by the Bond Registrar on or prior to the date fixed for redemption of moneys
sufficient to pay the redemption price of such Bonds. I f such moneys are not so received by the
redemption date, such redemption notice will be of no force and effect, the City will not redeem such

12

 Bonds, the redemption price will nol be due and payable and the Bond Registrar will give notice, in the
same manner in which the notice of redemption was given, that such moneys were not so received and
that such Bonds will not be redeemed. Unless the notice of redemption is made conditional as described
above, on or prior to any redemption date, the City is required to deposit with the Bond Registrar an
amount of money sufficient lo pay the redemption price of all the Bonds or portions thereof which are lo
be redeemed on that date.
The Bonds called for redemption will become due and payable on the redemption dale at the
applicable redemption price. When ftinds sufficient for redemption are deposited with the Bond
Registrar, interest on such Bonds to be redeemed will cease to accme on the date fixed for redemption.
Book-Entry System
The following information under "— Book-Entry System — General" has been fumished by
DTC for use in this Official Statement and neither the City nor any Underwriter lakes any responsibility
for its accuracy or completeness.
General. DTC will act as securities depository for the Bonds. The Bonds will be issued as fullyregistered securities registered in the name of Cede & Co. (DTC's partnership nominee) or such other
name as may be requested by an authorized representative of DTC. One fully-registered Bond certificate
will be issued for each maturity of each series of the Bonds, each in the aggregate principal amount of
such maturity, and will be deposited with DTC.
DTC, the world's largest depository, is a limited-purpose tmst company organized under the New
York Banking Law, a "banking organization" within the meaning of the New York Banking Law, a
member of the Federal Reserve System, a "clearing corporation" within the meaning of the New York
Uniform Commercial Code, and a "clearing agency" registered pursuant to the provisions of Section 17A
of the Exchange Act. DTC holds and provides asset servicing for over 3.5 million issues of U.S. and nonU.S. equity issues, corporate and municipal debt issues, and money market instmments from over 100
countries that DTC's participants ("Direct Participants") deposit with DTC. DTC also facilitates the posttrade settlement among Direct Participants of sales and other securities transactions in deposited
securities, through electronic computerized book-entry transfers and pledges between Direct Participants'
accounts. This eliminates the need for physical movement of securities certificates. Direct Participants
include both U.S. and non-U.S. securities brokers and dealers, banks, tmst companies, clearing
corporations and certain other organizations. DTC is a wholly owned subsidiary of The Depository Tmst
& Clearing Corporation ("DTCC"). DTCC is the holding company for DTC, National Securities
Clearing Corporation and Fixed Income Clearing Corporation, all of which are registered clearing
agencies. Access lo the DTC system is also available to others such as both U.S. and non-U.S. securities
brokers and dealers, banks, tmst companies and clearing corporations that clear through or maintain a
custodial relationship with a Direct Participant, either directly or indirectly ("Indirect Participants"). DTC
has Standard & Poor's highest rating: AAA. Direct Participants and Indirect Participants are collectively
referred lo as "DTC Participants." The DTC Rules applicable lo DTC Participants are on file with the
Commission. More information about DTC can be found at www.dtcc.com and www.dlc.org.
Purchases of Bonds under the DTC system must be made by or through Direct Participants,
which will receive a credit for the Bonds on DTC's records. The ownership interest of each actual
purchaser of each Bond ("Beneficial Owner") is in tum to be recorded on the Direct Participant's and
Indirect Participant's records. Beneficial Owners will not receive written confirmation from DTC of their
purchase. Beneficial Owners are, however, expected to receive written confirmations providing details of
the transaction, as well as periodic statements of their holdings, from the Direct Participant or Indirect
Participant through which the Beneficial Owner entered into the transaction. Transfers of ownership

13

 interests in the Bonds are to be accomplished by entries made on the books of Direct Participants and
Indirect Participants acting on behalf of Beneficial Owners. Beneficial Owners will not receive
certificates representing their ownership interests in Bonds, except in the event that use of the book-entry
system for the Bonds is discontinued.
To facilitate subsequent transfers, all Bonds deposited by Direct Participants with DTC are
registered in the name of DTC's partnership nominee. Cede & Co., or such other name as requested by an
authorized representative of DTC. The deposit of Bonds with DTC and their registrafion in the name of
Cede & Co. or such other DTC nominee do not effect any change in beneficial ownership. DTC has no
knowledge of the actual Beneficial Owners of the Bonds; DTC's records reflect only the identity of the
Direct Participants to whose accounts such Bonds are credited, which may or may not be the Beneficial
Owners. The Direct Participants and Indirect Participants will remain responsible for keeping account of
their holdings on behalf of their customers.
Conveyance of notices and other communications by DTC to Direct Participants, by Direct
Participants to Indirect Participants, and by Direct Participants and Indirect Participants to Beneficial
Owners will be govemed by arrangements among them, subject to any statutory or regulatory
requirements as may be in effect from time to fime.
Beneficial Owners of the Bonds may wish to take certain steps to augment the transmission to
them of notices of significant events with respect to the Bonds, such as redemptions, defaults and
proposed amendments to the Bond documents. For example. Beneficial Owners of the Bonds may wish
to ascertain that the nominee holding the Bonds for their benefit has agreed to obtain and transmit notices
to Beneficial Owners. In the altemative. Beneficial Owners may wish to provide their names and
addresses to the Bond Registrar and request that copies of notices be provided directly to them.
Redempfion notices shall be sent to DTC. If less than all of the Bonds are being redeemed,
DTC's practice is to determine by lot the amount of the interest of each Direct Participant in the Bonds to
be redeemed.
Neither DTC nor Cede & Co. (nor any other DTC nominee) will consent or vote with respect to
Bonds, unless authorized by a Direct Participant in coimection with DTC's Procedures. Under its usual
procedures, DTC mails an Omnibus Proxy to the City as soon as possible after the record dale. The
Omnibus Proxy assigns Cede & Co.'s consenting or voting rights to those Direct Participants to whose
accounts the Bonds are credited on the record date (identified in a listing attached to the Omnibus Proxy).
Payment of principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds will be made to Cede & Co.,
or such other nominee as may be requested by an authorized representative of DTC. DTC's practice is to
credit Direct Participants' accounts, upon DTC's receipt of ftinds and corresponding detail information
from the Bond Registrar or the City on payable date in accordance with their respective holdings shown
on DTC's records. Payments by DTC Participants to Beneficial Owners will be govemed by standing
instmciions and customary practices, as is the case with securities held for the accounts of customers in
bearer form or registered in "street name," and will be the responsibility of such Participant and nol of
DTC, the Bond Registrar or the City, subject to any statutory or regulatory requirements as may be in
effect from time to time. Payment of principal of, premium, if any, and interest to Cede & Co. (or such
other nominee as may be requested by an authorized representative of DTC) is the responsibility of the
Bond Registrar or the City, disbursement of such payments to Direct Participants will be the
responsibility of DTC, and disbursements of such payments to the Beneficial Owners will be the
responsibility of Direct Participants and Indirect Participants.

14

 DTC may discontinue providing its services as depository with respect to the Bonds at any time
by giving reasonable notice to the City or the Bond Registrar. Under such circumstances, in the event that
a successor depository is not obtained, Bond certificates are required to be printed and delivered.
The City may decide lo discontinue use of the system of book-entry-only transfers through DTC
(or a successor securities depository). In that event, certificates for the Bonds will be printed and
delivered to DTC.
Additional Information. For every transfer and exchange of the Bonds, DTC, the Bond Registrar
and the DTC Participants may charge the Beneficial Owner a sum sufficient lo cover any tax, fee or other
charge that may be imposed in relation thereto.
NEITHER THE CITY NOR THE BOND REGISTRAR WILL HAVE ANY RESPONSIBILITY
OR OBLIGATION TO ANY DTC PARTICIPANTS, OR TO THE PERSONS FOR WHOM THEY
ACT AS NOMINEES WITH RESPECT TO THE BONDS, OR TO ANY BENEFICIAL OWNER IN
RESPECT OF THE ACCURACY OF ANY RECORDS MAINTAINED BY DTC OR ANY
PARTICIPANT OR INDIRECT PARTICIPANT OF ANY AMOUNT IN RESPECT OF THE
PRINCIPAL OR INTEREST ON THE BONDS, OR ANY NOTICE WHICH IS PERMITTED OR
REQUIRED TO BE GIVEN WITH RESPECT TO THE BONDS, INCLUDING ANY NOTICE OF
REDEMPTION OR OTHER ACTION TAKEN, BY DTC AS REGISTERED OWNER OF THE
BONDS.
The City is entitled to treat Owners as absolute owners of the Bonds for the purpose of paying
principal, interest and redemption price.
In reading this Official Statement it should be understood that while the Bonds are in the BookEntty System, references in other sections of this Official Statement to registered owners should be read
to include the person for which a Participant acquires an interest in the Bonds, but (a) all rights of
ownership must be exercised through DTC and the Book-Entry System and (b) notices that are to be
given to registered owners will be given only to DTC.
Global Clearance Procedures
The information set out below has been obtained from sources that the City believes lo be
reliable, but prospective investors are advised to make their own inquiries as to such procedures. In
particular, such information is subject lo any change in or interpretation of the mles, regulations and
procedures of Euroclear Bank or Clearstream, Luxembourg (together, the "Clearing Systems") currently
in effect and investors wishing lo use the facilities of any of the Clearing Systems are therefore advised to
confirm the confinued applicability of the mles, regulations and procedures of the relevant Clearing
System. Neither the City nor the Underwriters will have any responsibility for the performance by the
Clearing Systems, the Clearstream, Luxembourg participants or the Euroclear Operator or their respective
direct or indirect participants or accountholders ("Participants") of their respective obligations under the
mles and procedures goveming their operations or for the sufficiency for any purpose of the arrangements
described below. No representation is made as lo the completeness or the accuracy of such information or
as to the absence of material adverse changes in such information subsequent to the dale hereof
Clearstream
Clearstream Banking, socicle anonyme, 42 Avenue J.F. Kennedy, L-1855 Luxembourg
("Clearstream, I.uxembourg"), was incorporated in 1970 as "Cedel S.A.," a company with limited
liability under Luxembourg law (a societe anonyme). Cedel S.A. subsequently changed its name lo

15

 Cedelbank. On January 10, 2000, Cedelbank's parent company, Cedel Intemational, societe anonyme
("CI") merged its clearing, settlement and custody business with that of Deutsche Borse AG ("DBAG").
The merger involved the transfer by CI of substantially all of its assets and liabiliUes (including its shares
in Cedelbank), and the transfer by DBAG of its shares in Deutsche Borse Clearing (DBC), to a new
Luxembourg company, which with effect January 14, 2000 was renamed Clearstream Intemational,
societe anonyme, and was then 50% owned by CI and 50% owned by DBAG. Following this merger, the
subsidiaries of Clearstream Intemational were also renamed to give them a cohesive brand name. On
January 18, 2000, Cedelbank was renamed "Clearstream Banking, societe anonyme," and Cedel Global
Services was renamed "Clearstream Services, societe anonyme." On January 17, 2000, Deutsche Borse
Clearing AG was renamed "Clearstream Banking AG." Today Clearstream Intemational is 100% owned
by DBAG. The shareholders of DBAG are comprised of mainly banks, securities dealers and financial
institutions.
Clearstream, Luxembourg holds securities for its customers and facilitates the clearance and
settlement of securities transactions between Clearstream, Luxembourg customers through electronic
book-entry changes in accounts of Clearstream, Luxembourg customers, thereby eliminating the need for
physical movement of certificates. Transactions may be settled by Clearstream, Luxembourg in any of 36
currencies, including United Stales Dollars. Clearstream, Luxembourg provides to its customers, among
other things, services for safekeeping, administration, clearance and settlement of intemationally traded
securities and securities lending and borrowing. Clearstream, Luxembourg also deals with domestic
securities markets in over 30 countries through established depository and custodial relationships.
Clearstream, Luxembourg is registered as a bank in Luxembourg, and as such is subject to regulation by
the Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier, "CSSF," and the Banque Centralc du Luxembourg
("BCL") which supervise and oversee the activities of Luxembourg banks. Clearstream, Luxembourg's
customers are worid-widc financial institutions including underwriters, securities brokers and dealers,
banks, tmst companies and clearing corporations.
Clearstream, Luxembourg's U.S. customers are limited to securities brokers and dealers and
banks. Currently, Clearstream, Luxembourg has approximately 2,000 customers located in over 80
countries, including all major European countries, Canada, and the United States. Indirect access to
Clearstream, Luxembourg is available to other institutions that clear through or maintain a custodial
relationship with an account holder of Clearstream, Luxembourg. Clearstream, Luxembourg has
established an electronic bridge with Euroclear Bank S.A./N.V. as the Operator (the "Euroclear
Operator") of the Euroclear System, as defined below, in Bmssels to facilitate settlement of trades
between Clearstream, Luxembourg and the Euroclear Operator.
Euroclear Bank
Euroclear Bank S.A./N.V. ("Euroclear Bank") holds securities and book-entry interests in
securities for participating organizations and facilitates the clearance and settlement of securities
transactions between Euroclear Participants, and between Euroclear Participants and Participants of
certain other securities intermediaries through electronic book-entry' changes in accounts of such
Participants or other securities intermediaries (the "Euroclear System").
Euroclear Bank provides Euroclear Participants, among other things, with safekeeping,
administration, clearance and settlement, securities lending and borrowing, and related services.
Euroclear Participants are investment banks, securities brokers and dealers, banks, central banks,
supranational, custodians, investment managers, corporations, tmst companies and certain other
organizations. Certain of the managers or underwriters for this offering, or other financial entities
involved in this offering, may be Euroclear Participants. Non-Participants in the Euroclear System may
hold and transfer book-entry interests in the securities through accounts with a Participant in the

16

 Euroclear System or any other securities intermediary that holds a book-entty interest in the securities
through one or more securities intermediaries standing between such other securities intermediary and
Euroclear Bank.
Clearance and Settlement. Although Euroclear Bank has agreed lo the procedures provided
below in order to facilitate transfers of securities among Participants in the Euroclear System, and
between Euroclear Participants and Participants of other intermediaries, it is under no obligation to
perform or continue to perform such procedures and such procedures may be modified or discontinued at
any time.
Initial Distribution. Investors electing to acquire securities through an account with Euroclear
Bank or some other securities intermediary must follow the settlement procedures of such an intermediary
with respect to the settlement of new issues of securities. Securities to be acquired against payment
through an account with Euroclear Bank will be credited to the securities clearance accounts of the
respective Euroclear Participants in the securities processing cycle for the business day following the
settlement date for value as of the settlement date, if against payment.
Secondary Market. Investors electing lo acquire, hold or transfer securifies through an account
with Euroclear Bank or some other securities intermediary must follow the setflement procedures of such
an intermediary with respect to the settlement of secondary market transactions in securities. Please be
aware that Euroclear Bank will not monitor or enforce any transfer restrictions with respect to the
securities offered herein.
Custody. Investors who are Participants in the Euroclear System may acquire, hold or transfer
interests in the securities by book-entry lo accounts with Euroclear Bank. Investors who are not
Participants in the Euroclear System may acquire, hold or transfer interests in the securities by book-entry
to accounts with a securities intermediary who holds a book-entry interest in the securities through
accounts with Euroclear Bank.
Custody Risk. Investors that acquire, hold and transfer interests in the securities by book-entity
through accounts with Euroclear Bank or any other securities intermediary are subject to the laws and
contractual provisions goveming their relationship with their intermediary, as well as the laws and
contractual provisions goveming the relationship between such an intermediary and each other
intermediary, if any, standing between themselves and the individual securities.
Euroclear Bank has advised as follows:
Under Belgian law, investors that are credited with securities on the records of Euroclear Bank
have a co-property right in the fungible pool of interests in securities on deposit with Euroclear Bank in
an amount equal to the amount of interests in securities credited to their accounts. In the event of the
insolvency of Euroclear Bank, Euroclear Participants would have a right under Belgian law to the retum
of the amount and type of interests in securities credited to their accounts with Euroclear Bank. If
Euroclear Bank did not have a sufficient amount of interests in securities on deposit of a particular type to
cover ihe claims of all Participants credited with such interests in securities on Euroclear Bank's records,
all Participants having an amounl of interests in securities of such type credited lo their accounts with
Euroclear Bank would have the right under Belgian law to the retum of their pro-rata share of the amount
of interests in securities actually on deposit.
Under Belgian law, Euroclear Bank is required to pass on the benefits of ownership in any
interests in securities on deposit with it (such as dividends, voting rights and other entitlements) to any
person credited with such interests in securities on its records.

17

 Initial Settlement; Distributions; Actions Upon Behalf df Owners
All of the Bonds will initially be registered in the name of Cede & Co., the nominee of DTC.
Clearstream, Luxembourg and Euroclear Bank may hold omnibus positions on behalf of their participants
through customers' securities accounts in Clearstream, Luxembourg's and/or Euroclear Bank's names on
the books of their respective U.S. Depository, which, in tum, holds such positions in customers' securities
accounts in its U.S. Depository's name on the books of DTC. Citibank, N.A. acts as depository for
Clearstream, Luxembourg and JPMorgan Chase Bank acts as depositoty for Euroclear Bank (the "U.S.
Depositories"). Holders of the Bonds may hold the Bonds through DTC (in the United States) or
Clearstream, Luxembourg or Euroclear Bank (in Europe) i f they are participants of such systems, or
directly through organizations that are participants in such systems. Investors electing to hold the Bonds
through Euroclear Bank or Clearstream, Luxembourg accounts will follow the settlement procedures
applicable to conventional EuroBonds in registered form. Securities will be credited to the securities
custody accounts of Euroclear Bank and Clearstream, Luxembourg holders on the business day following
the settlement date against payment for value on the settlement date.
Distributions with respect to the Bonds held beneficially through Clearstream, Luxembourg will
be credited to the cash accounts of Clearstream, Luxembourg customers in accordance with its mles and
procedures, to the extent received by its U.S. Depository. Dislribufions with respect to the Bonds held
beneficially through Euroclear Bank will be credited to the cash accounts of Euroclear Participants in
accordance with the Terms and Conditions, to the extent received by its U.S. Depositoty. Such
distributions will be subject to tax reporting in accordance with relevant United States tax laws and
regulations. Clearstream, Luxembourg or the Euroclear Operator, as the case may be, will take any other
action pennitted to be taken by an owner of the Bonds on behalf of a Clearstream, Luxembourg customer
or Euroclear Participant only in accordance with the relevant mles and procedures and subject to the U.S.
Depository's ability to effect such actions on its behalf through DTC.
Each of the persons shown in the records of Euroclear Bank or Clearstream, Luxembourg as the
holder of the Bond must look solely to Euroclear Bank or Clearstream, Luxembourg for his share of each
payment made by the City lo the registered holder of the Bonds and in relation to all other rights arising
under the Bonds, subject to and in accordance with the respective mles and procedures of Euroclear Bank
or Clearstream, Luxembourg (as the case may be). The City expects that payments by Euroclear
Participants or Clearstream, Luxembourg customers to owners of beneficial interests in the Bonds held
through such Euroclear Participants or Clearstream, Luxembourg customers will be govemed by standing
instmctions and customary practices. Euroclear Participants or Clearstream, Luxembourg customers
should note that for so long as the Bonds are held in book entty form, the obligations of the City will be
discharged by payment to the registered holder of the Bonds in respect of each amount so paid.
Secondaty Market Trading
Secondary market trading between Participants (other than U.S. Depositories) will be settled
using the procedures applicable to U.S. corporate debt obligations in same-day funds. Secondary market
trading between Euroclear Participants and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg customers will be settled using
the procedures applicable lo conventional EuroBonds in same-day funds. When securities are to be
transferred from the account of a Participant (other than U.S. Depositories) to the account of a Euroclear
Participant or a Clearstream, Luxembourg customer, the purchaser must send instmciions to the
applicable U.S. Depositoty one business day before the settlement date. Euroclear Bank or Clearstream,
Luxembourg, as the case may be, will instmcl its U.S. Depository to receive the securities against
payment. Its U.S. Depository will then make payment to the Participant's account against delivcty of the
securities. After settlement has been completed, the securities will be credited lo the respective clearing
system and by the clearing system, in accordance with its usual procedures, to the Euroclear Participant's

18

 or Clearstream, Luxembourg customers' accounts. Credit for the securities will appear on the next day
(European time) and cash debit will be back-valued to, and the interest on the Bonds will accme from the
value dale (which would be the preceding day when settlement occurs in New York). If settlement is nol
completed on the intended value dale (i.e., the trade fails), the Euroclear Bank or Clearstream,
Luxembourg cash debit will be valued instead as of the actual settlement dale.
Euroclear Participants and Clearstream, Luxembourg customers will need to make available lo
the respective clearing systems the fiinds necessary lo process same-day fiinds settlement. The most
direct means of doing so is to prc-position ftinds for settlement, either from cash on hand or existing lines
of credit, as they would for any settlement occurring within Euroclear Bank or Clearstream, Luxembourg.
Under this approach, they may take on credit exposure to Euroclear Bank or Clearstream, Luxembourg
until the securifies are credited lo their accounts one day later. As an altemative, if Euroclear Bank or
Clearstream, Luxembourg has extended a line of credit to them, participants/customers can elect nol to
pre-posilion funds and allow that credit line lo be drawn upon to finance settlement. Under this
procedure, Euroclear Participants or Clearstream, Luxembourg customers purchasing securities would
incur overdraft charges for one day, assuming they cleared the overdraft when the securities were credited
to their accounts. However, interest on the securifies would accme from the value date. Therefore, in
many cases, the investment income on securities eamed during that one day period may substantially
reduce or offset the amount of such overdraft charges, although this result will depend on each
participant's/customer's particular cost of funds. Because the settlement is taking place during New York
business hours. Participants can employ their usual procedures for sending securities to the applicable
U.S. Depository for the benefit of Euroclear Participants or Clearstream, Luxembourg customers. The
sale proceeds will be available to the DTC seller on the settlement date. Thus, to the Participant, a crossmarket transaction will settle no differently from a trade between two Participants.
Due to time zone differences in their favor, Euroclear Participants and Clearstream, Luxembourg
customers may employ their customary procedure for transactions in which securities are to be transferred
by the respective clearing system, through the applicable U.S. Depository to another Participant's. In
these cases, Euroclear Bank will inslmct its U.S. Depositoty to credit the securifies lo the Participant's
account against payment. The payment will then be reflected in the account of the Euroclear Participant
or Clearstream, Luxembourg customer the following business day, and receipt of the cash proceeds in the
Euroclear Participants' or Clearstream, Luxembourg customers' accounts will be backvalued to the value
date (which would be the preceding day, when settlement occurs in New York). I f the Euroclear
Participant or Clearstream, Luxembourg customer has a line of credit with its respective clearing system
and elects to draw on such line of credit in anticipation of receipt of the sale proceeds in its account, the
back-valuation may substantially reduce or offset any overdraft charges incurred over that one-day period.
If settlement is not completed on the intended value date (i.e., the trade fails), receipt of the cash proceeds
in the Euroclear Participant's or Clearstream, Luxembourg customer's accounts would instead be valued
as of the actual settlement date.
Procedures May Change
Although DTC, Clearstream, Luxembourg and Euroclear Bank have agreed lo these procedures in
order to facilitate transfers of securities among DTC and its Participants, Clearstream, Luxembourg and
Euroclear Bank they are under no obligation to perform or continue lo perform these procedures and
these procedures may be discontinued and may be changed at any time by any of them.
General Statement
THE CITY CANNOT AND DOES NOT GIVE ANY ASSURANCES THAT DTC, DIRECT
PARTICIPANTS OR INDIRECT PARTICIPANTS OF DTC, CLEARSTREAM, LUXEMBOURG,

19

 CLEARSTREAM PARTICIPANTS, EUROCLEAR BANK OR EUROCLEAR PARTICIPANTS WILL
DISTRIBUTE TO THE BENEFICIAL OWNERS OF THE BONDS (1) PAYMENTS OF PRINCIPAL
OF OR INTEREST OR REDEMPTION PREMIUM ON THE BONDS (2) CONFIRMATIONS OF
THEIR OWNERSHIP INTERESTS IN THE BONDS OR (3) OTHER NOTICES SENT TO DTC OR
CEDE & CO., ITS PARTNERSHIP NOMINEE, AS THE REGISTERED OWNER OF THE BONDS,
OR THAT THEY WILL DO SO ON A TIMELY BASIS, OR THAT DTC, DIRECT PARTICIPANTS
OR
INDIRECT PARTICIPANTS, CLEARSTREAM, LUXEMBOURG, CLEARSTREAM
PARTICIPANTS, EUROCLEAR BANK OR EUROCLEAR PARTICIPANTS WILL SERVE AND
ACT IN THE MANNER DESCRIBED IN THIS OFFICIAL STATEMENT.
THE CITY WILL NOT HAVE ANY RESPONSIBILITY OR OBLIGATIONS TO DTC, THE
DIRECT PARTICIPANTS, THE INDIRECT PARTICIPANTS OF DTC, CLEARSTREAM,
LUXEMBOURG, CLEARSTREAM PARTICIPANTS, EUROCLEAR BANK, EUROCLEAR
PARTICIPANTS OR THE BENEF1CL\L OWNERSVlTH RESPECT TO (1) THE ACCURACY OF
ANY RECORDS MAINTAINED BY DTC OR ANY DIRECT PARTICIPANTS OR INDIRECT
PARTICIPANTS OF DTC, CLEARSTREAM, LUXEMBOURG, CLEARSTREAM PARTICIPANTS,
EUROCLEAR BANK OR EUROCLEAR PARTICIPANTS; (2) THE PAYMENT BY DTC OR ANY
DIRECT PARTICIPANTS OR INDIRECT PARTICIPANTS OF DTC, CLEARSTREAM,
LUXEMBOURG, CLEARSTREAM PARTICIPANTS, EUROCLEAR BANK OR EUROCLEAR
PARTICIPANTS OF ANY AMOUNT DUE TO ANY BENEFICIAL OWNER IN RESPECT OF THE
PRINCIPAL AMOUNT OF OR INTEREST OR REDEMPTION PREMIUM ON THE BONDS; (3)
THE DELIVERY BY DTC OR ANY DIRECT PARTICIPANTS OR INDIRECT PARTICIPANTS OF
DTC, CLEARSTREAM, LUXEMBOURG, CLEARSTREAM PARTICIPANTS, EUROCLEAR BANK
OR EUROCLEAR PARTICIPANTS OF ANY NOTICE TO ANY BENEFICIAL OWNER THAT IS
REQUIRED OR PERMITTED TO BE GIVEN TO OWNERS UNDER THE TERMS OF THE
DOCUMENTS RELATED TO THE BONDS; OR (4) ANY CONSENT GIVEN OR OTHER ACTION
TAKEN BY DTC AS OWNER OF THE BONDS.
Bonds Not Presented for Payment
If any Bond is not presented for payment when the principal amount thereof becomes due, either
at maturity or at a date fixed for redemption thereof or otherwise, and i f moneys sufficient to pay such
Bond arc held by the Bond Registrar for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond, the Bond
Registrar will hold such moneys for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond without liability to
the registered owner for interest. The registered owner of such Bond thereafter will be restricted
exclusively to such fiinds for satisfaction of any claims relating to such Bond.
Defeasance
If payment or provision for payment is made, to or for the registered owners of the Bonds, of the
principal of and interest due and to become due on any Bond at the times and in the manner stipulated
therein, and there is paid or caused to be paid to the Bond Registrar or a bank or trust company (the
"Defeasance Escrow Agent") designated by an Authorized Officer of the City, all sums of money due or
lo become due according to the Ordinance, then the provisions of the Ordinance and the estates and rights
granted by the Ordinance will cease, determine and be void as to those Bonds or portions thereof, except
for those provisions of the Ordinance goveming the registration, transfer and exchange of Bonds and the
payment of such moneys or obligations to or for the registered owners of the Bonds.
Any Bond shall be deemed to have been paid with the effect expressed in the immediately
preceding paragraph when payment of the principal of any such Bond, plus interest thereon to the due
date thereof (whether at maturity, upon redemption or otherwise), either shall have been made in

20

 accordance with its terms or shall have been provided for by irrevocably depositing with the Bond
Registrar or the Defeasance Escrow Agent in tmst and exclusively for such payment: (1) moneys
sufficient to make such payment; or (2) (a) direct obligations of the United Slates, (b) obligations of
agencies of the United States, the timely payment of principal of and interest on which are guaranteed by
the United Stales, (c) obligations of the following government-sponsored agencies that are nol backed by
the full faith and credit of the United Slates Govemment: Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. (FHLMC)
debt obligations. Farm Credit System (formerly: Federal Land Banks, Federal Intermediate Credit Banks
and Banks for Cooperatives) debt obligations. Federal Home Loan Banks (FHL Banks) debt obligations,
Fannie Mae debt obligations. Financing Corp. (FICO) debt obligations. Resolution Funding Corp.
(REFCORP) debt obligations and U.S. Agency for Intemational Development (U.S. A.l.D.) Guaranteed
notes, (d) pre-refunded municipal obhgations as defined as follows: any bonds or other obligations of any
state of the United States of America or of any agency, instmmentalily or local governmental unit of any
such state which are not callable at the option of the obligor prior to maturity or as to which irrevocable
instmciions have been given by the obligor lo call on the date specified in the notice, or (e) instmments
evidencing an ownership interest in obligations described in (a), (b) and (c) above; or (3) a combination of
the investments described in (1) and (2) above, such amounts so deposited being available or maturing in
such amounts and at such fimes, without consideration of any reinvestment thereof as will ensure the
availability of sufficient moneys to make such payment (all as confirmed by a nationally recognized finn
of independent public accountants).
Registration and Transfers
The books for registration and transfer of the Bonds will be kept at the designated corporate tmst
office of the Bond Registrar. See "THE BONDS — Book-Entry System" for a discussion of registration
and transfer of the beneficial ownership interests in Bonds while they are in the Book-Entry System. The
following provisions relate lo the registration and transfer of Bonds when the Bonds are in certificated
form.
Upon surrender for transfer of any Bond at the designated corporate tmst office of the Bond
Registrar, duly endorsed by, or accompanied by a written instmmenl or instmments of transfer in form
satisfactory to the Bond Registrar and duly executed by the registered owner or its altomey duly
authorized in wrifing, the City shall execute and the Bond Registrar shall authenficate, date and deliver in
the name of the transferee or transferees one or more fiilly registered Bond or Bonds of the same series,
interest rate and maturity of authorized denominations, for a like aggregate principal amount. Any fully
registered Bond or Bonds may be exchanged at the office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate
principal amount of Bonds of the same series, interest rale and maturity of other authorized
denominations.
In all cases in which the privilege of exchanging Bonds or registering the transfer of Bonds is
exercised, the City is required to execute and the Bond Registrar is required lo authenticate, dale and
deliver Bonds in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinance. For every such exchange or
registration of transfer of Bonds, whether temporary or defmitive, the Bond Registrar may make a charge
in an amount sufficient to cover any lax or other governmental charge required to be paid wilh respect to
such exchange or registration of transfer (except in the case of the issuance of a Bond or Bonds for the
unredeemed portion of a Bond surrendered for redemption), which sum or sums shall be paid by the
person requesting such exchange or registration of transfer as a condition precedent to the exercise of the
privilege of making such exchange or registration of transfer. The Bond Registrar is not required to
transfer or exchange (i) any Bond after nofice calling such Bond for redemption has been mailed, or (ii)
any Bond during a period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of such Bond.

21

 Registered Owner Treated as Absolute Owner
The City and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat a registered owner of a Bond as the absolute
owner of such Bond for all purposes, and payment of the principal of or interest on any Bond, as
appropriate, shall be made only to the registered owner thereof or its legal representative. All such
payments so made shall be valid and effectual to satisfy and discharge the liability upon such Bond to the
extent of the sum or sums so paid.
SECURITY FOR THE BONDS
General Obligation of the City
The Bonds are direct and general obligations of the City and shall be payable, as to principal and
interest, from any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or fiinds of the City legally available for
such purpose, including, but not limited to, the proceeds of a direct annual tax levied by the City in the
Ordinance upon all taxable property located in the City sufficient to pay the principal of and interest on
the Bonds. The City has pledged its full faith and credit to the payment of the Bonds. See APPENDIX B
— "FINANCIAL AND OTHER CITY INFORMATION — Property Tax Supported Bonded Debt —
Debt Service Schedule." In addition lo the Bonds, the City has other direct and general obligations
previously issued and outstanding under separate ordinances adopted by the City Council. See
APPENDIX B' — "FINANCIAL AND OTHER CITY INFORMATION — Property Tax Supported
Bonded Debt — Computation of Direct and Overlapping Bonded Debt."
Under the Ordinance, the City is obligated to appropriate amounts sufficient to pay principal of
and interest on the Bonds for the years such amounts are due, and the City covenants in the Ordinance to
take timely action as required by law to carry out such obligation, but, if for any such year the City fails to
do so, the Ordinance constitutes a continuing appropriation of such amounts without any fiirther action by
the City.
If the taxes to be applied to the payment of the Bonds are not available in time to make any
payments of principal of or interest on the Bonds when due, then the appropriate fiscal officers of the City
are directed in the Ordinance lo make such payments from any other moneys, revenues, receipts, income,
assets or funds of the City that are legally available for that purpose in advancement of the collecfion of
such taxes.
Property Tax Limits
77;e C/(v. In 1993, the City Council adopted an ordinance (the "City Tax Limitation Ordinance")
limiting the City's aggregate property tax levy for any one year to an amount equal lo the prior year's
aggregate property tax levy (subject to certain adjustments) plus the lesser of five percent or the increase
in the Consumer Price Index. The City Tax Limitation Ordinance also established a safe harbor amount
for each year equal to a specified 1994 base amount increased annually by the lesser of five (5%) percent
or the increase in the Consumer Price Index. See APPENDIX A — "REAL PROPERTY TAX SYSTEM
AND LIMITS — Property Tax Limits — The City." Pursuant to the Ordinance, the taxes levied by the
City for the payment of the principal of and interest on the Bonds are not subject to the limitafions
contained in the City Tax Limitation Ordinance.
State of Illinois. The City continues lo be excluded from property lax limits imposed by the State
of Illinois on non-home mle units of local govemment in Cook Coimly and the five adjacent counties.
The property tax limitations imposed by the Stale differ from those contained in the City Tax Limitation
Ordinance. There can be no assurance that legislation applying such property tax limitations to the City

22

 will not be enacted by the Illinois General Assembly. For addifional information, see APPENDIX A —
"REAL PROPERTY TAX SYSTEM AND LIMITS — Property Tax Limits — State of Illinois."
Additional General Obligation Debt
The Cily may issue from time to lime notes and bonds that are general obligations of the City and
that are secured by the full faith and credit of the City, which may or may nol be subject to the provisions
of the City Tax Limitation Ordinance.
LITIGATION
There is no litigation pending in any court or, to the knowledge of the City, threatened,
questioning the corporate existence of the Cily, or which would restrain or enjoin the issuance or delivery
of the Bonds, or which concerns the proceedings of the City taken in connection with the Bonds or the
City's pledge of its full faith, credit and resources to the payment of the Bonds.
The City is a defendant in various pending and threatened individual and class action litigation
relating principally lo claims arising from contracts, personal injuty, property damage, police conduct,
discriminafion, civil rights actions and other matters. The City believes that the ultimate resolution of
these matters will not have a material adverse effect on the financial position of the City.
Property Tax Objections: 2004-2007. The City's property tax levies for 2004 through 2007,
varied between approximately $720 and $833 million annually. Objecfions have been filed in the Circuit
Court to these levies, which objections remain pending. The City is unable to predict the outcome of
proceedings conceming the objections.
E2 Nightclub Litigation. The Cily is a defendant in 57 wrongful death and personal injury
lawsuits arising out of a stampede of patrons at the E2 Nightclub on Febmary 17, 2003. The cases allege
that the City, in a number of ways, engaged in conduct that contributed lo the injuries or deaths. The
circuit court denied the City's motion to dismiss the cases, but certified three questions of law for
interlocutory appeal lo the Illinois appellate court. Upon review, the appellate court addressed one of the
quesfions so certified and found that the City is immune from liability for its alleged failure to enforce
laws or court orders or provide police protection, effectively resolving all three questions in the City's
favor. The plaintiffs filed a pefition for leave lo appeal lo the Illinois Supreme Court for further review.
In a September 24, 2008 order, the Supreme Court denied the plaintiffs petition and let stand the
appellate court's favorable decision. Effectively, the vast majority of issues in the case have been
resolved in the City's favor. There is only one issue remaining before the circuit court. As to that issue,
the City previously filed a summary judgment morion, and the parties have fully briefed it. The City
cannot predict whether the circuit court will grant the City's motion; regardless, the City will continue to
defend each case vigorously.
Parking Meiers Litigation. On December 4, 2008, the City entered into the Chicago Metered
Parking System Concession Agreement (the "Agreement") with Chicago Parking Meiers, LLC (the
"Concessionaire"), whereby the Concessionaire paid the City approximately $1,151 billion, and the City
granted the Concessionaire the right to operate the City's metered parking system, including the right to
collect revenues derived from the metered parking spaces. The City Comptroller (along with the State's
Comptroller) has been named as a defendant in a case brought by the Independent Voters of Illinois
Independent Precinct Organization and an individual plaintiff, arguing that certain provisions of the
Agreement are illegal or unconstitutional, and requesting that the City and the Slate be enjoined from
making certain expenditures in connection with the City's metered parking system. In March, 2010, the
Circuit Court of Cook County granted the motion lo dismiss the plaintiffs' complaint but gave the

23

 plaintiffs leave to file an amended complaint. The plainfiffs have filed an amended complaint. While the
City cannot predict the outcome of this litigation, the City will continue to defend the case vigorously.
Automatic Red-Light Ticketing Litigation. In July 2010, individual plainfiffs, seeking to
maintain a class action, filed suit against the City and other defendants in the Circuit Court. The plaintiffs
allege that the Slate statute goveming the use of automated red-light ticketing systems violates several
provisions of the State Constitufion, and that all such systems are therefore unlawful. The alleged
grounds are that the Stale statute constitutes special legislation, violates the uniformity requirement, and
violates equal protection because most of the Slate's African-American population lives in the eight
counfics covered by the statute. Plaintiffs seek to enjoin the operation of the City's red-light ficketing
system, along with all others, and restitution of fines paid. Although the City cannot predict the outcome
of this litigation, the City will vigorously defend this suit.
Firefighter Hiring Process Litigation. A class action was filed challenging the 1995 exam the
City used as the first step of the hiring process for firefighter candidates. The City admitted in the district
court that the exam had a disparate impact on African-American candidates but argued that the case was
filed too late. The City also defended the exam on the basis that it was job-related and valid, and that the
cut-off score was consistent with business necessity. The district court rejected all these defenses and
entered judgment against the City. The court of appeals reversed, agreeing that the case was filed too
late. The Supreme Court then reversed and remanded the case to the court of appeals. The City is unable
to predict the outcome of this litigation.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS
The basic financial statements of the City as of and for the year ended December 31, 2009,
included in APPENDIX C lo this Official Statement, have been audited by Deloitte & Touche LLP,
independent auditors, as slated in their report appearing in APPENDIX C.
CERTAIN VERIFICATIONS
Robert Thomas CPA, LLC, Shawnee Mission, Kansas (the "Verification Agent"), independent
certified public accountants, upon delivery of the Bonds, will deliver lo the City a report stating that the
firm, based upon infomiation supplied by the City in connection wilh such matters, has reviewed the
mathematical accuracy of certain computations relating to (i) the sufficiency of the maturing principal of
and interest on the Govemment Securities to pay, when due, the principal and redemption price of and
interest on the Refunded Bonds as described under the capfion "PLAN OF FINANCITNG — Refunding of
Certain General Obligation Bonds," and (ii) the actuarial yields on the Series 201 OA Bonds and the
Govemment Securities, such computations with respect to such yields to be used to support the
conclusion of Co-Bond Counsel that the Series 2010A Bonds are not "arbitrage bonds" under Section 148
of the Code and the regulations promulgated thereunder. The Verification Agent will express no opinion
on the attainability of any assumptions or the tax-exempt status of the Series 201 OA Bonds.
RATINGS
The Bonds are rated "
" by S&P, "
" by Moody's and "
" by Fitch based upon each
rating agency's assessment of the creditworthiness of the City. A rating reflects only the view of the
rating agency giving such raring. An explanafion of the significance of such rating may be obtained from
such organization. There is no assurance that any rating will continue for any given period of time or that
any rating will nol be revised downward or withdrawn entirely if, in the judgment of the rating agency,
circumstances so warrant. Any such downward revision or withdrawal of a rating may have an adverse
effect on the price at which the Bonds may be resold.
24

 FINANCIAL ADVISOR
The City has engaged Gardner, Underwood & Bacon-Illinois, LLC, lo act as financial advisor
(the "Financial Advisor") in connecnon with the issuance and sale of the Bonds. Under the terms of its
engagement, the Financial Advisor is not obligated to undertake, and has not undertaken lo make, an
independent verification of, or to assume responsibility for the accuracy, completeness or faimess of the
information contained in this Official Statement.
UNDERWRITING
The Underwriters have agreed, subject to certain conditions, to purchase the Series 2010A Bonds
at a price equal to $
(which represents the aggregate principal amount of the Series 201 OA
Bonds less an Underwriters' discount of $
plus/less a net reoffering premium/discount of
$
), to purchase the Taxable Series 201 OB Bonds at a price equal to $
(which
represents the aggregate principal amount of the Series 2010B Bonds less an Underwriters' discount of
$
) and to purchase the Taxable Series 20I0C Bonds at a price equal to $
(which represents the aggregate principal amount of the Series 20I0C Bonds less an Underwriters'
discount of $
). The Underwriters have agreed, subject to certain condifions, to purchase the
Bonds at a price equal to $
(which represents the aggregate principal amounl of the Bonds
less an Underwriters' discount of $
).
The obligation of the Underwriters to accept delivery of the Bonds is subject to various
conditions set forth in a Bond Purchase Agreement between the Underwriters and the City. The
Underwriters are obligated to purchase all of the Bonds if any of the Bonds are purchased.
Loop Capital Markets LLC, an underwriter of the Bonds, has entered into an agreement (the
"Distribution Agreement") with UBS Financial Services Inc. for the retail distribufion of certain
municipal securities offerings at the original issue prices. Pursuant to the Distribution Agreement, Loop
Capital Markets LLC will share a portion of its underwrifing compensation with respect to the Bonds with
UBS Financial Services Inc.
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association ("WFBNA"), one of the underwriters of the Bonds, has
entered into an agreement (the "Distribufion Agreement") wilh Wells Fargo Advisors, LLC ("WFA") for
the retail distribution of certain municipal securities offerings, including the Bonds. Pursuant to the
Distribution Agreement, WFBNA will share a portion of its underwrifing compensation with respect to
the Bonds with WFA. WFBNA and WFA are both subsidiaries of Wells Fargo & Company.
Wells Fargo Securities is the trade name for certain capital markets and investment banking
services of Wells Fargo & Company and its subsidiaries, including Wells Fargo Bank, National
Association. Wells Fargo Bank, National Association is serving as one of the underwriters for the Bonds
and as Bond Registrar for the Bonds.

25

 TAX MATTERS
Series 2010A Bonds
Summary of Co-Bond Counsel Opinion
Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP and Cotillas and Associates, Co-Bond Counsel, are of the opinion
that under existing law, interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds is not includable in the gross income of the
owners thereof for federal income tax purposes. I f there is continuing compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Intemal Revenue Code of 1986 (the "Code"), Co-Bond Counsel arc of the opinion
that interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds will continue to be excluded from the gross income of the owners
thereof for federal income tax purposes. In addition, interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds is not an item of
tax preference for purposes of compufing individual or corporate altemafive minimum taxable income.
However, interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds is includable in corporate camings and profits and therefore
must be taken into account when computing corporate alternative minimum taxable income for purposes
of the corporate altemative minimum tax.
Interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds is not exempt from Illinois income taxes.
Exclusion from Gross Income: Requirements
The Code contains certain requirements that must be satisfied from and after the date of issuance
of the Series 201 OA Bonds in order to preserve the exclusion from gross income for federal income tax
purposes of interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds. These requirements relate to the use and investment of
the proceeds of the Series 201 OA Bonds, the payment of certain amounts to the United States, the security
and source of payment of the Series 201 OA Bonds and the use of the propertyfinancedwith the proceeds
of the Series 201 OA Bonds. Among these specific requirements arc the following:
Inwestment Restrictions. Except during certain "temporary periods," proceeds of the Series
201 OA Bonds and investment camings thereon (other than amounts held in a reasonably required reserve
or replacement fund, if any, or as part of a "minor portion") may generally not be invested in investments
having a yield that is materially higher than the yield on the Series 201 OA Bonds.
Rebate of Permissible Arbitrage Earnings. Eamings from the investment of the "gross proceeds"
of the Series 201 OA Bonds in excess of the eamings that would have been realized if such investments
had been made at a yield equal to the yield on the Series 201 OA Bonds arc required to be paid to the
United States at periodic intervals. For this purpose, the term "gross proceeds" includes the original
proceeds of the Series 201 OA Bonds, amounts received as a result of investing such proceeds and
amounts to be used to pay debt service on the Series 201 OA Bonds.
Limitations on Private Use. The Code includes limitations on the amount of Series 201 OA Bond
proceeds that may be used in the trade or business o f or used lo make or finance loans to, persons other
than govemmental units.
Covenants to Comply
The City has covenanted to comply with the requirements of the Code relating to the exclusion
from gross income for federal income tax purposes of interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds.

26

 Risk of Non-Compliance
In the event that the City fails to comply wilh the requirements of the Code, interest on the Series
201 OA Bonds may become includable in the gross income of the owners thereof for federal income tax
purposes retroactively to the dale of issue. In such event, the City's agreements with the owners of the
Series 2010A Bonds require neither acceleration of payment of principal of or interest on the Series
201 OA Bonds nor payment of any additional interest or penalties to the owners of the Series 201 OA
Bonds.
Federal Income Tax Consequences
Pursuant to Section 103 of the Code, interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds is not includable in the
gross income of the owners thereof for federal income tax purposes. However, the Code contains a
number of other provisions relafing to the treatment of interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds that may affect
the taxation of certain types of owners, depending on their particular tax situations. Some of the
potentially applicable federal income tax provisions are described in general terms below.
PROSPECTIVE PURCHASERS SHOULD CONSULT THEIR TAX ADVISORS CONCERNING THE
PARTICULAR FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES OF THEIR OWNERSHIP OF THE
BONDS.
Cost of Cany. Owners of the Series 201 OA Bonds will generally be denied a deduction for
otherwise deductible interest on any debt that is treated for federal income tax purposes as incurred or
continued to purchase or carry the Series 2010A Bonds. Financial institutions are denied a deducfion for
their otherwise allowable interest expense in an amount determined by reference to their adjusted basis in
the Series 201 OA Bonds.
Corporate Owners. Interest on the Series 2010A Bonds is generally taken into account in
computing eamings and profits of a corporation and consequently may be subject to federal income taxes
based thereon. Thus, for example, interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds is taken into account not only in
computing the corporate altemative minimum tax but also the branch profits tax imposed on certain
foreign corporations, the passive investment income tax imposed on certain S corporations, and the
accumulated eamings tax.
Individual Owners. Receipt of interest on the Series 2010A Bonds may increase the amounl of
social security and railroad retirement benefits included in the gross income of the recipients thereof for
federal income tax purposes.
Certain Blue Cross or Blue Shield Organizations. Receipt of interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds
may reduce a special deduction otherwise available to certain Blue Cross or Blue Shield organizations.
Property or Casualty Insurance Companies. Receipt of interest on the Series 20 lOA Bonds may
reduce otherwise deductible underwriting losses of a property or casualty insurance company.
Foreign Personal Holding Company Income. A United States shareholder of a foreign personal
holding company may realize taxable income to the extent that interest on the Series 201 OA Bonds held
by such a company is properiy allocable to the shareholder.
Series 201 OA Bonds Purchased at a Premium or at a Discount
The difference (if any) between the initial price at which a substantial amount of each maturity of
the Series 201 OA Bonds is sold to the public (the "Offering Price") and the principal amount payable at

27

 maturity of such Scries 201 OA Bonds is given special treatment for federal income tax purposes. If the
Offering Price is higher than the maturity value of a Series 201 OA Bond, the difference between the two
is known as ""bond premium;" if the Offering Price is lower than the maturity value of a Series 2010A
Bond, the difference between the two is known as ""original issue discount."
Bond premium and original issue discount are amortized over the term of a Series 2010A Bond
on the basis of the owner's yield from the date of purchase to the date of maturity, compounded at the end
of each accmal period of one year or less with straight line interpolation between compounding dates, as
provided more specifically in the Income Tax Regulations. The amount of bond premium accming
during each period is subtracted from the owner's tax basis in the Scries 201 OA Bond. The amount of
original issue discount accming during each period is treated as interest that is excludable from the gross
income of the owner of such Series 2010A Bond for federal income tax purposes, to the same extent and
with the same limitafions as current interest, and is added to the owner's tax basis in the Scries 201 OA
Bond. A Series 2010A Bond's adjusted tax basis is used to determine whether, and lo what extent, the
owner realizes taxable gain or loss upon the disposition of the Series 2010A Bond (whether by reason of
sale, acceleration, redemption prior to maturity or payment at maturity of the Series 201 OA Bond).
Owners who purchase Series 201 OA Bonds at a price other than the Offering Price, after the
termination of the initial public offering or at a market discount should consult their tax advisors with
respect to the tax consequences of their ownership of the Series 2010A Bonds. In addition, owners of
Series 2010A Bonds should consuh their tax advisors with respect to the state and local tax consequences
of owning the Series 201 OA Bonds; under the applicable provisions of state or local income tax law, bond
premium and original issue discount may give rise lo taxable income at different times and in different
amounts than they do for federal income tax purposes.
Taxable Bonds
General
Interest on the Taxable Bonds is not excludable from gross income of the owners thereof for
federal income tax purposes. In addition, interest on the Taxable Bonds is not exempt from State of
Illinois income taxes.
Certain United Stales Federal Income Tax Consequences
The following is a summary of the principal United States federal income tax consequences of
ownership of Taxable Bonds. It deals only with Taxable Bonds held as capital assets by initial
purchasers, and not with special classes of holders, such as dealers in securities or currencies, banks, taxexempt organizations, life insurance companies, persons that hold Taxable Bonds that are a hedge or that
are hedged against currency risks or that are part of a straddle or conversion transaction, or persons whose
functional currency is not the U.S. dollar. The summary is based on the Code, its legislative hisloty,
existing and proposed regulations thereunder, published mlings and court decisions, all as currently in
effect and all subject lo change at any lime, perhaps with retroactive effect.
The Code contains a number of provisions relating to the taxation of the Taxable Bonds
(including bin not limited to the freatment of and accounting for interest, premium, original issue discount
and market discount thereon, gain from the disposition thereof and withholding tax on income therefrom)
that may affect the taxation of certain owners, depending on their particular tax situations. Prospective
purchasers of Taxable Bonds should consult their own tax advisors conceming the consequences, in their
particular circumstances, under the Code and the laws of any other taxing jurisdiction, of ownership of
Taxable Bonds.

28

 Payments of Interest lo United States Holders
Interest on the Taxable Bonds will be taxable to a United Slates Holder (as defined below) as
ordinary income at the lime it is received or accmed, depending on the holder's method of accounting for
lax purposes in accordance wilh generally applicable principles.
A United States Holder for purposes of this discussion is a beneficial owner of a Taxable Bond
for U.S. federal income lax law purposes and:
a citizen or resident of the United States;
a corporation or partnership which is created or organized in or under the laws of the
United States or of any political subdivision thereof;
an estate the income of which is subject to United Slates federal income taxation
regardless of its source; or
a tmst if (1) a court within the United Stales is able lo exercise primary supervision over
the administration of the tmst and one or more United States persons have the authority to
control all substantial decisions of the tmst or (2) the tmst was in existence on August 10,
1996 and properiy elected lo continue to be treated as a U.S. person.
The term "Non-U.S. Holder" refers to any beneficial owner of a Taxable Bond who or which is
nol a United States Holder.
Original Issue Discount
In general, i f the excess of a Taxable Bond's stated redemption price at maturity over its issue
price is le5S than one-quarter of one percent (0.25%) of the Taxable Bond's stated redemption price at
maturity multiplied by the number of complete years lo its maturity, then such excess, i f any, constitutes
de minimis original issue discount. In such case, the Taxable Bond is not considered to be a Taxable
Bond issued with original issue discount that is required to be included in income calculated using a
constant-yield method without regard lo the receipt of cash attributable lo such income. Such e.xcess will
be treated as gain recognized upon retirement of the Taxable Bond.
Sale and Retirement of the Taxable Bonds
United States Holders of Taxable Bonds will recognize gain or loss on the sale, redemption,
retirement or other disposition of such Taxable Bonds. The gain or loss is measured by the difference
between the amount realized on the disposition of the Taxable Bond and the United States Holder's
adjusted tax basis in the Taxable Bond. Such gain or loss will be capital gain or loss, except lo the extent
of accmed market discount not previously included in income, and will be long term capital gain or loss if
at the time of disposition such Taxable Bond has been held for more than one year.
United States Federal Income Tax Considerations for Non-U.S. Holders
Withholding Tax on Payments of Principal and Interest on Taxable Bonds. Generally, payments
of principal and interest on a Taxable Bond will nol be subject lo U.S. federal withholding lax, provided
that in the case of an interest payment:

29

 the holder is not a bank to whom the Taxable Bonds would constitute an extension of
credit made pursuant to a loan agreement entered into in the ordinary course of its trade
or business; and
either (A) the beneficial owner of the Taxable Bond certifies lo the applicable payor or its
agent, under penalties of perjury on an IRS Form W-8BEN (or a suitable substitute form),
that such owner is not a United States person and provides such owner's name and
address or (B) a securifies clearing organization, bank or other financial institution, that
holds customers' securities in the ordinaty course of its trade or business (a "financial
institution") and holds the Taxable Bond, certifies under penalfies of perjury that such an
IRS Form W-8BEN (or suitable substitute form) has been received from the beneficial
owner by it or by a financial institution between it and the beneficial owner and ftimishes
the payor with a copy thereof
Except to the extent otherwise provided under an applicable tax treaty, a Non-U.S. Holder
generally will be taxed in the same manner as a United States Holder with respect to interest and original
issue discount payments on a Taxable Bond i f such interest and original issue discount is effecfively
connected wilh its conduct of a trade or business in the United States. Effectively connected interest and
original interest discount received by a corporate Non-U.S. Holder may also, under certain circumstances,
be subject to an additional "branch profits tax" at a 30% rate (or, if applicable, a lower treaty rate), subject
to certain adjustrtients. Such effectively connected interest and original issue discount will not be subject
to withholding tax if the holder delivers an IRS Form W-8ECI to the payor.
Gain on Disposition of the Taxable Bonds. A Holder generally will not be subject to U.S. federal
income tax on gain realized on the sale, exchange or redemption of a Taxable Bond unless:
the Holder is an individual present in the United States for 183 days or more in the year
of such sale, exchange or redemption and either (A) has a "lax home" in the United Stales
and certain other requirements are met, or (B) the gain from the disposition is attributable
to its office or other fixed place of business in the United States; or
the gain is effectively connected with your conduct of a trade or business in the United
Slates.
UiS. Federal Estate Tax. A Taxable Bond held by an individual who at the time of death is not a
citizen or resident of the United States (as specially defined for U.S. federal estate tax purposes) will not
be subject lo United Stales federal estate lax if at the time of the individual's death, payments with respect
to such Taxable Bond would not have been effectively connected with the conduct by such individual of a
trade or business in the United Slates. The United Slates federal estate lax was repealed effective
Januaty 1, 2010. In addifion, the legislation repealing the estate lax expires in 2011, and thus the estate
tax will be reinstated at that time unless future legislafion extends the repeal.
Backup Withholding and Information Reporting
United States Holders. Information reporting applies to payments of interest made by the City, or
the proceeds of the sale or other disposition of the Taxable Bond with respect to certain non-corporate
U.S. holders, and backup withholding may apply unless the recipient of such payment supplies a taxpayer
identification number, certified under penalties of perjury, as well as certain other information or
otherwise establishes an exemption from backup withholding. Any amounts withheld under the backup
withholding mles may be allowed as a refimd or a credit against that holder's U.S. federal income tax
liability provided the required information is fumished to the IRS.

30

 Non-U.S. Holders. Backup withholding and information reporting on Fonm 1099 will nol apply
lo payments of principal and interest on the Taxable Bonds by the City or its agent to a Non-U.S. Holder
provided the Non-U.S. Holder provides the certification described above under "United States Federal
Income Tax Considerations for Non-U.S. Holders-Withholding Tax on Payments of Principal and Interest
on Taxable Bonds" or otherwise establishes an exemption (provided that neither the City nor its agent has
actual knowledge that the holder is a United States person or that the conditions of any other exeinpfions
are not in fact satisfied). Interest payments made to a Non-U.S. Holder may, however, be reported to the
IRS and lo such Non-U.S. Holder on Fonn 1042-S.
Information reporting and backup withholding generally will nol apply to a payment of the
proceeds of a sale of Taxable Bonds effected outside the United States by a foreign office of a foreign
broker. However, information reporting requirements (but not backup withholding) will apply to a
payment of the proceeds of a sale of Taxable Bonds effected outside the United States by a foreign office
of a broker if the broker (i) is a United Slates person, (ii) derives 50 percent or more of its gross income
for certain periods from the conduct of a trade or business in the United States, (iii) is a "controlled
foreign corporafion" as to the United States, or (iv) is a foreign partnership that, at any time during its
taxable year is 50 percent or more (by income or capital interest) owned by United States persons or is
engaged in the conduct of a U.S. trade or business, unless in any such case the broker has documentary
evidence in its records that the holder is a Non-U.S. holder (and has no actual knowledge to the contrary)
and certain conditions are met, or the holder otherwise establishes an exemption. Payment by a United
Stales office of a broker of the proceeds of a sale of Taxable Bonds will be subject to both backup
withholding and information reporting unless the holder certifies its non-United States status under
penalties of perjury or otherwise establishes an exemption.
Any amounts withheld under the backup withholding mles may be allowed as a refund or a credit
against that holder's U.S. federal income tax liability provided the required information is fumished to the
IRS.
Circular 230 Disclaimer
The description of certain tax matters under the heading "TAX MATTERS," above is not
intended to be used, and cannot be used by any purchaser of the Bonds, for the purpose of avoiding
penalties that may be imposed on such purchaser. This advice is written to support the promotion or
marketing of the Bonds.
Prospective purchasers of the Bonds should consult their own lax advisors conceming the
particular federal, state, local and foreign tax consequences of their ownership of Bonds.
Change of Law
The opinions of Co-Bond Counsel and the descriptions of the lax law contained in this Official
Statement are based on statutes, judicial decisions, regulations, mlings, and other official interpretations
of law in existence on the dale the Bonds were issued. There can be no assurance that such law or the
interpretation thereof will nol be changed or that new provisions of law will nol be enacted or
promulgated at any lime while the Bonds are outstanding in a manner that would adversely affect the
value or the tax treatment of ownership of the Bonds.
APPROVAL OF LEGAL MATTERS
Legal matters with regard to the authorization, issuance and sale of the Bonds are subject to the
approving opinions of Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP, Chicago, Illinois, and Cotillas and Associates,

31

 Chicago, Illinois, Co-Bond Counsel, which opinions will be substantially in the forms included as
APPENDIX D hereto.
Certain legal matters will be passed upon for the City by its Corporation Counsel and for the
Underwriters by their counsel, McGaugh & Associates, Chicago, Illinois.
SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE
The City will enter inlo a Continuing Disclosure Undertaking (the "Undertaking") for the benefit
of the beneficial owners of the Bonds to send certain information annually and to provide notice of certain
events to the MSRB pursuant to the requirements of Section (b)(5) of the Rule. The MSRB has
designated its Electronic Municipal Market Access system, known as EMMA, as the system to be used
for continuing disclosures to investors. The information to be provided on an annual basis, the events that
will be noticed on an occurrence basis and a summaty of other terms of the Undertaking, including
termination, amendment and remedies, are set forth below.
A failure by the City to comply with the Undertaking will not constitute a default under the
Bonds or the Ordinance, and beneficial owners of the Bonds are limited to the remedies described in the
Undertaking. See "— Consequences of Failure of the City to Provide Information" under this caption. A
failure by the City to comply with the Undertaking must be reported in accordance with the Rule and
must be considered by any broker, dealer or municipal securities dealer before recommending the
purchase or sale of the Bonds in the secondary market. Consequently, such a failure may adversely affect
the transferability and liquidity of the Bonds and their market price.
The following is a brief summary of certain provisions of the Undertaking of the City and does
not purport lo be complete. The statements made under this caption are subject to the detailed provisions
of the Undertaking, a copy of which is available upon request from the City.
Annual Financial Information Disclosure
The City covenants that it will disseminate its Annual Financial Information and its Audited
Financial Statements (as described below) to the MSRB; The City is required to deliver such information
so that the MSRB receives the information by the dates specified in the Undertaking.
"Annual Financial Information" means infonnation generally consistent with that contained under
the caption "THE CITY — Corporate Fund" and in APPENDIX B hereto.
"Audited Financial Statements" means the audited basic financial statements of the City prepared
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to govemmental units as in effect
from time to time.
Annual Financial Information exclusive of Audited Financial Statements will be provided to the
MSRB nol more than 210 days after the last day of the City's fiscal year, which currendy is December 31.
If Audited Financial Statements are nol available when the Annual Financial Information is filed,
unaudited financial statements will be included, and Audited Financial Statements will be filed when
available.

32

 Events Notification; Material Events Disclosure
The City covenants that it will disseminate in a fimely manner to the MSRB the disclosure,of the
occurrence of an Event (as described below) that is material, as materiality is interpreted under the
Exchange Act. The "Events," certain of which may nol be applicable to the Bonds, are:
principal and interest payment delinquencies;
non-payment related defaults;
unscheduled draws on debt service reserves reflecfingfinancialdifficulties;
unscheduled draws on credit enhancements reflecting financial difficulties;
subsfitufion of credit or liquidity providers, or their failure to perform;
adverse tax opinions or events affecting the lax-exempt status of the security;
modifications to rights of security holders;
Bond calls;
defeasances;
release, substitution or sale of property securing repayment of the securities; and
raring changes.
Consequences of Failure of the City to Provide Information
The City shall give notice in a timely manner to the MSRB of any failure to provide disclosure of
Annual Financial Information and Audited Financial Statements when the same are due under the
Undertaking.
In the event of a failure of the Cily to comply with any provision of the Undertaking, the
beneficial owner of any Bond may seek mandamus or specific performance by court order, lo cause the
City to comply wilh its obligations under the Undertaking. The Undertaking provides that any court
action must be initiated in the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois. A default under the Undertaking
shall not be deemed a default under the Bonds or the Ordinance, and the sole remedy under the
Undertaking in the event of any failure of the City to comply with the Undertaking shall be an action to
compel performance.
The City is currently in compliance wilh undertakings previously entered into by it pursuant to
the Rule. The City has had to take corrective action with respect lo its undertakings for its Single Family
Mortgage Revenue Bonds issued from 1996 to 2002. See "— Corrective Action Related to Certain Bond
Disclosure Requirements" below.
Amendment; Waiver
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Undertaking, the City may amend the Undertaking,
and any provision of the Undertaking may be waived, ifi

33

 (a)
(i)
the amendment or waiver is made in connection with a change in circumstances
that arises from a change in legal requirements, change in law, or change in the identity, nature or status
of the City or type of business conducted;
(ii)
the Undertaking, as amended, or the provision, as waived, would have complied with the
requirements of the Rule at the time of the primaty offering, after taking inlo accoiml any amendments or
interpretations of the Rule, as well as any change in circumstances; and
(iii)
the amendment or waiver does not materially impair the interests of the beneficial owners
of the Bonds, as determined by a party unaffiliated with the City (such as bond counsel), or by approving
vole of the owners of the Bonds pursuant lo the terms of the Ordinance at the lime of the amendment or
waiver; or
(b)

the amendment or waiver is otherwise permitted by the Rule.

Termination of Undertaking
The Undertaking shall be terminated if the Cily shall no longer have any legal liability for any
obligation on or relating to repayment of the Bonds. I f this provision is applicable, the City shall give
nofice in a timely manner to the MSRB.
Additional Information
Nothing in the Undertaking shall be deemed to prevent the City from disseminating any other
information, using the means of dissemination set forth in the Undertaking or any other means of
communication, or including any other informafion in any Annual Financial Information or Audited
Financial Statements or notice of occurrence of a material Event, in addition to that which is required by
the Undertaking. I f the City chooses lo include any information in any Annual Financial Information or
Audited Financial Statements or notice of occurrence of a material Event in addition to that which is
specifically required by the Undertaking, the City shall have no obligation under the Undertaking to
update such information or include it in any fiittire Annual Financial Information or Audited Financial
Statements or notice of occurrence of an Event.
Corrective Action Related lo Certain Bond Disclosure Requirements
While the City is currenfiy in compliance with respect lo its undertakings lo file Annual Financial
Information relating lo all previously issued bonds and the Bonds in accordance with the Rule, the City
and the disseminafion agent for the City's Collateralized Single Family Mortgage Revenue Bonds issued
from 1996 lo 2002 (the "Single Family Mortgage Bonds") did not distribute annual bond disclosure
reports for those Single Family Mortgage Bonds in a timely manner as required by Section (b)(5) of the
Rule. The City has filed current annual bond disclosure reports for those Single Family Mortgage Bonds
with the tmstee for the Single Family Mortgage Bonds and such tmstee has disseminated such reports lo
each Nationally Recognized Municipal Securities! Information Reposiloty then recognized by the
Commission for purposes of the Rule with respect to those previously issued Single Family Mortgage
Bonds and has complied with the Rule for Collateralized Single Family Mortgage Revenue Bonds issued
subsequent lo 2002.

34

 MISCELLANEOUS
The foregoing summaries or descriptions of provisions of the Ordinance and the Undertaking and
all references lo other materials nol purporting to be quoted in full, are qualified in their entirety by
reference lo the complete provisions of the documents and other materials summarized or described.
Copies of these documents may be obtained from the Chief Financial Officer of the City.
The Bonds are authorized and are being issued pursuant to the City Council's approval under the
powers of the City as a home mle unit under Article VII of the Illinois Constitution of 1970. This Official
Statement has been authorized by the City Council.
CITY OF CHICAGO

By:.
Chief Financial Officer

35

  PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

 

APPENDIX A
CITY OF CHICAGO

REAL PROPERTY TAX SYSTEM AND LIMITS

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Real Property Assessment, Tax Levy and Collection Procedures
General
Assessment
Equalization
Exempfions
?
Tax Levy
Collection

A-1
A-1
A-1
A-2
A-2
A-4
A-5

Propert Tax Limits
Stale Legislation
State of Illinois
The City

A-6
A-6
A-6
A-6

 REAL PROPERTY ASSESSMENT, TAX LEVY AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES
General
Information under this caption provides a general summary of the current procedures for real
property assessment, tax levy and tax collection in Cook County (the "County"). The following is not an
exhaustive discussion, nor can there be any assurance that the procedures described under this caption
will not be changed either retroactively or prospecfively. The Illinois laws relafing to real property
taxation are contained in the Illinois Properly Tax Code (the "Property Tax Code").
Substantially all (approximately 99.99 percent) of the "Equalized Assessed Valuation" (described
below) of taxable property in the City is located in the County. The remainder is located in DuPagc
County. Accordingly, unless otherwise indicated, the information set forth under this caption and
elsewhere in this Official Statement wilh respect to taxable property in the City, does not reflect the
portion situated in DuPage County.
Assessment
The Cook County Assessor (the "Assessor") is responsible for the assessment of all taxable real
property within the County, except for certain railroad property and pollution control equipment assessed
directly by the State. One-third of the real property in the County is reassessed each year on a repealing
triennial schedule established by the Assessor. The City was reassessed in 2009. In 2008, the suburbs in
the westem and southem portions of the County were reassessed. The suburbs in the northem and
northwestem portions of the County will be reassessed in 2010.
Real property in the County is separated into various classifications for assessment purposes.
After the Assessor establishes the fair cash value of a parcel of land, that value is mulfiplied by one of the
classification percentages to arrive at the assessed valuafion (the "Assessed Valuation") for the parcel.
Beginning with the 2009 tax year, the classification percentages range from 10 to 25 percent depending
on the type of property (e.g., residential, industrial, commercial) and whether it qualifies for certain
incentives for reduced rates. For prior years, the classification percentages ranged from 16 to 38 percent.
The Cook County Board of Commissioners has adopted various amendments to the County's
Real Property Assessment Classification Ordinance (the "Classitication Ordinance"), pursuant to which
the Assessed Valuation of real property is established. Among other things, these amendments have
reduced certain property classification percentages, lengthened certain renewal periods of classifications
and created new property classifications.
The Assessor has established procedures enabling taxpayers to contest the Assessor's tentative
Assessed Valuations. Once the Assessor certifies final Assessed Valuations, a taxpayer can seek review
of its assessment by the Cook County Board of Review (the "Board of Review"). The Board of Review
has powers to review and adjust Assessed Valuations set by the Assessor. Owners of property are able to
appeal decisions of the Board of Review to the Illinois Property Tax Appeal Board (the "PTAB"), a statewide administrative body, or to the Circuit Court of Cook County (the "Circuit Court"). The P TAB has
the power to determine the Assessed Valuation of real property based on equity and the weight of the
evidence. Based on the amount of the proposed change in assessed valuation, taxpayers may appeal
decisions of the P TAB to either the Circuit Court or the Illinois Appellate Court under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law.
In a series of PTAB decisions, the PTAB reduced the assessed valuations of certain commercial
and industrial property in the County based upon the application of median levels of assessment derived

A-1

 from Illinois Department of Revenue sales-ratio studies instead of utilizing the assessment percentages
provided in the Classificafion Ordinance. On appeal, the Illinois Appellate Court determined that it was
improper for the PTAB, on its own initiative, to use the sales-ratio studies when such studies were not
even raised as an issue by the taxpayer before the Board of Review or in its appeal lo the PTAB.
The Appellate Court decisions do not preclude a taxpayer in a properly presented case from
introducing into evidence sales-ratio studies for the purpose of obtaining an assessment below that which
would result from application of the Classification Ordinance. No prediction can be made whether any
currently pending or future case would be successfLil. The City believes that the impact of any such case
on the City would be minimal, as the City's ability to levy or collect real property taxes would be
unaffected.
As an altemative to seeking review of Assessed Valuations by the PTAB, taxpayers who have
first exhausted their remedies before the Board of Review may file an objection in the Circuit Court. The
City filed a pefition to intervene in certain of these proceedings for the first time in 2003, but the Ciicuit
Court denied the City's petition in early 2004. The City appealed the Circuit Court decision. On appeal,
the Circuit Court decision was reversed and the matter was remanded to the Circuit Court with
instmcfions to allow the City to proceed with its petitions to intervene. In addition, in cases where the
Assessor agrees that an assessment error has been made after tax bills have been issued, the Assessor can
correct the Assessed Valuation, and thus reduce the amount of taxes due, by issuing a Certificate of Error.
Equalization
After the Assessed Valuation for each parcel of real estate in a county has been determined for a
given year including any revisions made by the Board of Review, the Illinois Department of Revenue
reviews the assessments and determines an equalization factor (the "Equalization Factor"), commonly
called the "multiplier," for each county. The purpose of equalization is lo bring the aggregate assessed
value of all real property, except farmland and undeveloped coal, in each county to the statutory
requirement of 33-1/3 percent of estimated fair cash value. Adjustments in Assessed Valuation made by
the PTAB or the courts are not reflected in the Equalization Factor. The Assessed Valuafion of each
parcel of real estate in the County is multiplied by the County's Equalization Factor to determine the
parcel's equalized assessed valuation (the "Equalized Assessed Valuafion").
The Equalized Assessed Valuation for each parcel is the final property valuation used for
determinafion of tax liability. The aggregate Equalized Assessed Valuafion for all parcels in any taxing
body's jurisdiction, after reduction for all applicable exeinpfions, plus the valuation of property assessed
directly by the State, constitutes the total real estate tax base for the taxing body and is the figure used to
calculate lax rales (the "Assessment Base"). The Equalization Factor for a given year is used in
computing the taxes extended for collection in the following year. The Equalization Factors for levy years
1999 through 2008 are listed in APPENDIX B in the table captioned "Property Tax Infonnation."
In 1991, legislation was enacted by the State which provided that for 1992 and for subsequent
years' tax levies, the Equalized Assessed Valuafion used to determine any applicable tax limits is the one
for the immediately preceding year and not the current year. This legislation impacts taxing districts wilh
rale limits only and currently does not apply to the City. See "Property Tax Limits" below.
Exemptions
The Illinois Constitution allows homestead exemptions for residential property. Pursuant to the
Illinois Property Tax Code, property must be occupied by the owner as a principal residence on January 1
of the tax year for which the exemption will be claimed.

A-2

 The annual general homestead exemption provides for the reduction of the Equalized Assessed
Valuation ("EAV") of certain properly owned and used exclusively for residenfial purposes by the
amount of the increase over the 1977 EAV, up to a maximum reduction of S5,000. There is an additional
homestead exemption for senior citizens (individuals at least 65 years of age), for whom the Assessor is
authorized to reduce the EAV by a maximum of $4,000. An additional exemption is available for homes
owned and exclusively used for residential purposes by disabled veterans or their spouses, for whom the
Assessor is authorized to annually exempt up lo $70,000 of the Assessed Valuafion. In addition, there is a
homestead exemption of $5,000 for the taxable year in which a veteran retums from active duty in an
armed conflict involving the armed forces of the United States. An exempfion is available for homestead
improvements by an owner of a single family residence of up lo $75,000 of the increase in the fair cash
value of a home due to certain home improvements lo an existing stmcture for at least four years from the
date the improvement is completed and occupied. Senior citizens whose household income is $55,000 or
less, and who are either the owner of record or have a legal or equitable interest in the property, qualify to
have the EAV of their property frozen in the year in which they first qualify for the so-called "freeze" and
each year thereafter in which the qualifying criteria are maintained.
On July 12, 2004, the Property Tax Code was amended to permit each county in the Slate, by
enacting an ordinance within six months of the effective dale of the law, to limit fijture increases in the
taxable value of residenfial property in such a county to an annual increase of not more than 7% per year.
This is known as the Altemative Homestead Exemption. Upon adoption of such an ordinance, homestead
property will generally be entitled lo an annual homestead exemption equal to the difference between the
property's EAV and the property's "adjusted homestead value." The County adopted an ordinance
electing to be govemed by this law. The exemption provided for under this law cannot exceed $20,000 in
any taxable year. The purpose of the law is to reduce the increase in the taxable value of residential
property that otherwise occurs when home values rise rapidly.
In 2007, the Altemative Homestead Exemption law enacted in 2004 was allowed to sunset. Later
in 2007, Public Act 95-0644 was enacted, which extended the Altemative Homestead Exemption law for
an additional three years, subject to certain revisions and adjustments lo the prior law. The extension
enacted in 2007 expired for properties located in the City with the 2008 assessment. On August 1, 2010,
Public Act 96-1418 was enacted to extend the Altemative Homestead Exempfion for three more years.
The maximum exemption is $20,000 for the first year, $16,000 for the second year, and $12,000 for the
third year. This exemption is being applied over a three-year period: 2009 through 2011 in the City,
2010 through 2012 in the northem and northwestem portions of the County, and 2011 through 2013 in the
westem and southem portions of the County.
In October 2004, the Chicagoland Chamber of Commerce, along with mulfiple other plaintiffs,
filed a Complaint for Declaraloty and Injuncfive Relief in the Circuit Court, requesting the court lo enter
an order declaring the 2004 Altemative Homestead Exemption law unconsfitutional and enjoining the
applicafion and enforcement of its provisions. (The Chicagoland Chamber of Commerce, et al. v. Maria
Pappas, et al., 04 CH 16874). On April 22, 2005, the circuit court dismissed the complaint, and that
mling was appealed. On appeal, the Appellate Court affirmed the decision of the Circuit Court.
Aside from homestead exemptions, upon application, review and approval by the Board of
Review, or upon an appeal to the Illinois Department of Revenue, there are exemptions generally
available for properties of religious, charitable, and educational organizafions, as well as units of federal,
state and local governments.
Additionally, counties have been authorized to create special property tax exempfions in longestablished residential areas or in areas of deteriorated, vacant or abandoned homes and properties. Under
such an exemption, long-lime, residential owner-occupants in eligible areas would be entitled to a deferral

A-3

 or exemption from that portion of property taxes resulfing from an increase in market value because of
refurbishment or renovation of other residences or constmction of new residences in the area. On June 5,
2001, the County enacted the Longtime Homeowner Ordinance, which provides property tax relief from
dramatic rises in property taxes directly or indirectly attributable to gentrification in the form of an
exemption. This is generally applicable to homeowners: (i) who have resided in their homes for 10
consecufive years (or five consecufive years for homeowners who have received assistance in the
acquisition of the property as part of a govemment or nonprofit housing program), (ii) whose annual
household income for the year of the homeowner's trieimial assessment does not exceed 115 percent of
the Chicago Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area median income as defined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, (iii) whose property has increased in assessed value to a
level exceeding 150 percent of the current average assessed value for properties in the assessment district
where the property is located, and (iv) who, for any triennial assessment cycle, did not cause a substantial
improvement which resulted in an increase in the property's fair cash value in excess of the $45,000
allowance set forth in the Property Tax Code.
Tax Levy
There are over 800 units of local govemment (the "Units") located in whole or in part in the
County that have taxing power. The major Units having taxing power over property within the City are
the City, the Chicago Park District, the Board of Edueafion of the City of Chicago, the School Finance
Authority, Commimity College District No. 508, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater
Chicago, the County and the Forest Preserve District of Cook County.
As part of the annual budgetary process of the Units, each year in which the determination is
made to levy real estate taxes, proceedings are adopted by the goveming body for each Unit. The tax levy
proceedings impose the Units' respective real estate taxes in terms of a dollar amount. Each Unit certifies
its real estate tax levy, as established by the proceedings, to the County Clerk's Office. The remaining
administrafion and collection of the real estate taxes is statutorily assigned to the County Clerk and the
County Treasurer, who is also the County Collector (the "County Collector").
After the Units file their annual tax levies, the County Clerk computes the annual tax rate for each
Unit by dividing the levy of each Unit by the Assessment Base of the respective Unit. If any tax rate thus
calculated or any component of such a tax rale (such as a levy for a particular fund) exceeds any
applicable statutory rate limit, the Coimty Clerk disregards the excessive rate and applies the maximum
rate permitted by law.
The County Clerk then computes the total tax rale applicable to each parcel of real property by
aggrcgafing the tax rates of all the Units having jurisdiction over the particular parcel. The County Clerk
enters in the books prepared for the County Collector (the "Warrant Books") the tax (determined by
mulfiplying that total tax rate by the Equalized Assessed Valuation of that parcel), along with the tax
rates, the Assessed Valuation and the Equalized Assessed Valuation. The Warrant Books are the County
Collector's authority for the collecfion of taxes and are used by the County Collector as the basis for
issuing tax bills to all property owners.
The Illinois Tmth in Taxation Law (the "Tmth in Taxation Law") contained within the Property
Tax Code imposes procedural limitations on a Unit's real estate taxing powers and requires that notice in
prescribed form must be published if the aggregate annual levy is estimated to exceed 105 percent of the
levy of the preceding year, exclusive of levies for debt service, levies made for the purpose of paying
amounts due under public building commission leases and election costs. A public hearing must also be
held, which may not be in conjunction with the budget hearing of the Unit on the adoption of the annual
levy. No amounl in excess of 105 percent of the preceding year's levy may be used as the basis for

A-4

 issuing tax bills to property owners unless the levy is accompanied by certification of compliance wilh the
foregoing procedures. The Truth in Taxation Law does not impose any limitations on the rate or amount
of the levy to pay principal of and interest on the general obligations bonds and notes of the City.
Collection
Property taxes are collected by the County Collector,''who remits lo each Unit its share of the
collections. Taxes levied in one year become payable during the following year in two installments, the
first due on March 1 and the second on the later of August 1 or 30 days after the mailing of the lax bills.
The first installment is an estimated bill calculated at 55% of the prior year's tax bill. The second
installment is for the balance of the current year's tax bill, and is based on the current levy, assessed value
and Equalizafion Factor and applicable tax rates, and reflects any changes from the prior year in those
factors. Taxes on railroad real property used for transportation purposes are payable in one lump sum on
the same date as the second installment.
The following table sets forth the second installment penalty dale during the last 10 years; the
first installment penalty date has been March 2 for all years.
Second Installment
Penalty Date
December 1, 2009
November 3, 2008
December 3, 2007
September 1, 2006
November 1, 2005
November 15, 2004
October 1, 2003
November 1, 2002
November 1, 2001
October 2, 2000

Tax Year
2008
2007
2006
2005
2004
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999

The County may provide for tax bills to be payable in four installments instead of two. The
County has nol determined to require payment of tax bills in four installments. During the periods of peak
collecfions, lax receipts are forwarded to each Unit not less than weekly.
At the end of each collection year, the County Collector presents the Warrant Books to the Circuit
Court and applies for a judgment for all unpaid taxes. The court order resulting from the application for
judgment provides for an aimual sale of all unpaid taxes shown on the year's Warrant Books (the "Annual
Tax Sale"). The Anriual Tax Sale is a public sale, at which time successful tax buyers pay the unpaid
taxes plus penalties. Unpaid taxes accme penalties at the rate of 1.5 percent per month from their due date
until the date of sale. Taxpayers can redeem their property by paying the amount paid at the sale, plus a
maximum of 18 percent for each six-month period after the sale. I f no redempfion is made within the
applicable redemption period (ranging from six months to two and one-half years depending on the type
and occupancy of the property) and the tax buyer tiles a petition in Circuit Court, notifying the necessaty
parties in accordance with applicable law, the tax buyer receives a deed lo the properfy. In addition, there
are miscellaneous statutory provisions for foreclosure of tax liens.
If there is no sale of the tax lien on a parcel of property at the Annual Tax Sale, the taxes are
forfeited and eligible to be purchased at any time thereafter at an amount equal to all delinquent taxes,
interest and certain other costs to the date of purchase. Redemption periods and procedures are the same

A-5

 as applicable to the Annual Tax Sale, except that a different penalty rate may apply depending on the
length of the redemption period.
A scavenger sale (the "Scavenger Sale"), like the Annual Tax Sale, is a sale of unpaid taxes. A
Scavenger Sale must be held, at a minimum, evety two years on all property in which taxes are delinquent
for two or more years. The sale price of the unpaid taxes is the amount bid at the Scavenger Sale, which
may be less than the amount of the delinquent taxes. Redemption periods vaty from six months to two
and one-half years depending upon the type and occupancy of the property.
The annual appropriation ordinance of the City has a provision for.an allowance for uncollectible
taxes. The City reviews this provision annually to determine whether adjustments are appropriate. For tax
year 2009, collectible in 2010, the allowance for uncollectible taxes is four percent of the gross lax levy.
For financial reporting purposes, uncollected taxes are written off by the City after four years, but are
fully reserved after one year.
Property Tax Limits
State Legislation
As described above under "Real Property Assessment, Tax Levy and Collection Procedures —
Exemptions," the Altemative Homestead Exemption was recently extended for an additional three years.
State of Illinois
The Property Tax Code limits (a) the amount of property taxes that can be extended for non-home
mle units of local govemment located in the County and five adjacent counties and (b) the ability of those
entifies to issue general obligation bonds without voter approval (collectively, the "State Tax Cap").
Generally, the extension of property taxes for a unit of local government subject to the State Tax Cap may
increase in any year by five percent or the percent increase in the Consumer Price Index for the preceding
year, whichever is less, or the amount approved by referendum. The State Tax Cap does not apply to
"limited bonds" payable from a unit's "debt service extension base" or to "double-barreled altemate
bonds" issued pursuant to Section 15 of the Local Govemment Debt Refomi Act.
As a home mle unit of govemment, the City is not subject to the State Tax Cap. Under the Illinois
Constitution of 1970, the enactment of legislation applying the State Tax Cap to the City and other home
mle municipalities would require a law approved by the vote of three-fifths of the members of each house
of the Illinois General Assembly and the concurrence of the Governor of the State of Illinois. It is nol
possible to predict whether, or in what form, any property tax limitations applicable to the City would be
enacted by the Illinois General Assembly. The adopfion of any such limits on the extension of real
property taxes by the Illinois General Assembly may, in fiiture years, adversely affect the City's ability to
levy property taxes to finance operations at current levels and the City's power to issue addifional general
obligation debt without the prior approval of voters.
Stale law imposes certain notice and public hearing requirements on non-home mle units of local
govemment that propose to issue general obligation debt. These requirements do not apply to the City.
The City
In 1993, the City Council of the City adopted an ordinance (the "City Tax Limitation Ordinance")
limiting, beginning in 1994, the City's aggregate property tax levy to an amounl equal to the prior year's
aggregate property tax levy (subject lo certain adjustments) plus the lesser of (a) five percent or (b) the

A-6

 percentage increase in the annualized Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers for all items, as
published by the United States Department of Labor, during the 12-month period most recently
announced prior to the filing of the preliminary budget estimate report. The City Tax Limitation
Ordinance also provides that such limitation shall not reduce that portion of each levy attributable to the
greater of (i) for any levy year, interest and principal on general obligation notes and bonds of the City
outstanding on January I , 1994, to be paid from collections of the levy made for such levy year, or
(ii) $395,255,686, the amount of the aggregate interest and principal payments on the City's general
obligation bonds and notes during the 12-month period ended January 1, 1994, subject to annual increase
in the manner described above for the aggregate levy (the "Safe Harbor"). Additional safe harbors are
provided for portions of any levy attributable to payments under installment contracts or public building
commission leases or attributable to payments due as a result of the rcftmding of general obligation bonds
or notes or of such installment contracts or leases. Pursuant to the Ordinance, the taxes levied by the City
for the payment of principal of and interest on the Bonds arc not subject to the limitations contained in the
City Tax Limitation Ordinance. See "SECURITY FOR THE BONDS — Property Tax Limits."
The tax limits set forth in the City Tax Limitation Ordinance may in future years adversely affect
the City's ability tofinanceoperations at current levels and limit the ability of the City to finance capital
improvement projects through the issuance of property-tax-supportcd bonds.

A-7

  HIS PAGE LEFT 

 

APPENDIX 
CITY OF CHICAGO

FINANCIAL AND OTHER CITY 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
The following tables reflect information for Cook County, which represents approximately 99.99
percent of the equalized assessed value of taxable property in the City, unless otherwise indicated.
Page
PROPERTY TAX INFORMATION
Assessed, Equalized Assessed and Esfimaled Value of All Taxable Property 1998-2008

B-I
B-1

Property Taxes for All City Funds, Collecfions and Estimated Allowance for
Uncollecfible Taxes 2000 - 2009
Property Tax Rates By Fund Per $100 Of Equalized Assessed Valuation 1999 - 2008

B-2
B-3

Combined Property Tax Rates of the City and Other Major Govemmental Units
Per $100 of Equalized Assessed Valuation 1999-2008
PROPERTY TAX SUPPORTED BONDED DEBT

B-4
B-5

Computation of Direct and Overlapping Bonded Debt

B-5

Selected Debt Stafisfics

B-6

Debt Service Schedule

B-7

PROPERTY TAX LEVIES BY FUND 2005 - 2009

B-8

SCHEDULE OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES IN FUND BALANCES

B-9

General Fund (Corporate) forfiscalyears ended 2005 - 2009

B-9

Special Revenue Funds for fiscal years ended 2005 - 2009

B-10

Debt Service Funds forfiscalyears ended 2005 - 2009

B-11

Capital Projects Funds forfiscalyears ended 2005 - 2009

B-12

Combining Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund Balances Noninajor
Govemmental Funds Year Ended December 31, 2009
B-13

 PROPERTY TAX INFORMATION
The following tables present statistical data regarding the City's property tax base, tax rates, tax levies and tax collections.
Assessed, Equalized Assessed and Estimated Value of All Taxable Property 1998- 2008
(Dollars in Thousands)
Assessed Value'

Tax
Levy
Year'

Class 2'

Class 3'

Class S'

1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008'°

$6,646,198
6,777,400
8,758,682
8,973,796
9,221,622
12,677,199
12,988,216
13,420,538
18,521,873
18.937,256
19,339,573

$2,047,577
2,021,411
1,966,921
1,923,256
1,865,646
2,233,572
1,883,048
1,842,613
2,006,898
1,768,927
1,602,768

$7,848,335
7,910,838
8,807,444
8,757,366
8,878,142
10,303,732
10,401,429
10,502,698
12,157,149
12,239,086
12,359,537

Other'

State
tquali'/ation
Factor'

Total

$267,007 $16,809,117
282,255 16,991,904
342,943 19,875,990
354,036 20,008,454
349,372 20,314,782
487,680 25,702,183
465,462 25,738,155
462,099 26,227,948
688,868 33,374,788
678,196 33,623,465
693,239 33,995,117

2.1799
2 2505
2 2235
2.3098
2.4689
2.4598
2.5757
2 7320
2.7076
2 8439
2 9786

Tola!
Equalized
Assessed
Value'
$33,940,146
33.354,802
40,480,077
41,981,912
45,330,892
53,168,632
55,277,096
59,304,530
69,511,192
73,645,316
80,977,543

Total
Direct
Tax
Kate
1 998
1.860
1 660
1 637
1 591
1 380
1.302
1.243
1 062
1 044
1.030

Total
Estimated
Fair Casti
Value'
$122,726,446
135,522,333
162,593,364
185,912,246
201,938,231
223,572,427
262,080,627
283,137,884
329,770,733
320,503,503
310,888,609

Total Equalized
Assessed Value
as a Percentage
or Total
Estimated Fair
Casti Value
27.66%
24 61
24.90
22.58
22 45
23.78
21 09
2095
21.08
22 98
2605

Source Cook County Assessor's Office Excludes portion oFCity in OuPage County
Taxes for each year become due and payable m the fol lowing year For example, ta^es for the 2009 tax levy became due and payable m 2010.
Residerttial. six units and under
Residential, seven units and over and mi^ed-use.
Industrial/commercial.
Vacant, not-ror-profit and indusinaL/cominercial incentive classes
Source Illinois Department of Revenue
Source: Cook County Clerk's Office Calculations are net orexcmpnons and exclude portions of ihcCiiy in DuPage Couniy Calculations also include assessment of pollution control facilities and
railroad property.
Source' The Civic Fcdeiaiion Excludes railroad propeny, pollution control facilities and portion of Cily in DuPage Couniy
° 2009 information not available ai time ofpublication

B-1

 Property Taxes for All City Funds, Collections and Estimated Allowance
for Uncollectible Taxes 2000 - 2009'
(Dollars in Thousands)
Collections within
Fiscal Year
Tax
Levy

YeaH
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

'
'
'
'*
'

Total Tax Levy
for Fiscal Year^
$672,104
687,381
707,181
719,695 '
- 719,780 '
718,071 '
719,230 '
749,351 '
834,152 '
833,206 '

Amount
$646,409
664,393
676,997
674,325
694,214
694,593
630,666
712,008
776,522
423,547

Percentage
of Levy
96.2%
96.7
95.7
93.7
96.4
96.7
87.7
95.0
93.1
50.8

Total Collections
to Date
Collections in
Subsequent
Years
S 7,157
13,078
1.3,310
25,237
9,077
8,636
69,979
27,976
42,625

-

Total Tax
Collections'*
$653,566
677,471
690,307
699,562
703,291
703,229
700,645
7.39,984
819,147
423,547

Percent of Total
Tax Collections
to Tax Levy
97.2%
98.6
97.6
97 2
97.7
97.9
97.4
98 7
98.2
50.8

Source. Cook County Clerk's OfTice
Taxes for each year become due and payable in the following year For example, taxes for the 2009 tax levy become due and payable in 2010
Does not include the levy for the Special Ser\'ices Areas and net o f collections for Tax increment {"inancmg Dlstnct.^
RcRccts tax collections through October 21.2010
Does not include the levy for the Schools Duilding and Improvement Fund, which is accounted for in an agency fund

B-2

Estimated
Allowance for
Uncollectible
Taxes
$18,538
9,910
16,874
20,133
16,489
14,842
18,250
9,180
8,997
16,386

Net
Outstanding
Taxes
Receivable

$
.

335
187
6,008
393,273

 PROPERTY TAX RATES BY FUND PER $100 OF EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUATION
1999-2008'

Tax
Levy
Year
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008'

Laborers' and
Retirement
Board

Municipal
Tax Extension
(in thousands)'

Bond, Note
Redemption and
Interest'

Policemen's
Annuity and
Benetit

$657,731
672,104
687,381
707,181
719,695"
719,780*
718,071 •*
719,230''
749,351 '
834,152 *

$1.076812
0,980950
0.942710
0.943061
0.831169
0.760676
0,696607
0 569261
0.588843
0.602842

$.314836
.301167
.289912
.271463
.230466
.216752
.231467
.194953
.191548
.172426

Employees'
Annuity and
Benefit
$.298024
260291
.277774
.259848
.218316
.229048
231683
197399
.174302
.162182

Source Cook County Clerk "s Office
Docs not include levy for Spccul Service Areas and net of collections for T J \ Increment Financing districts
Includes raies from the Chicago Public Library Bond, Note Redemption and Interest Fund
Docs not Include the levy for the Schools Building and Itnprovetneni Fund, which is accounted for m an agency fund.
2009 information not available ut time ofpublication

B-3

Firemen's
Annuity and
Benefit
$.134637
117590
126603
.116628
.100049
.095524
.083243
.099974
.088581
.080787

Employees'
Annuity and
Benefit
$.035691

-

.011763

Total
$1 860
1.660
1.637
1.591
1.380
1.302
1.243
1.062
1.044
1.030

 COMBINED PROPERTY TAX RATES OF THE CITY AND OTHER MAJOR GOVERNMENTAL
UNITS PER $100 OF EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUATION 1999-2008'

Tax
Levy
Year

City

1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008'

$1,860
1.660
1.637
1 591
1.380
1.302
1.243
1.062
1.044
1.030

City of
Chicago
School
Building &
Improvement
Fund

.
-

$.117

Chicago
School
Finance
Authority
$255
.223
223
.177
.151
,177
.127
.118
.091

-

City
Colleges
of
Chicago

Board of
Education
$4,104
3.714
3.744
3.562
3.142
3.104
3 026
2 697
2.583
2 472

•

$.347
.31 1
.307
280
.246
.242
.234
.205
.159
156

Source Coolc County Clerk's OtTice.
2009 infonnation not available at time of publication

B-4

Chicago
Park
District
$.627
572
.567
545
464
.455
.443
.379
.355
.323

Metropolitan
Water
Reclamation
District
$.419
.415
.401
.371
.361
347
.315
284
.263
252

Forest
Preserve
District of
Cook
County
$070
.069
.067
.061
.059
.060
.060
.057
.053
.051

Cook
County
$854
824
.746
.690
.630
.593
.533
.500
.446
.415

Total
$8 536
7.788
7.692
7.277
6.433
6.280
5.981
5.302
4.994
4.816

 CITY OF CHICAGO
PROPERTY TAX SUPPORTED BONDED DEBT
Computation of Direct and Overlapping Bonded Debt
AsofOctober21,2010
(Not Adjusted for the issuance of the Bonds and the refunding of the Refunded Bonds)
(Dollars in Thousands)
Direct Debt.
General Obligation Bonds and Notes'
The Bonds
General Obligation Short Term Obligations'

S7,272,l 50

Net Direct Long-Term Debt

S

(3 19.762)

Net Direct
Deb'^

Overlapping DebtCity Colleges of Chicago
Board of Education
Chicago School Finance Authority
Chicago Park District
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District Of GreaterChicago
Cook County
Cook County Forest Preserve District
Total Overlapping Long-Term Debt

S

Percent
Overlapping''

-0-0813,095'
1,991,704
3,577,455
108,665

100.00%
100.00
100.00
100.00
47.61
46.63
46.63

_

Debt
Applicable

$

?

-05,263,309
-0813,095
948,250
1,668,167
50.670
8.743.492

Net Direct and Overlapping Long-Term Debt.

Includes Fixed Rate General Obligation, General Obligation Tender and Commercial Paper Notes consisting of
(a)
Fixed Rate Notes outstanding in the amounts .shown below (dollars m thousands)
Amount
Series
Final Maturity
$70,425
2010
04/01/2012
(b)

Tender Notes outstanding m the amounts shown below (dollars in thousands):
Amount
570,425

 c)

Scries
2009

Final Maturity
05/31/2011

Commercial Paper Notes outstanding in the amounts below (dollars in thousands):
Amount

Series

$178,966*

2002B (Taxable)

* A portion of the Ctjiiiiiicrcial Paper Notes is expected to be refunded with a portion of the proceeds of the Taxable Scries 20 IOC Bunds.

Includes debt secured by property taxes (including "alternate bonds" .ind "limited tax" bonds) and Public Building Commission bonds secured
by long-term lease obligations also secured by property taxes.
Source; Bach of the respective tax districts.
Source: Cook County Clerk's Oflice.
Includes $4,904,509,237 and $329,735,000 of general obligation bonds of Ihe Board and the Chicago Park District, respectively, issued as
"alternate revenue" bonds secured by alternate revenue sources. An ad valorem property tax levy is filed in an amount sufficient to pay debt
service on the altemate revenue bonds. When sufficientrevenues have accumulated to pay annual debt service on the altemate revenue bonds,
the property ta.x levy is abated. To dale, altemate revenues have been available in amounis sufficient to pay principal and interest coming due
on the altemate revenue bonds issued by the Board of Education and the Chicago Park District.

B-5

 Selected Debt Statistics
2,896,016'
$ 80,977,543,020'
$310,888,609,224^

Population (2000)
Total Equalized Assessed Value (2008)
Total Estimated Fair Cash Value (2008)

Percent of Total

Amount
Net Direct Long-Term Debt
Total Net Direct and Overlapping Long-Term Debt..

Per Capita

Percent of Total
Estimated Fair
Cash Value
%~
%

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.
Source: Cook County Clerk's Office. Total Equalized Assessed Value is net of exemptions, includes assessment of pollution control
facilities and excludes portions of the City in DuPage County.
Source: The Civic Federation. Excludes railroad property, pollution control facilities and portion of the City in DuPage County.

B-6

 Debt Service Schedule'
AsofOctober2l,20lO
(Not adjusted for the issuance of the Bonds and the refunding of ihe Refunded Bonds)
General Oblii;3l:on N o i c i
r3l Obli;:3lion Rondj Oui^iamitR
principal

Year

lni™>l'-'

CapiialiZcii I n t c r c i i

Debt ScrMcc' * *

S145.581.1S9

$166,809,315

$(16,778,5261

5120,081,854

201 1

156.646,211

343,890,386

(34,076,0291

466,460,568

2012

167,752,714

340,210,720

(12,145,985)

495.817,449

2013

205,826.569

331,877,983

(4,034,677)

533 6 6 9 , 8 7 5

2014

215 509,425

323.6l>t,63l

539,114,055

2015

228 386.371

3 11.539.846

539,926,217

2016

24.1.871.761

301.646,102

545,517,863

2017

267,126,948

290.944,192

558,071,140

2018

279,736,972

279,012.390

558,749,362

2019

290.668.700

266.110.969

556,779,668

2020

306.148.918

254.701,417

560,850.335

2021

309.397,240

240,619,906

550,017 145

2022

313,448.400

232,055,380

545.503 780

2023

305,023,320

218.325.781

523.349.101

2024

299,152.012

204,724,463

503,876.475

202.5

289,668,971

191,619.096

481.288.067

2026

290.626.163

178.940.902

469,567,065

2027

286.229,720

159.6311,164

2028

288,219,806

153,273,377

441,493,184

2029

291,954,515

137,627,286

429,581.801

2010

S

Capiialilcil Intercut
S

Principal

Total Dcbi Service
$ 615,694,112

445,859.884

2030

287.002.520

127,250,344

414 2 5 2 . 8 6 4

2031

209,983.596

113.581,490

323.565.086

2032

206.198.762

89,252,744

295.451.506

2033

187,596.194

79,931,170

267.527.364

2034

170,492.377

71,490,114

241,982,490

2035

168,297,607

63,566,355

231,863 962

2036

148,066,559

55,685,905

203 752,464

2037

126,962.925

48,682.331

175,645,256

203S

104,866.380

42.667,127

147,533,507

2039

111,675,000

7,745.633

119,420.633

2040

24,625,000

2,077.366

26,702.366

2041

25 645,000

1.059.901

56,952,387,842

55.630.155,284

Dial

'

Inicrcii

S

S

S

s

26.704.901
5(67,035,216)

5320,081,854

512,835,589 764

Principal
i::icn:^ (including (he ainauni o f intercut ihai ha^ acrrcicil on capital appreciation bond^) TDT each year includes air.u-anK payable un ihc C i r y \ general obtii;aiiun bundt anil note:> on July I o f ihai year and January 1 o f ihc following year,
CACcpi ihai each year mcludCi prmctpal ami inicrcsi payable on ihc General Oblijjaimn Flond^ Seriei 2007A K (ModciD School} Acro^v Chieaj;o Program), ihe General Obligaiion flondi Series 2CH0 A (ModerTi S c h o o l Across Chicago Progom) (Ta.\Esempi) and ihc Ger.cral Oblt;;2iior, Bor.i!>, Taxable Series 20IOn (Modem Schooli Acro>:i Chicago Proijrain) (Build America flQnd> - Direci I'aymenO on June I and Deceiiibi:r I of ihai year
liikTCii for each y;.;r mcludt^ ihc fall amounl of ihc inicresi payable on General Obligaiion Bomii, Taxable Projeci Scricj 20WC iBuild America H o n d i - D:reci I'ajnieiii). ihe General Oblijaiion flondi. Taxable Pr(i;cci Sencj 20')9D (Rcco\ery Zone
Eeo:iOmir Developm.cni f)ond>-Direct Paymcnil and ihc General Obligaiion BoniU, Taxable Senci 20100 (Modem School* Across Chicago Program) (Build Amcnra l l o n d i - Direel I'aynKnl) wiihour adju^imcnt forSubiidy Paymcnii lo be received by ihc
C.iy

*

The iniercM rale on variable raiC bonds l i assumed lo be appronmaicly bciwccn four and SM perccr.i Ttie Ciiy has entered mio micrvji raic hedge agroemenis whrch rcnuired ihe Ciiy lo pay iniercsi ai a rate o f i 375 pcrceru for iis Oenerjl Obligaiion
Vznablc Raic Remand BoniJi (Netghbortioods Alive 21 Program), Senej 2nii2!i. 4 0S2 pcrrcni for ii> General Ohlsgaiior. Variable Raie Uemand Bonds. Projcd and Rciunding Series 20030. 4 104 perceni for iis C c n c r j l Oblmaiion Variable Raic
Demand bunds. Projeci and Rcfumlmg Scrie* 2005D and .1 9982 perecni for iis General Obligaiion Variable Rale Demand Bonds Rcfumlini Series 2t)07i;, f and G The lable includes Ihe inlca-si payable by ihe Cily under the miercsl rale hedge
agreements for ihesc lour bond issues

'

The [iiicresi rate on Fixed Raic ar.d Tender Nines is assumed lo he beiween n frl and I 625 percer.i

'

Includes ouisianding Fixed Rate. Tender and Coinmercial Taper Noics Sec A I ' I ' L N D I N B • Kl.S'AS'CIAL A N D OTHER I N F O R M A T I O N - Compiiiaiimi ofDircci and Overlapping Bonilcii Debt - N o t c d i "
A portion o f the Commcmal Paper Noies is cxpecied lo be refunded wilh u puiiion of ihc proeeeiis of the Taxable Series 30I0C Ronds.

Noie

May not loial d'.ic to rounding

13-7

 PROPERTY TAX LEVIES BY FUND
For Fiscal Years Ended 2005 - 2009' (Dollars m Thousands)

2007

Change

2005

2006

Nolc Rcdcmpiion and Interest^

$81,223

$ 60,116

Bond Rcdctnption and Interest

312,780

315,858

(25.99)%
1.30

Change

$ 33,506
381,145

(44 26)%
20.29

2008
$ 73,363
414,853

Change

2009

Change

1 18.95%

$73,363

-%

8.84

408,609

(1 51)
1.50

t*oliccmcn's Annuity and Benefit*

137,284

135,528

(1.28)

141,080

4.10

139,540

(102)

141,741

Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit*

137,412

137,228

(0.13)

128,378

(6.45)

131,344

231

130,026

(1.00)

49,372

69.500

40.77

65,242

(6.13)

65,426

0.28

66,140

1.09

13,327

39.90

Firemen's Annuity and Benefit*
Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees'
Annuity and Benefit
Total

_
$718,071

$719,230

_

_

0.16%

$749,351

_

9,526

4.19%

$834,152

_
11 32%

$833,206

(0 11)%

' Source Cook Couniy Clerk's Office
• Sec APPENDIX B - "FINANCIAL AND OTHER INFORMATION - Propeny Taxes For All Ciiy Funds, Collcciions AniJ Esiiniaietl Allowance For Uncollectible Taxes 2000-2009." Does not
include the levy for ihe School Building and Improvement Fund which is accounieJ for in un agency fund.
' Includes Corporate, Chicago Public Library Maintenance and Operations, Chicago Public Library Building and Sites, and City Relief Funds
* For infonnation regarding the City's unfunded (assets in excess oO pension bcncni obligations under its Pension Plans, see Ihe individual Pension Plans Financial Statements

B-8

 i
C I T Y OF C H I C A G O
SCHEDULE OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES A N D C H A N G E S IN FUND BALANCES
General Fund (Corporate)
For Fiscal Years Ended 2005-2009'
(Dollars in Thousands)

Revenues:
Utility Tax
Sales Tax
Stale Income Tax
Other Taxes
Federal/State Grants
Other Revenues'
Total Revenues
Expenditures:
'
Current:
Public Safety
General Govemment
Other^..:
Debt Service
Total Expenditures
Revenues Under Expenditures
Other Financing Sources (Uses):
Proceeds of Debt, Nel of
Original Discount/Including
Premium
Transfers In....
Transfers Out
Total Other Financing
Sources (Uses)
Revenues and Other Financing
Sources Over (Under)
Expenditures and Other
Financing Uses
Fund Balance - Beginning of Year..
Change in Inventory
Fund Balance - End of Year

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

$492,109
471,069
307,462
669,041
2,066
722,366
2,664,113

$475,482
537,441
314,559
708,706
2,802
729,999
2,768,989

$501,023
543,238
377,727
687,511
3,366
822,561
2,935,426

$524,842
518,131
378,545
637,923
2,347
813,983
2,875,771

$481,275
476,557
251,820
572,472
1,714
777,788
2,561,626

1,546,359
884,040
301,466
7,705
2,739,570
(75,457)

1,783,993
783,059
328,081
7,069
2,902,202
(133,213)

1,845,497
860,976
349,616
6,930
3,063,019
(127,593)

1,856,634
889,266
356,066
5,318
3,107,284
(231,513)

$1,862,914
857,626
288,559
4,978
3,014,077
(452,451)

15,050
118,244
(17,100)

115,058
(30,500)

23,921
130,561
(42,500)

164,000
94,058
(25,193)

58,500
416,135
(17,463)

116,194

84,558

111,982

232,865

457,172

40,737
73,227
(3,145)
$110,819

(48,655)
110,819
227
$62,391

(15,611)
62,391
(2,473)
$44,307

1,352
44,307
2,784
$48,443

4,721
48,443
1,542
$54,706

Source; Table 6 in the Statistical Section of the City of Chicago Comprehensive Annual Kinancial Report (CAFR) for the year ended
December 31, 2009. The City's CAFR for the year ended Decerjiber 31. 2009 is available upon request from the Office of the City
Comptroller
Includes Intemal Service, Licenses and Permits, Fines, Investment Income, Charges for Services and Miscellaneous Revenues.
Includes Health, Streets and S.initation, Transportation, Cultural and Recreational and Other Expenditures.

B-9

 Special Revenue Funds
For Fiscal Years Ended 2005 - 2009'
(Dollars in Thousands)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

$310,543
31,675
93
46,560
334,580
804,406
107,150
1,635,007

$302,772
24,299
76
65,552
382,232
820,702
115,023
1,710,656

$314,742
28,838
5
55,719
465,533
778,601
114,906
1,758,344

5326,334
82,373
56,848
554,096
794,564
120,401
1,934,616

$334,972
45,688
95,944
572,651
751,555
131,295
1,961,975

65,564
736,267
388,053
530,786
16,513
80,129
1,817,312

67,363
740,423
396,923
552,675
8,110
6,356
1,771,850

35,102
789,703
371,649
603,553
16,674
7^603
1,824,284

35,518
915,659
413,690
677,990
4,360
5^628
2,052,845

50,797
799,236
430,915
566,612
3,357
3,632
1,854,549

Revenues:
Properly Tax
Utility Tax
Sales Tax
State Income Tax
Other Taxes
Federal/State Grants
Other RevenuesTotal Revenues
Expenditures:
Current:
Public Safety
General Govemment
Employee Pensions
Other'
Capital Outlay
Debt Service
Total Expenditures
Revenues Under Expenditures
Other Financing Sources (Uses):
Proceeds of Debt, Net of
Original Discount/
Including Premium
Payment lo Refunded Bond
Escrow Agent
Transfers In
Transfers Out
Total Other Financing
Sources (Uses)
Revenues and Other Financing
Sources Over (Under)
Expenditures and Other
Financing Uses
Fund Balance-Beginning of Year
Fund Balance-End of Year

(182,305)

(61,194)

(65,940)

(118,229)

107,426

104,750

79,250

144,614

163,628

72,925

(134,148)
521,879
(55,168)

_
193,850
(38,177)

_
108,045
(86,470)

_
155,637
(48,604)

_
185,358
(1,746,126)

437,313

234,923

166,189

270,661

(1,487,843)

255,008

173,729

100,249

152,432

(1,380,417)

354,111
S609,I19

609,119
$782,848

782,848
$883,097

883,097
$1,035,529

1,035,529
$(344,888)

Source; Tabic 7 in the Statistical Section of the City of Chicago Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) for the year ended
December 3l, 2009. The City's CAFR for the year ended December 3l, 2009 is available upon request from the Office of the City
Comptroller.
Includes Intemal Service, Licenses and Permits, Fines, Investment Income, Charges for Services and Miscellaneous Revenues.
Includes Health, Streets and Sanitation, Transportation, Cultural and Recreational and Other Expenditures.

B-IO

 Debt Service Funds
For Fiscal Years Ended 2005 - 2009'
(Dollars in Thousands)

2005
Revenues:
Property Tax
Utility Tax
Sales Tax
Other Taxes
Other Revenues"
Total Revenues
Expenditures:
Debt Service
Total Expenditures
Revenues Over (Under)
Expenditures
Other Financing Sources (Uses):
Proceeds of Debt, Net of Original
Discount/Including Premium ,
Payment to Refunded Bond
Escrow Agent
Transfers In
Transfers Out
Total Other Financing
Sources (Uses)
Revenues and Other Financing
Sources Over (Under)
Expenditures and Other
Financing Uses
Fund Balance - Beginning of Year
Fund Balance - End of Year

2006

2007

2008

2009

$428,876
15,541
28,066
211,990
32,522
716,995

$363,218
22,308
^21,639
193,824
33,368
634,357

$346,965
22,318
27,684
217,731
30,594
645,292

$403,489
22,282
30,440
220,220
6,562
682,993

$471,218
22,138
27,395
131,993
38,720
691,464

757,241
757,241

693,110
693,110

625,459
625,459

1,022,156
1,022,156

777,725
777,725

(40,246)

(58,753)

19,833

(339,163)

. (86,261)

1,513,417

302,658

777,151

405,311

340,324

(1,051,917)
2,107
(93,246)

(276,607)
8,741
(509,884)

(951,419)
63,807
(73,325)

(186,421)
33,186
(141,498)

(213,435)
684,277
(81,291)

370,361

(475,092)

(183,786)

110,578

729,875

330,115

(533,845)
688,887
$155,042

(163,953)
155,042
5(8,911)

(228,585)

643,614

(8,911)
$(237,496)

(237,496)
$406,118

358,772
$688,887

Source; Table 8 in the Statistical Section of the City of Chicago Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) for the year ended
December 31, 2009. The City's CAFR for the year ended December 31, 2009 is available upon request from the Office of the City
Comptroller
Includes Investment Income and Miscellaneous Revenues.

B-1 1

 Capital Projects Funds
For Fiscal Years Ended 2005-2009'
(Dollars in Thousands)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

$56,687
56,687

$76,666
76,666

$44,464
44,464

$18,240
18,240

907,201
907,201

585,759
585,759

657,104
657,104

615,916
615,916

Revenues:
Other Revenues^
Total Revenues

$34,676
34,676

Expenditures
Capital Outlay
Total Expenditures

435,771
435,771

Revenues Under Expenditures
Other Financing Sources (Uses):
Proceeds of Debt, Nel of Original
Discount/Including Premium
Transfers In
Transfers Out
Total Olher Financing
Sources (Uses)

•

(401,095)

(850,514)

(509,093)

(612,640)

(597,676)

238,679
2,627

380,925
352,386
(10,977)

708,195
29,603
(27,521)

62,493
10,567
(96)

529,553
16,334
(3,734)

241,306

722,334

710,277

72,964

542,153

Revenues and Other Financing Sources
Over (Under) Expenditures and Olher
Financing Uses

(159,789)

(128.180)

201,184

(539,676)

(55,523)

Fund Balance - Beginning of Year

1,070,608

910,819

782,639

983,823

444,147

Fund Balance - End of Year

$910,819

$782,639

$983,823

$444,147

$388,624

' Source. Table 9 in the Statistical Section of the City of Chicago Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) for the year ended
December 31, 2009. The City's CAFR for the year ended December 3l, 2009 is available upon request from the Office of the City
Comptroller.
" Includes Investment Income, Charges for Services and .Miscellaneous Revenues

B-12

 Combining Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund Balances
Nonmajor Governmental Funds
Year Ended December 31, 2009 '
(Dollars in Thousands)

Total Special
Revenue
Funds
REVENUI2S
Property Tax
Utility Tax
Sales Tax
Transportation Tax
State Income Tax
Transaction Tax
Special Area Tax
Other Taxes
Federal/State Grants
Intemal Service
Fines
Investment Income
Charges for Services
Miscellaneous
Total Revenues

-

-

$1,405

161,736
95,994
25,385

-

-

116,361
20

_
-

_
-

36

$1,686

218,141
7,565
• 2,497
76,785
73,916
89,705
430,915
377

OTHER FINANCING SOURCES (USES)
Issuance of Debt
Payment to Refunded Bond Escrow Agent
Transfers In
Transfers Out
Total Olher Financing Sources (Uses)

117,822

744
2,430

218,141 •
7.565
2,497 •
76,785
73,916
89,705
430,915
377
88,000

. 3,632
903,533

37.000
28.740
65,740

88,000

37,000
32,372
1,057,273

(106,327)

52,082

(85.570)

(139,815)

89,200

162,125

72,484
18,273
$90,757

_

-

16,995
15,408
5,608
26,974
27,110
917,458

-

117,176
(11,290)
178,81 1

Fund Balance - End of Year

-

$334,792
75,688
1,405
161,736
95,994
25,385
116,361
14.002

-

72,925

Net Change in Fund Balances
Fund Balance - Beginning of Year

Total
Nonmajor
Governmental
Funds'

-

16,995
15,408
3,886
26,974
26,366
797,206

Revenues Over (Under) Expenditures..

Total
Capital
Project
Funds

$334,792
75,688

13,982

EXPENDITURES
Current;
General Govemment
Health
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Cultural and Recreational
Employee Pensions
Other
Capital Outlay
Debt Service:
Principal Retirement
Interest and Other Fiscal Charges
Total Expenditures

Debt
Service
Fund
Special
Taxing
Areas

88,000

_
-

_
-

33,140
(66,097)
(32,957)

89,200

19,125
130,522
$149,647

3,630
44,116
$47,746

150,316
( 77,387)
235,054
95,239
192,911
$288,150

Source; Schedule B-2 in the Nonmajor Governmental Funds Section of the City of Chicago Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
(CAFR) for the year ended December 31, 2009. The City's CAFR for the year ended December 31, 2009 is available upon request from the
Office of ihe City Comptroller
The line iiems under 'Tot.il Nonmajor Governmental Funds" above are identical to the line items under ihe column captioned "Oiher
Governmental Funds" appearing as Exhibit 4 to the City's Basic Financial Statements for the year ended December 31. 2009 included as
APPENDIX C herelo

B-13

  PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

 

APPENDIX 
CITY OF CHICAGO

BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 2009

 

 PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

Deloitte
City of Chicago
Basic Financial Statements
for the Year Ended December 31, 2009

Richard M. Daley, Mayor
Gene R. Saffold, Chief Financial Officer
Steven J. Lux, City Comptroller

  PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Pages
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS' REPORT
MANAGEMENTS DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS

1-2
4-16

BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS:
Government-wide Financial Statements:
Exhibit

1

Statement of Net Assets

Exhibit

2

Statement of Activities

17
18-19

Fund Financial Statements:
20-21
Exhibit

3

Exhibit

4

Exhibit

Exhibit
Exhibit
Exhibit
Exhibit
Exhibit
Exhibit
NOTES

Balance Sheet - Governmental Funds

Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund Balances Governmental Funds
5
Reconciliation of the Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes
in Fund Balances of Governmental Funds to the
Statement of Activities
6
Statement of Revenues and Expenditures - Budget and Actual General Fund (Budgetary Basis)
7
Statement of Net Assets - Proprietary Funds
8
Statement of Revenues, Expenses and Changes in Net Assets Proprietary Funds .
9
Statement of Cash Flows - Proprietary Funds
10
Statement of Fiduciary Net Assets - Fiduciary Funds
11
Statement of Changes in Plan Net Assets Pension Trust Funds
TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

Schedule of Other Postemployment Benefits Funding Progress

22-25

26
27
28-29
30
31-32
33
34
35-78
79

 This Page Intentiona?y Left Biank

Deloitte

Deloitte a Touche LLP
I l l s •.Vj-:kerDi^e
Ct-KjCO, IL 60606-4301
USA '
Tel 11 312 43-5 1000
FJ< +1 312 ' i i S 1436
W W ripioiro (lorn

INDEPENDENT AUDITORS' REPORT

To the Honorable Richard M. Daley, Mayor,
and Members of the City Council
City of Chicago, Illinois
We have audited the accompanying fmancial statements of the govemmental activities, the business-type
activities, each major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund informaiion of the City of Chicago, Illinois
(the "City"), as of and for the year ended December 31, 2009, which collectively comprise the City's
basic financial statements, as listed in the table of contents. These fmancial statements are the
responsibility of the City's management. Our responsibility is to express opinions on these financial
statements based on our audit. We did not audit thefinancialstatements of the City's Pension Plans (the
"Plans") which, in aggregate, represent substantially all the assets and revenues of thefiduciaryfunds,
included in the aggregate remaining fund infonnation. Those financial statements were audited by other
auditors whose reports thereon have been fumished to us, and our opinion, insofar as it relates to the
amounts included for the Plans, is based solely on the reports of the other auditors.
We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the Uniied States of
America. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether the respectivefinancialstatements arc free of material misstatement. An audit includes
consideration of intemal control overfinancialreporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are
appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of
the City's intemal control overfinancialreporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit
also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the
respective financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made
by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our
audit and the reports of other auditors provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
In our opinion, based on our audit and the reports of other auditors, thefinancialstatements referred to
above present fairly, in all material respects, the respective net assets or financial position of the
governmental activities, the business-type activities, each major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund
information of the City, as of December 31, 2009, and the respective changes in financial position and
cash flows, where applicable, thereof and the respective budgetary comparison for the General Fund for
the year then ended, in confomiity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.

Membef ot
Dctoltte T o u c h e Tohmdtau

 The Management's Discussion and Analysis and Schedule of Other Postemployment Benefits Funding
Progress, as listed in the table of contents, are not a required part of the basic financial statements, but are
supplementary information required by the Govemmental Accounting Standards Board. This
supplementary information is the responsibility of the City's management. We and other auditors have
applied certain limited procedures, which consisted principally of inquiries of management regarding the
methods of measurement and presentation of the required supplementary information. However, we did
not audit the information and express no opinion on it.

June 29, 2010

. 9

 This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31. 2009
Management's Discussion and Analysis
As management of the City of Chicago, Illinois (City) we offer readers of the City's Basic Financial Statements this
narrative overview and analysis of the financial activities of fhe City for tfie fiscal year ended December 31, 2009. We
encourage the readers to consider the information presented here in conjunction with information that we have
fumished in the basic financial statements and notes to the basic financial statements contained within this report.
Fiscal 2009 Financial Highlights
•

•

•
•

•

Liabilities and Deferred Inflows of the City, In the government-wide financial statements, exceeded its assets at
the close of the most recent fiscal year by $264.5 million (net deficit). Of this amount, $7,359.3 million is an
unrestricted deficit, while $2,537.8 million is invested in capital assets, net of related debt and $4,557.0 million is
restricted for specific purposes.
The City's total assets Increased by $1,242.6 million. The increase relates to $808.6 million increase in capital
assets as a result of the City's capital improvement program and $345.9 million increase in unrestricted and
restricted cash and cash equivalents and investments primarily as a result of the City's Meter Parking System
Services Concession Agreement.
Revenues and Other Financing Sources, in the fund financial statements, available for general governmental
operations during 2009 were $8,590.7 million, an increase of $1,917.0 million (28.7 percent) from 2008.
The General Fund, also in the fund financial statements, ended 2009 with a total Fund Balance of $54.7 million.
Total Fund Balance increased from 2000 primarily because Revenues and Other Financing Sources were more
than Expenditures and Other Financing Uses by $4.7 million. Fund Balance at December 31, 2009 of $32.4
million was reserved for commitments. Unreserved Fund Balance was $2.7 million at December 31, 2009,
compared to a balance of $.2 million at the end of 2008. •
The City's general obligation bonds and notes outstanding increased by $407.4 million during the current fiscal
year. The proceeds from the increase in bonds were used to finance the City's capital plan.

Overview of the Financial Statements
This discussion and analysis is intended to serve as an introduction to the City's basic financial statements, which
include the following components: 1) government-wide financial statements, 2) fund financial statements, and 3)
notes to the basic financial statements. This report also contains required supplementary information and other
supplementary information in addition to the basic financial statements. These components are described below:
Government-wide financial statements. The governmenf-w;de financial statements are designed to provide
readers with a broad overview of the City's finances, using accounting methods similar to those used by privatesector companies. The statements provide both short-term and long-term information about the City's financial
position, which assists in assessing the City's economic condition at the end of the fiscal year. These financial
statements are prepared using the flow of economic resources measurement focus and the accrual basis of
accounting. This basically means such statements follow methods that are similar to those used by most businesses.
They take into account all revenues and expenses connected with the fiscal year even if cash involved has not been
received or paid. The government-wide financial statements include two statements:
The statement of net assets presents information on all of the City's assets, liabilities, and deferred inflows with the
difference reported as nef assets. Over time, increases or decreases in net assets may serve as a useful indicator of
whether the financial position of the City is improving or deteriorating, respectively. To assess the overall health of
the City, the reader should consider additional non-financial factors such as changes in the City's property tax base
and the condition of the City's roads.
The statemenf of activities presents information showing how the government's net assets changed during each fiscal
year. All changes in net assets are reported as soon as the underlying event giving rise to the change occurs,
regardfess of the timing of the related cash flows. Thus, revenues and expenses are reported in this statement for
some items that will only result in cash flows in future periods (for example, uncollected taxes, and earned but unused

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - Confinued
vacation). This statement also presents a comparison between direct expenses and program revenues for each
function of the City.
Both of the government-wide financial statements distinguish functions of the City that are principally supported by
taxes and intergovernmental revenues (governmenfa/ activities) from other functions that are intended to recover all
or a significant portion of their costs through user fees and charges (bt/s/ness-type actfv/t;es). The governmental
activities of the City include general government, public safety, streets and sanitation, transportation, health, and
cultural and recreation. The business-type activities of the City include water, sewer, tollway and airport services.
The government-wide financial statements present information about the City as a primary government, which
includes the Chicago Public Library and the City related funds of the Public Building Commission. The governmentwide financial statements can be found immediately following this management's discussion and analysis.
Fund financial statements. A fund is a grouping of related accounts that is used to maintain control over resources
that have been segregated for specific activities or objectives. The City, like other state and local governments, uses
fund accounting to ensure and demonstrate compliance with finance-related legal requirements. All of the funds of
the City can be divided into three categories: governmental funds, proprietary funds, and fiduciary funds.
Governmenfa/ funds. Govemmenfa/ funds are used to account for essentially the same functions reported as
govemmenfa/ acf/v/t/es in the government-wide financial statements. However, unlike the government-wide financial
statements, governmental fund financial statements focus on near-ferm inflows and outflows of spendable resources,
as well as on balances of spendable resources available at the end of a fiscal year. Such information may be useful
in evaluating a government's near-term financing requirements.
Because the focus of governmental funds is narrower than that of the government-wide financial statements, it is
useful to compare the information presented for govemmenta/ funds with similar information presented for
govemmenta/ acf/v/t/es in the government-wide financial statements. By doing so, readers may better understand the
long-term impact of the government's near-term financing decisions. Both the governmental fund balance sheet and
the governmental fund statement of revenues, expenditures, and changes in fund balances provide a reconciliation to
facilitate the comparison between govemmenta/ funds and governmenta/ activities.
The City maintains 20 individual governmental funds. Information for the seven funds that qualify as major is
presented separately in the governmental fund balance sheet and in the governmental fund statement of revenues,
expenditures, and changes in fund balances. The seven major governmental funds are as follows: the General Fund,
the Federal, State and Local Grants Fund, the Special Taxing Areas Fund, Service Concession Agreement Fund, the
Reserve Fund, the Bond, Note Redemption and Interest Fund, and the Community Development and Improvement
Projects Fund. Data from the other governmental funds are combined into a single, aggregated presentation.
The City adopts an annual appropriation budget for its general and certain special revenue funds on a non-GAAP
budgetary basis. A budgetary comparison statement has been provided for the General Fund, the only major fund
with an appropriation budget, to demonstrate compliance with this budget. The basic governmental fund financial
statements can be found immediately following the government-wide statements.
Proprietary funds. These funds are used to show activities that operate more like those of commercial enterprises.
Because these funds charge user fees for services provided to outside customers including local governments, they
are known as enterprise funds. Proprietary funds, like government-wide statements, use the accrual basis of
accounting and provide both long- and short-term financial information. There is no reconciliation needed between
the government-wide financial statements for business-type activities and the proprietary fund financial statements.
The City uses five enterprise funds to account for its water, sewer, tollway and two airports operations.
Proprietary funds provide the same type of information as the government-wide financial statements, but provide
more detail. The proprietary fund financial statements provide separate information for the Water Fund, Sewer Fund,
Chicago Skyway Fund, Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Fund and the Chicago Midway International Airport
Fund. All the proprietary funds are considered to be major funds of the City. The basic proprietary fund financial
statements can be found immediately following the governmental fund financial statements.

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - Confinued
Fiduciary funds. Fiduciary funds are used primarily to account for resources held for the benefit of parties outside
the primary government. The City is the trustee, or fiduciary, for its employees' pension plans. It is also responsible
for other assets that, because of a trust arrangement can be used only for the trust beneficiaries. The City also uses
fiduciary funds to account for transacfions for assets held by the City as agent for various entifies. The City is
responsible for ensuring that the assets reported in these funds are used for their intended purposes. Fiduciary funds
are not reflected in the government-wide financial statements because the resources of those funds are not available
to support the City's own programs. All of the City's fiduciary activities are reported in a separate statement of
fiduciary net assets and a statement of changes in fiduciary net assets. The accounting used for fiduciary funds is
much like that used for proprietary funds. The basic fiduciary fund financial statements can be found immediately
following the propnetary fund financial statements.
Notes (o (he basic financial statements. The notes provide addifional information that is essential to a full
understanding of data provided in the government-wide and fund financial statements. The notes to the basic
financial statements can be found immediately following the fiduciary fund financial statements.
Financial Analysis of the City as a Whole
Net assets (deficit). As noted eariier, net assets may serve over time as a useful indicator of a government's
financial position. In the case of the City, liabilities and deferred inflows exceeded assets by $264.5 million at
December 31, 2009.
A large portion of the City's net deficit, $2,537.8 million reflects its investment in capital assets (land, buildings, roads,
bndges, etc.) less any related debt used to acquire those assets that is still outstanding. The City uses these capital
assets to provide services to citizens; consequenUy, these assets are not available for future spending. Although the
City's investment in its capital assets is reported net of related, debt, it should be noted that the resources needed to
repay this debt must be provided from other sources, since the capital assets themselves cannot be used to liquidate
these liabilities and deferred inflows.
City of Chicago, Illinois
Summary Statement of Net Assets
(in millions of dollars)
Governmental
Activities
2009
Current and other assets
Capital assets

$

Total assets

6,106.2
7,311.5

Business-type
Activities

$

5,112.5
7.208.5

$

2,772.6
10,917.5

Total

2008

2009

2008

$

2009

3,332.3
10,211.9

$

8,878.8
18,229.0

2008
$

8,444.8
17,420.4

13,417.7

12,321.0

13,690.1

13,544.2

27,107.8

25,865.2

12.122.8
1,448.0

11,732.3
1,344.0

9,600.3
782.1

11,284.1
674.7

21,723.1
2,230.1

23,016.4
2,018.7

13,570.8

13,076.3

10,382.4

11,958.8

23,953.2

25,035.1

1.681.5

-

1,737.6

-

3,419.1

-

494.9

2,286.7

2,323.4

2,537.8

2,818.3

821.9
(1,538.5)

779.9
(1,517.9)

4,557.0
(7,359.3)

3,622.1
(5,610.3)

Long-term liabilities
outstanding
other liabilities
Total Liabilities
Deferred Inflows
Net assets:
Invested in capital assets,
net of related debt

251.1

Restricted
Unrestricted
Total net assets (deficit)

2,842.2
(4,092.4)

3,735.1
(5,820.8)
$

(1,834.6)

$

(755.3)

$

1,570.1

$

1,585.4

$

(264.5)

$

830.1

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - Continued
An additional portion of the City's net assets ($4,557.0 million) represent resources that are subject to external
restrictions on how they may be used.
Governmenta/ Activities. Net assets of the City's governmental activities decreased $1,079.3 million to a deficit of
$1,834.6 million. However, a significant portion of those net assets are either restricted as to the purpose they can be
used for or they are invested in capital assets (buildings, roads, bridges, etc.) net of related debt. Consequently,
unrestricted net assets showed a $5,820.8 million deficit at the end of this year. This deficit does not mean that the
City does not have the resources available to pay its bills next year. Rather, it is the result of having long-term
commitments that are greater than currently available resources. Specifically, the City did not include in past annual
budgets the full amounts needed to finance future liabilifies arising from personnel, property, pollution and casualty
claims ($664.7 million). Municipal employees. Policemen's and Firemen's net pension obligation ($3,453.4 million)
and post-employment benefits ($329.0 million). The City will include these amounts in future years' budgets as they
come due. In addition, the remaining deferred inflow of $1,681.5 million will be amortized into income over the life of
the concession service agreements.
Over half of the City's revenue comes from taxes. Total taxes decreased by 5.7 percent. Total taxes include a
decrease in property taxes of $2.9 million (.4 percent). Other taxes decreased by $172.5 million (7.5 percent) as a
result of decreases in sales, income and transacfion taxes. Federal/State'grants vary from year to year depending
primarily on the level of spending for programs, construction and other projects.
Expenses for governmental acfivities in 2009 were $6,217.2 million. This reflects a decrease of $46.8 million (.8
percent) over 2008. Public Safety was the largest component of current expenses, accounfing for 40.6 percent of
total expenses. Expenses remained consistent with 2008 expenses.
The cost of all governmental activities was $6,217.2 million.
• The amount that taxpayers paid for these activities through City taxes was only $2,918.6 million.
• Some of the cost was paid by those who directly benefited from the programs ($621.9 million), or
• By other governments and organizafions that subsidized certain programs with grants and contributions
($726.6 million).
The City paid for the 'public benefit" portion wilh $870.8 million with other revenues such as state aid, interest and
miscellaneous income.
Although total net assets of business-types acfivities were $1,570.1 million, these resources cannot be used to make
up for the net asset deficit in governmental activities. The City generally can only use these net assets to finance the
continuing operafions of the water, sewer, tollway, and airports activities.

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - Continued
City of Chicago, Illinois
Changes in Net Assets
Years Ended December 3 1 ,
(in millions of dollars)
Business-type
Activities
2008
2009

Governmental
Activities
2009
2008

Total
2009

2008

Revenues:
Program Revenues:
Licenses, Permits. Fines and
Charges for Services
Operating Grants and Contributions
Capital Grants and Contributions

$

611.3

621.9

$

653.1
624.4

115.3
797.0

$

1,332 1

$

1,339.5

$

1,954.0

$

1,992.6

-

-

611.3

624.4

139.9

211.2

224 8

326.5

364.7

2.121.6

799.9
2,294.1

-

-

797.0
2,121.6

799.9
2,294.1
712.4

General Revenues:
Property Taxes
Other Taxes
Grants and Contributions not
Restricted to Specific Programs
Other
Total Revenues

601.2

712.4

-

601.2

269 6

169.5

24 0

95 1

293 6

264.6

5,137 9

5,393.3

1.567 3

1,659.4

6.705 2

7,052 7

2,364 8

2,384.6

2,521.1

2,434.8
371.1

351.1
166.9

381.1

-

2,384.6

2,434.8
371.1

-

2,364.8

2.521.1
297 2

386.1

381.5

382.5
170 0

371 4

382.5
170.0

371.4

Expenses:
General Government
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Health
Cultural and Recreational

130 0

170 8
140.1

Interest on Long-term Debt

386.1

381 5

-

-

206 6

6,217.2

6,264.0

Water
Sewer
Midway International Airport
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport
Chicago Skyway
Total Expenses
Change in Net Assets Before Transfers
Transfers
Change in Net Assets
Net Assets, Beginning of Year
Net Assets, End of Year

(1.079.3)

(870.7)

811 7

158 3
217.6
803 4

11 8

124

1,582 6

1,563.1

(15 3)

297.2
351.1
166.9
130.0

96 3

381.1
170.8
140.1

206.6

158.3
217.6

811.7

803.4

11.8

12.4

7,799 8

7,827 1

(1,094 6)

(774 4)

_

-

-

-

-

-

(1,079 3)

(870.7)

(15.3)

96.3

(1,094 6)

(774.4)

(755 3)
$ (1,834.6) $

115.4
(755.3)

$

1,585 4

1,489.1

1,570 1 $

1,585.4

830 1
$

(264 5) $

1,604 5
830 1

 CITY O F CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
M A N A G E M E N T ' S D I S C U S S I O N AND A N A L Y S I S
Y E A R E N D E D D E C E M B E R 31, 2009 - C o n t i n u e d

Expenses and Program Revenues - Governmental Activities
(in m i l l i o n s of dollars)

1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600 1,800 2,000 2,200 2,400 2,600
200

400

600

800

General Govemment
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Health
Cultural and Recreational
• Expenses • Program Revenues
Interest on Long-term Debt

Revenues by Source - Governmental Activities

Licenses, Permits.
Fines and Charges for
Services
12%

Operating Grants and Capital Grants and
Contributions
Contnbutions
2%
12%

Property Tax
16%

Other
5%

Grants and
Contnbutions not
restricted to specific
programs
12%
Other Taxes
41%

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - Continued
Bus/ness-type Activities. Revenues of the City's business-type activities decreased by $92.1 million in 2009 due
primarily to decreases in rent and investment earnings. All Funds met debt service coverage ratios set forth in the
applicable bond indentures.
•
•

•

•

•

The Water Fund's operafing revenues for 2009 increased by 10.8 percent from 2008 due to an increase in water
rates. Operating expenses in 2009 decreased by .5 percent primarily due to a decrease in personnel services.
The Sewer Fund's operating revenues increased 9.5 percent during fiscal year 2009, as the result of an increase
in water and sewer rates. Operafing expenses increased 10.1% as a result of increased repairs and
maintenarice.
Chicago Midway International Airport Fund's operating revenues for 2009 decreased by-$2.7 million compared to
prior year operafing revenues. Operating expenses decreased by $8.3 million primarily due to a decrease in
contractual services.
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Fund's operating revenues for 2009 decreased by $59.8 million (8.7
percent) compared to prior year operating revenues as a result of decreased fund deposit requirements.
Operating expenses increased by $3.7 million as a result of an increase in depreciation and amortization of $27.9
million.
The Chicago Skyway was leased for 99 years to a private company. The agreement granted the company to
operate the Skyway and to collect toll revenue during the term of the agreement. The City received an upfront
payment of $1.83 billion of which $446.3 million was used to advance refund all of the outstanding Skyway bonds.
The upfront payment is being amortized into non-operating revenue oyer the period of the lease ($18.5 million
annually).

10

 CITY O F C H I C A G O , ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND A N A L Y S I S
Y E A R E N D E D D E C E M B E R 31, 2009 - Continued

E x p e n s e s and Program R e v e n u e s - Business-type Activities
(in rrellions of dollars)
200

100

300

400

500

600

700

800

Water

Sewer
Chicago Midway Intemational
Airport
Chicago-O'Hare International
Airport
Chicago Skyway

R e v e n u e s by S o u r c e - B u s i n e s s - t y p e Activities

Other
2%

Licenses, Permits,
Fines and Charges for
Services
85%

Capital Grants and
Contributions
13%

11

900

1,000

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - Confinued
Financial Analysis of fhe City's Funds
As noted eariier, the City uses fund accounting to ensure and demonstrate compliance with finance-related legal
requirements.
Govern/nenfa/ funds. The focus of the City's governmenta/ funds is to provide information on near-term inflows,
outflows, and balances of spendable resources. Such information is useful in assessing the City's financing
requirements. In particular, unreserved fund balance may serve as a useful measure of a government's net
resources available for spending at the end of the fiscal year.
At December 31, 2009, the City's governmental funds reported combined ending fund balances of $1,806.9 million, a
decrease of $144.1 million in comparison with the prior year. Of this total amount ($85.9 million) consfitutes
undes/gnated fund deficit. The remainder of fund balance is reserved to indicate that it is not available for new
spending because it has already been committed 1) to liquidate contracts and purchase orders of the prior period
($147.3 million), 2) to pay debt service ($406.1 million), 3) to provide a long-term reserve ($880.0 million), 4) for future
appropriations ($422.3 million), and 5) for a variety of other restricted purposes ($37.1 million).
The General Fund is the chief operating fund of the City. At the end of the current fiscal year, unreserved fund
balance of the General Fund was $2.7 million with a total fund balance of $54.7 million. As a measure of the General
Fund's liquidity, it may be helpful to compare both unreserved fund balance and total fund balance to total fund
expenditures. Total General Fund balance represents 1.8 percent of total General Fund expenditures.
The fund balance of the City's General Fund increased by $6.3 million during the current fiscal year. Revenues and
Other Financing Sources exceeded Expenditures and Other Financing Uses by $4.7 million.
The Federal, State and Local Grants Fund has a total fund balance of $13.1 million, $17.4 million of which is reserved
for the resale of property, while there is an unreserved, undesignated deficit of $4.3 million.
The Special Taxing Areas Fund has a total fund balance of $1,232.8 million, of which $37.1 million is reserved for
encumbrances, and the remaining $1,197.7 million is unreserved, undesignated.
The Bond, Note Redempfion and Interest Fund have a total fund balance of $256.5 million. The net increase in fund
balance during the current year in the Bond, Note Redemption and Interest Fund was $624.5 million primarily from
the transfer of the underground parking garage system deferred inflow to the Concession Service Agreement Fund
that also includes the Meter Parking System Service Agreement transacfion.
The Service Concession Agreement Fund accounts for deferred inflows from non business type long-term concession
and lease transactions and has an unreserved, undesignated fund deficit of $1,681.5 million.
The Community Development and Improvement Projects Fund has a total fund balance of $340.9 million, of which
$48.7 million is reserved for encumbrances and the remaining $292.2 million is unreserved, undesignated. The
decrease in fund balance during the current year in the Community Development and Improvement Projects Fund
was $59.2 million.
The Reserve Fund has a total fund balance of $1,302.3 million, of which $880.0 million is reserved as a long-term
trust. The remaining is designated for future appropriafions.
Changes in fund balance. The City's governmental fund revenues (excluding other financing sources) decreased
by 4.5 percent or $248.9 million.
Proprietary funds. The City's proprietary funds provide the same type of informafion found in the government-wide
financial statements, but in more detail.

12

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - Continued
Unrestricted net assets of the Water, Sewer, Chicago Skyway, Chicago-O'Hare International Airport, and Chicago
Midway Internafional Airport Funds at the end of the year amounted to a deficit of $1,538.5 million. The total
decrease in unrestricted net assets related to changes in the $2,286.7 million pf net assets invested in capital assets,
net of related debt and the $821.8 million of net assets restricted is primarily due to assets being reserved for debt
service, construcfion, and rehabilitafion. Other factors concerning the finances of these five funds have already been
addressed in the discussion of the City's business-type activities.
General Fund Budgetary Highlights
The City's 2009 Original General Fund Budget is $3,186.5 million. This budget reflects a decrease of $32.0 million
(1.0 percent) over the 2008 Budget. The City's 2009 General Fund Budget was approved by the City Council on
November 9, 2008.
The General Fund revenues and expenditures in 2009 ended the current fiscal year with an available unreserved fund
balance of $2.7 million, which is a $2.5 million increase over 2008.
The General Fund revenues on a budgetary basis were $148.7 million less than the final budget as a result of lower
than expected taxes. In addition, unfavorable results occurred in internal services revenue, licenses and permits, and
leases, rentals and sales. Expenditures were $146.3 million less than budgeted as a result of favorable variances in
general government, primarily as a result of certain labor contracts not being finalized during 2009 as was budgeted.
Addifional information on the City's budget can be found in Note #3 under Stewardship, Compliance and
Accountability within this report.
Capital Asset and Debt Administration
Capital assets. The City's capital assets for its governmental and business-type acfivifies as of December 31, 2009
amount to $18,229.0 million (net of accumulated depreciafion). These capital assets include land, buildings and
system improvements, machinery and equipment, roads, highways and bridges, and property, plant and equipment.
Major capital asset events during the current fiscal year included the following:
The City continued its LEED Strategy with new libraries, police stafions and fire engine company construcfion
projects totaling $54.0 million in 2009.
The City also continued its commitment to libraries with the addition of $7.0 million of books and equipment in
2009.
The City also completed $30.3 million in street lighting and transit improvement projects. An additional $60.9
million in bridge and viaduct reconstrucfion projects were also completed. The City completed street construction
and resurfacing projects totaling $160.5 million in 2009
The City purchased the Michael Reese Hospital Campus for $91.0 million.
During 2009 the Water Fund expended $186.7 million for capital acfivities. This included $11.5 million for
i
structures and improvements, $95.4 million for distribution plant, $11.0 million for equipment and $68.8 million for
construction in progress. The 2009 Water Main Replacement Program completed 31.6 miles of water mains.
During 2009, net completed projects amounted to $73.0 million.
The 2009 Sewer Mam Replacement Program completed 8.1 miles of sewer mains and 43.0 miles of refining of
existing sewer mains at a cost of $112.0 million.
Chicago Midway Internafional Airport had capital asset additions in 2009 of $38.6 million principally due to land
acquisition, terminal improvements, security enhancements, parking, and runway improvements.
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport had capital asset additions in 2009 of $621.6 principally due to land
acquisifion, terminal improvements, secunty enhancements, snow dump improvements, water drainage and
sewer, heafing and refrigeration, runway, roadway and parking improvements.

13

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - Continued
City of Chicago, Illinois
Capital Assets (net of depreciation)
(in millions of dollars)
Governmental
Activities
2009
Land

$

2008

1,372.7

$

$

1,271.6

Total

839.5

$

791.3

2008

2009

2008

2009

S

2,212.2

$

2,062.9

/

Works of Art and
Historical Collections
Construction in Progress
Buildings and Other Improvements
Machinery and Equipment
Infrastructure
Total

BUsiness-type
Activities

13.1

11.6

13.1

11.6

225.3

345.5

1,502.5

1,135.0

1.727.8

1.480.5

1.589.8

1,512.0

8,286.6

8,005.8

9,876.4

9.517.8

335 9

344.2

288.9

279.7

624.8

623.9

3,774.7

3,723.6

3.774.7
S 7,311.5

3,723.6
S

$ 10,917.5

7.208.5

$ 10,211.8

$

18.229.0

$

17,420.3

Informafion on the City's capital assets can be found in Note #7 of this report.
Debf. At the end of the current fiscal year, the City had $6,192.1 million in General Obligafion Bonds and Notes and
$671.3 million in General Obligafion Certificates and Other Obligafions outstanding. Other outstanding long-term debt
is as follows: $208.9 million in Motor Fuel Tax Revenue Bonds; $355.9 million of Sales Tax Revenue Bonds; $186.2
million in Tax Increment Financing Bonds; $3.5 million in Installment Purchase Agreements; and $9,532.3 million in
Enterprise Fund Bonds and long-term obligafions. For more detail, refer to the Long-term Obligations note in the
Basic Financial Statements.
City of Chicago, Illinois
General Obligation and Revenue Bonds
(in millions of dollars)
Business-type
Activities

Governmental
Activities
2009
2008
General Obligation

Total

2008

2009

2008

2009

$ 6,863.4

S 6.456.0

3.5

5.5

3.5

5.5

Tax Increment

186.2

210.2

186.2

210.2

Revenue Bonds

564.8

562.7

Installment Purchase Agreement

Total

$

7,617.9

$

$

9,532.3

7,234.4

$

9,532.3

9,467.7

$

10,097.1

9.467 7
$

6,863.4

$

17,150.2

6,456.0

10,030.4
$

16,702.1

During 2009, the City issued the following:
General Obligafion Bonds and Notes:
• General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2008C, Library Series 2008D and Taxable Project and
Refunding Series 2008E ($611 million)
• General Obligation Tender Notes Series 2009 ($70.4 million)
• General Obligafion Commercial Paper Notes ($135.7 million)
Revenue Bonds:
•
Sales Tax Revenue Refunding Bonds Series 2009A-C ($90.9 million)

14

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31. 2009 - Continued
Enterprise Fund Revenue Bonds and Notes:
• Chicago-O'Hare International Airport General Commercial Paper Notes ($259.8 million)
• Chicago Midway International Airport General Commercial Paper Notes (S61.4 million)
At December 31, 2009 the City had credit ratings with each of the three major rating agencies as follows:
Rating Agency

Moody's

General Obligation
City
Revenue Bonds.
O'Hare Airport:
First Lien General Airport Revenue Bonds
Second Lien General Airport Revenue Bonds
Third Lien General Airport Revenue Bonds
First Lien Passenger Facility Charge (PFC)
Midway Airport
First Lien
Second Lien
Water
First Lien
Second Lien
Wastewater:
First Lien
Junior Lien

standard &
Poors

Fitch

Aa3

AA-

AA

Aa3
Al
Al
Al

AA
AAAA

AA+
AA
A
A+

A2
A3

A
A-

A+
A

Aa3
Al

AA
AA-

AA+
AA

n/a
A2

AAA+

n/a
AA-

Sales Tax

Aa3

AAA

AA

Motor Fuel Tax

A1

AA+

A-

In 2007, the City closed and exfinguished the First Lien Passenger Facility Charge (PFC) bonds. All outstanding PFC
bonds exist within the same lien status.
Economic Factors and Next Year's Budgets and Rates
The City's finances are closely tied with the global and national economies. As a result, the City's economically
sensitive taxes and tax collecfions decreased. Nafionally, in 2009 new housing unit starts were 28 percent below
2008 levels. Addifionally, in Illinois year to date home sales decreased 1.4 percent in 2009 and the average home
price decreased 15.5 percent. Therefore, real estate transaction tax collections decreased by 48.0 percent from 2008
collecfions. Additionally, 2009 sales tax collecfions decreased by 7.6 percent. An increase in the amusement tax
resulted in an increase in the recreation tax of 4.1 percent over 2008 collections.
Chicago is a center of tourism and conventions. Chicago's business district includes more than 30,000 hotel rooms
within a five-mile range of McCormick Place, the convention facility that contaihs 2.6 million square feet of exhibit
halls. A combinafion of economic factors and an increase in supply resulted in hotel occupancy declining to 67
percent in 2009 while the average daily room rate decreased by 18.4 percent. Hotel projects completed in 2009
included the Wit with 298 rooms and Hotel Felix with 230 rooms. Additionally, the 661 room Swissotel completed the
$120 million upgrade of all guest rooms and the expansion of its meefing and ballroom space totalirig 55,000 square
feet.
The 2009 nafional unemployment rate reached 9.275 percent up from 5.82 percent in 2008. The City saw a similar
trend as its unemployment rate increased to 10.0 percent in 2009 up from 6.4 percent in 2008.

15

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - Concluded
On December 2, 2009, the City Council approved the City's 2010 General Fund Budget in the amount of $3,179.7
million. This budget reflects a decrease over the 2009 General Fund budget of $6.8 million or under 1.0 percent over
the 2009 General Fund budget. The City's 2010 budget includes $114.0 million in expense reducfions, some of which
are extensions of those implemented in 2009. Reducfions include the eliminafion of 220 vacant positions across all
departments and the elimination of cost-of-living increases for non-union employees. Additional cost saving
measures include fuel cost savings, equipment rental savings, real estate lease renegotiafions, debt refunding and
the closure of TIF districts. The City will also temporarily leverage some of its exisfing asset concession proceeds to
manage the revenue decline brought on by the national economic recession.
Requests for Information
This financial report is designed to provide a general overview of the City's finances for all of those with an interest in
the government's finances. Questions concerning any of the infomation provided in this report or requests for
additional financial information should be addressed to the City of Chicago Comptroller's Office.

16

 Exhibit 1
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF NET ASSETS
December 3 1 , 2009
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)

Govemmental
Acfivities

Primary Government
Business-type
Acfivities

Total

ASSETS
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investments
Cash and Investments with Escrow Agent
Receivables (Net of Allowances):
Property Tax
Accounts
Internal Balances
Inventories
Restricted Assets:
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investments
Other Assets
Capital Assets:
Land, Improvements, Art, and Construcfion in Progress
Other Capital Assets, net of Accumulated Depreciafion
Total Capital Assets
Total Assets

$

$

1,606,394
801,904
491,626

$

1,701,571
916,321
491,626

95,177
114,417

1,323.772
959,085

1,323,772
702,258
(9,134)
19,658

256,827
9,134
15,112

122,075
757,147
290,472

790,250
988,282
503,473

912,325
1,745,429
793,945

1,611,197
5,700,333
7,311,530
13,417,702

2,341,993
8,575,482
10.917,475
$ 13,690,147

3,953,190
14,275,815
18,229,005
$ 27,107,849

427,573
672
138,294
786,128
95,343

319,382

181,405
128.952
152,482

746,955
672
319,699
915,080
247,825

274,506
11,848,298
13,570,814

220,125
14,291
9,365,860
10,382,497

494,631
14,291
21,214,158
23,953,311

1,681.459

1,737,576

3,419,035

251,103

2,286,658

2,537,761

34,770

LIABILITIES AND DEFERRED INFLOWS
Voucher Wan-ants Payable
Short-term Debt
Accrued Interest
Accrued and Other Liabilities
Unearned Revenue
Long-term Liabilities:
Due Within One Year
Long-term Purchase Obligation
Due in More Than One Year
Total Liabilifies

$

Deferred Inflows
NET ASSETS

$

^

Invested in Capital Assets, Net of Related Debt
Restricted for:
Capital Projects
Long-term Reserve

13,725
1,302,319

Debt Service

1,099,797

Federal, State and Local Grants
Special Taxing Areas
Passenger Facility Charges
Noise Mitigation Program
Other Purposes
Unrestricted (Deficit)
Total Net Assets

13,050
1,306,237

$

See notes to basic financial statements.
17

(5,820,802)
(1,834,571)

192,187
1.302,319
1,139,829
40.032
13,050
1,306,237
203,752
203,752
207,850
207,850
191,813
191,813
(7,359,295)
(1,538,493)
$ 1,570,074 $ (264,497)
178,462

 Exhibit 2
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF ACTIVITIES
Year Ended December 3 1 , 2009
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)

Licenses, Permits,
Fines and

Expenses

Functions/Programs
Primary Government
Governmental Activities:
General Govemment
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Health
Cultural and Recreational ....
Interest on Long-term Debt ..
Total Governmental Activities

$

Business-type Acfivities:
Water
Sewer
Chicago Midway International Airport
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport
Chicago Skyway
Total Business-type Activities
Total Primary Government

See notes to basic financial statements.

2,364,754
2,521,151
297,156
351,101
166,914
129,996
386,125
6,217,197

Charges for Services

$

410,213
175.163
122,301
624,443
1,332,120

382,502
169,982
206,613
811,710
11,775
1,582,582
$

7,799,779

382,617
158,490
30,990
24,895
2,504
22,375
621,871

$

1,953,991

 Net (Expense) Revenue and Changes in Net Assets
Primary Government

Program Revenues
Operating
Grants and
Contributions

Capital
Grants and
Contributions

Business-type

Activities

Activities

$

3,357

435,503
44,400

Governmental

111,904

115,204
16,194
611,301

115,261

211,174
611,301

$

-

(4,868,764)

326,435

General Revenues
Taxes:
Property Tax
Utility Tax
Sales Tax
Transportation Tax
Transacfion Tax
Special Area Tax
Recreation Tax
Other Taxes
Grants and Contributions not Restricted to
Specific Programs
Unrestricted Investment Earnings
Miscellaneous
Total General Revenues
Transfers
Change in Net Assets
Net Assets - Beginning

797,026
579,101
252,282
333,199
205,026
501,042
154,038
96,944

$

19

27,711
5,181
(44,450)
(15,955)
(11,775)
(39,288)

(39,288)

(4,908,052)

797,026
579,101
252,282
333,199
205,026
501,042
154,038
96,944

_
15,024
8,941
23,965

$

(1,543,277)
(2,318,261)
(266,166)
(214,302)
(49,206)
(91,427)
(386,125)
(4,868,764)

27,711
5,181
(44,450)
(15,955)
(11,775)
(39,288)

-

601,198
31,520
238,126
3,789,502
(1,079,262)
(755,309)
(1,834,571)

$

$

-

39,862
171,312

$

(1,543,277)
(2,318,261)
(266,166)
(214,302)
(49,206)
(91,427)
(386,125)
(4,868,764)

Total

(15,323)
1,585,397
1,570,074

601,198
46,544
247,067
3,813,467

$

(1,094,585)
830,088
(264,497)

 Exhibit 3
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
BALANCE SHEET
GOVERNMENTAL FUNDS
December 31, 2009
(Amounts are In Thousands of Dollars)

General
ASSETS
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investments
Cash and Investments with Escrow Agent
Receivables (Net of Allowances):
Property Tax
Accounts
Due From Other Funds
Due From Other Governments
Inventories
Restricted Cash and Cash Equivalents
Restricted Investments
Other Assets
Total Assets

$

2,477
10

$

205,635
293,587
181,302
19,658

LIABILITIES, DEFERRED INFLOWS AND FUND BALANCE
Liabilities:
Voucher Warrants Payable
Bonds, Notes and Other Obligations Payable - Current ....
Accrued Interest
Due To Other Funds
Accrued and Other Liabilities
Claims Payable
Deferred Revenue
Total Liabilifies

Special
Taxing
Areas

Federal, State
and Local
Grants
46,666
9,083

1,088,549
134,848

380,257
1,538
5,212

24.558
45.513
152,148

$

702,669

$

17.397
295,365

$

128,551

$

133,141

20,689

54.967
3,224

9,382
2,313

90.983
282,315

345,256
377,640

256,721
247,849
10,482
4,360
647,963

$

1,610,404

Deferred Inflows
Fund Balance:
Reserved for Encumbrances
Reserved for Resale Property
Reserved for Inventory
Reserved for Debt Service
Reserved for Long-term Trust Fund
Unreserved, Designated for Future Appropriafions
Unreserved, Undesignated - Major Funds
Unreserved, Undesignated - Special Revenue Funds
Unreserved, Undesignated - Capital Projects Funds
Total Fund Balance
Total Liabilities, Deferred Inflows and Fund Balance

32,390

37,087
17.397

19,658

2,658

$

See notes to basic financial statements.

20

54,706
702,669

(4,347)

$

13,050
295,365

1,195,677

$

1,232,764
1,610,404

 Service
Concession
Agreements

$

Reserve

$
-

$

_
$

1,016,770

$

$
-

Other
Governmental
Funds

$

$

-

-

$

-

$

455,315

$

959,633

$

S

53,565

$

74,874
6,285
3,074
139,021
37,321

$

40,672
20,200

-

-

443,757
760,299

2,140

166,441
33.407
129.680

Total
Governmental
Funds

461,456
22,147
98,066
48,436

1,691
34,938

147,644
133,605
35,293

2,140

10,488
408,198

-

-

122,075
757,147
1,304,459

653
89,220
361,946

Community
Development
and Improvement
Projects

482,059
56,314
25,068
1,510

6,979

$

$

291,120
127,138

-

$

Bond, Note
Redemption
and Interest

410,908
671,483

114,437

1,681,459

1,323,772
318,862
502.384
383,396
19,658
122,075
757,147
17,397
6.344,615

410,820
153,929
136,679
538,196
310,907
10,482
1,295,264
2,856,277
1,681,459

48,677

-

-

-

-

(1,681,459)

$

1,302,319
1,304,459

$

256,471
1,016,770

29,120

-

256,471

880,000
422,319

(1,681,459)

$

1,606,394
801,904
491,626

149,647

-

292,201

$

340,878
455,315

$

80,333
29,050
288,150
959,633

S

147,274
17,397
19,658
406,118
880,000
422,319
(195,270)
80,333
29,050
1,806,879
6,344,615

Amounts reported for goi/emmental activities in Ihe statement of net assets are different because.
Capital assets used in govemmental activities are not financial resources and therefore are not reported in the funds ...
7,311,530
Othertong-termassets are not available to pay for cunrent-period expenditures and therefore are defened in the funds.
1,389,531
Certain liabilites, including bonds payable, are not due and payable in the cun^ent
period and therefore are not reported in the funds
(12,342,511)
Net assets of govemmental activities
$
(1,834,571)
21

 Exhibit 4
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES IN FUND BALANCES
GOVERNMENTAL FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2009
(Amounts are In Thousands of Dollars)
Federal,
State and
Local
Grants

General
Revenues:
Property Tax
Utility Tax
Sales Tax
Transportation Tax
State Income Tax
Transaction Tax
Special Area Tax
Recreation Tax
Other Taxes
Federal/State Grants
Internal Sen/ice
Licenses and Permits
Fines
Investment Income (Loss)
Charges for Services
Miscellaneous
Total Revenues
Expenditures:
Current:
General Government
Health
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Cultural and Recreafional
Employee Pensions
Other
Capital Ouflay
Debt Service:
Principal Retirement
Interest and Other Fiscal Charges
Total Expenditures
Revenues Over (Under) Expenditures

Special
Taxing
Areas

$
481,275
476,557
155,851
251,820
179,641
154,038
82,942
1,714
289,100
100,458
252,483
3,011
96,705
36,031

751,555
-

371,548
2;967
878
16,788

2,561,626

751,555

392,181

857,626
41,044
1,862,914
219,485
26,976
700

431,938
128,999
47,741
115,833
17,146

149,157
204
559
3,861
45,223
53

354
-

6,541
3,357

404
-

-

-

3,410
1,568
3,014,077
(452,451)

Continued on following pages.

22

751,555
-

199,461
192,720

 Service
Concession
Agreements

$

Bond, Note
Redempfion
and Interest

Reserve

$
-

$

-

Community
Development
^ and
Improvement
Projects

$

471,218
22,138
25,990
15,612

$

-

-

Nonmajor
Governmental
Funds
334,792
75,688
1,405
161,736
95.994
25,385
116.361

14.002

16,995

-

Total
Governmental
Funds
$

806,010
579,101
503,952
333,199
347,814
205,026
487,909
154,038
96,944
753,269
306,095
100,458
267,891
31,520
124.557
238,126

21,033

80,000

47,366

9,798

15,408
5,608
26,974
27,110

21,033

102,604

573,642

15,810

917,458

5,335,909

218,141
7,565
2,497
76,785
73,916
89,705
430,915
377
88,000

1,663,990
177,812
1,913,711
300,131
261,948
107,604
430,915
7,676
619,273

37,000
32,372

434,905
351,430

1,057,273

6,269,395

(139,815)

(933,486)

22,604

-

6,012

(8,682)

-

-

7,128

_
21,033

_
-

-

527,916

-

394,495
317,490

7,128

711,985

527,916

95,476

(138,343)

(512,106)

23

 Exhibit 4 - Concluded
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES IN FUND BALANCES
GOVERNMENTAL FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2009
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Federal,
State and
Local
Grants

General
Other Financing Sources (Uses):
Issuance of Debt
Premium
Payment to Refunded Bond Escrow Agent ...

$

58,500

457,172

Net Changes in Fund Balance
Fund Balance, Beginning of Year
Change in Inventory

4,721
48,443
1,542
$

54,706

See notes to basic financial statements.

24

$
_

416.135
(17,463)

Total Other Financing Sources (Uses)

Fund Balance. End of Year

$

-

Transfers Out

Special
Taxing
Areas

68,182
(32,344)
35,838
228,558
1,004.206

13.050

$

13,050

$

1,232,764

 Service
Concession
Agreements

-

$

-

$

340,324

-

438,094
2,259

Nonmajor
Governmental
Funds

$

162,125

Total
Governmental
Funds

$

-

-

999,043
2,259
(213,435)
2,253,459
(2,253,459)

(1,702,492)

951,355
(404,845)

(213,435)
651,137
(15,194)

(1,702,492)

546,510

762,832

452,953

235.054

787,867

(1,681,459)

641,986
660,333

624,489
(368,018)

(59,153)
400,031

95,239
192,911

(145,619)
1,950,956
1,542

$

Bond, Note
Redemption
and Interest

Reserve

$

$

Community
Development
and
Improvement
Projects

(1,681,459)

$

1,302,319

16,334
(3,734)

$

150,316
(77,387)

$

256,471

25

340,878

$

288,150

$

1,806,879

 Exhibit 5
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
RECONCILIATION OF THE STATEMENT OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES AND CHANGES
IN FUND BALANCES OF GOVERNMENTAL FUNDS TO THE STATEMENT OF ACTIVITIES
Year Ended December 31, 2009
(Amounts are In Thousands of Dollars)
Amounts reported for govemmental acfivifies in the statement of activities are different because:
Net change in fund balances - total governmental funds

$

Governmental funds report capital outlays as expenditures. However, in
the statement of activities the cost of those assets is allocated over their
estimated useful lives and reported as depreciation expense. This is the
amount by which capital outlays exceeded depreciation in the curreni
period

(145,619)

101,786

Revenues in the statement of acfivifies that do not provide current financial
resources are not reported as revenues in the funds

4,149

Bond proceeds provide current financial resources to governmental funds,
but issuing debt increases long-tenn liabilities in the statement of net
assets. This is the amount by which proceeds exceeded repayments

(370,549)

Certain expenses reported in the statement of activities do not require
the use of current financial resources and therefore are not reported as
expenditures in governmental funds

(669,029)

Change in the net assets of governmental activities

$

See notes to basic financial statements.

26

(1,079,262)

 Exhibit 6
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF REVENUES AND EXPENDITURES BUDGET AND ACTUAL
GENERAL FUND (BUDGETARY BASIS)
Year Ended December 31. 2009
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)

Original
Budget
Revenues:
Utility Tax
Sales Tax
Transportation Tax
Transacfion Tax
Recreation Tax
Business Tax
State Income Tax
State Sales Tax
State Auto Rental
Federal/State Grants
Internal Service
Licenses and Permits
Fines
Investment Income
Charges for Services
Municipal Utilities
Leases, Rentals and Sales
Miscellaneous
Issuance of Debt, Net of
Original Discount
Budgeted Prior Years' Surplus
and Reappropriations
Transfers In/Out

$

Total Revenues
Expenditures:
Current:
General Government
Health
Public Safety
Streets and Sanitation
Transportation
Cultural and Recreafional
Debt Service:
Principal Retirement
Interest and Other Fiscal Charges
Total Expenditures

523,266
262,715
161,568
257,250
162,551
93,991
362,045
284,820
3,800
2,500
315,546
125,990
293,546
10,960
93,686
5,900
24,061
19,214

Final
Budget
$

523,266
262,715
161,568
257,250
162.551
93,991
362,045
284,820
3,800
2,500
315,546
125,990
293,546
10,960
93,686
5,900
24,061
19,214

$

481,275
224,887
155,851
179,641
154,038
79,557
251,820
251,670
3,385
1,714
289,100
100,458
252.483
3.011
87,520
9,120
10,683
25,413

$

58,500

-

-

Variance
Positive
(Negative) •

Actual
Amounts

(41.991)
(37,828)
(5,717)
(77,609)
(8,513)
(14,434)
(110,225)
(33,150)
(415)
(786)
(26,446)
(25,532)
(41,063)
(7,949)
. (6,166)
3,220
(13,378)
6,199
58,500

3,186,472

1,473
181,590
3,186,472

1,473
416.135
3,037,734

234,545
(148,738)

1,058,261
42,694
1,823,197
223,904
32,925
700

1,058,261
42,694
1,823,197
223,904
32,925
700

885,049
41,169
1,862,429
219.618
26,487
700

173,212
1,525
(39,232)
4,286
6,438
-

3,410
1,381
3,186,472

3,410
1,381
3,186,472

3,410
1,354
3,040,216

27
146,256

1,473
181,590

Revenues Over (Under) Expenditures .... $

$

See notes to basic financial statements.

27

$

(2,482) $

(2,482)

 Exhibit 7
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF NET ASSETS
PROPRIETARY FUNDS
December 31, 2009
(Amounts are In Thousands of Dollars)
Business-type Activities - Enterprise Funds
Major Funds
Chicago

Water

Sewer

Chicago-

Midway

O'Hare

Intemational

Intemational

Chicago

Airport

Airport

Skyway

Total

ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS:
Unrestricted Assets:
Cash and Cash Equivalents

$

Investments

20.012

$

4,505

$

7,049

$

61,398

1,532

3.439

43,432

65,956

99,970

58,521

12,056

17,541

35.440

3.564
5

3,843

$

2.213

$

95,177

58

114,417

82,375

57

252,979

20.820

-

Accounts Receivable (Net of
Allowances)
Due from Other Funds

-

Due from Other Governments

.

-

77,365
3,848

13.817

1,295

152.872

103,200

66,106

234,392

2,328

558,898

Cash and Cash Equivalents

34.639

57.478

135.383

562,750

Investments

86,384

28.834

94.584

778,480

-

988,282

Total Restricted Assets

121,023

86,312

229.967

1,341,230

Total Current Assets

273,895

189,512

296.073

1.575.622

2,328

2.337.430

14,175

10,896

117,073

350,806

10.523

503,473

5,083

560

106.918

714,373

12.609

839,543

2,957,374

1.604,229

Inventories
Total Unrestricted Assets

15,112

Restnctod Assets:
790,250

1,778,532

NONCURRENT ASSETS:
OTHER ASSETS
PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT.

Structures, Equipment and
1,318,793

5,937.981

490,755

12,309,132

(736,433)

(364.782)

(293,557)

(2,158,534)

(180,344)

(3.733,650)

172,718

29,490

36,042

1,264,200

Total Property. Plant and Equipment..

2.398.742

1.269.497

1.168.196

5,758,020

323,020

10,917.475

Total Noncurrent Assets

2,412,917

1,280.393

1,285.269

6,108,826

333.543

11,420,948

Improvements
Accumulated Depreciation
Construction Woric in Progress

Total Assets

5

2,686.812

$

1.469.905

See notes to basic finanaal statements.

28

$

1,581.342

$

7.684,448

-

$

335,871

1,502,450

$

13,758,378

 Business-type Activities - Enterprise Funds
Major Funds
Chicago

Water

Sower

Chicago-

Midway

O'Hare

International

International

Chicago

Airport

Airport

Skyway

Total

LIABILITIES
CURRENT LIABILITIES:
Unrestncted Liabilities:
Voucher Warrants Payable

$

21.912

$

16,802

$

17,085

$

59,528

$

267

$

115.594

Due to Other Funds

45,345

10,017

7,808

5.046

15

68,231

Accrued and Other Liabilities

60.648

36.437

4,404

11.908

147

113,544

Deferred Revenue

21,164

35.373

31,433

64.512

149,069

98,629

60,730

140.994

73.884

37.844

116,800

392,198

222.953

136,473

177,530

533.192

1.452.061

879.731

1.196,154

5.837,914

Total Unrestncted Liabilities

152,482
429

449.851

Restricted Liabilities:
Current Liabilities Payable From
Restricted Assets
Total Current Liabilities

620,726
429

1,070.577

-

9,365.860

NONCURRENT LIABILITIES:
Revenue Bonds Payable
Long-term Purchase Obligation

14,291

14.291

Total Noncurrent Liabilities

1.466.352

879.731

1.196,154

5.837.914

Total Liabilities

1,689,305

1.016,204

1,373,684

6,371.106

9,380,151

DEFERRED INFLOWS

429

10.450,728

1,737,576

1,737,576

323,059

2,286,658

NET ASSETS
Invested in Capital Assets, Net of
Related Debt

958,723

391,248

708

612,920

40.032

40,032

350

9.533

10,408

158.171

178,462
203.752

Restricted Net Assets:
Debt Service
Capital Projects
Passenger Facility Charges

. .

Contractual Use Agreement
Noise Mitigation Program
Other
Unrestncted Net Assets
Total Net Assets

38.434
$

997,507

52.920
$

453,701

See notes to basic financial statements.

29

$

9,620

194,132

30,565

108,811

139,376

105,540

102.310

207,850

45,025

7.412

5.792

89.554

207,658

$

1,313.342

52.437
(1,725,193)
$

(1,402,134)

(1,538,493)
$

1,570,074

 Exhibit 8
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF REVENUES, EXPENSES AND CHANGES IN NET ASSETS
PROPRIETARY FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2009
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Business-type Activities - Enterprise Funds
Major Funds
Chicago

O'Hare

Intemational

Intemational

Chicago

Airport

Airport

Skyway

Sewer

Water

Chicago-

Midway

Total

Operating Revenues:
Charges for Services

$

396.954

$

-

Rent
Olher

173,906

$

-

52,640

$

69,661

394,279

-

1,257

410.213

175,163

122,301

624.443

Personal Sen/ices

104,549

14,403

39.521

150,338

Contractual Services

\ 52.780
1,808

3.319

6,727

54,767

66.490

37,967

82.518

Total Operating Revenues

_

-

13.259

$

$

230,164

1,017,779
299,825
14,516
1,332,120

Operating Expenses'

Repairs and Maintenance

-

Commodities and Materials

24,534

Depreciation and Amortization

38.748

21.878

General Fund Reimbursements

60,714

25,431

Total Operating Expenses
Operating Income (Loss)
Nonoperating Revenues (Expenses):
Interest Expense

116,662

-

86,145
161,810

147,308

583,002

11,775

97,358

43.642

(25,007)

41,441

(11.775)

234 •

12,775

1,051

(38.461)

-

Other

15,426

24,534

-

(59,305)

(228.708)

39,862

120,992

2,584

(19,528)

7.072

314

(66,102)

(57,755)

(11.320)

298,785

11.775

131,521

(69,647)

Passenger Facility Charges

178.717

117.593
188,783

312,855

961

Investment Income

-

47,667

-

29,722

Other

-

308,811

-

1,186,461
145,659

15,024

3

-

(396,121)
160,854
8,941

18,499

Total Nonoperating Revenues
(Expenses)

-

Transfers Out

(94.627)

-

-

-

Capital Grants

50,320

50,320

Net Income (Loss)

31,256

Net Assets (Deficit) - Beginning of Year
Net Assets (Deficit) - End of Year

(211,302)

18,502

966,251
$

997,507

$

(14,113)

(36,327)

467,814

243,985

453,701

See notes to basic financial statements.

30

$

207,658

6,727

(2,866)

1,313,342

1,585,397

(1,408,861)

1,316.208
$

(15,323)

$

(1,402,134)

$

1.570.074

 Exhibits
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
PROPRIETARY FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2009
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Business-type Activities - Enterpnse Funds
Major Funds
Chicago-

Chicago

Water

Midway

O'Hare

International

Intemational

Chicago

Airport

Airport

Skyway

Sewer

Total

Cash Flows from Operating Activities:
Received frcim Customers

$

Payments to Vendors
Payments to Employees
Transactions with Other City Funds

666,030

(26,447)

(57,685)

(233,800)

(403,897)

(104,550)

(44,039)

(32,175)

(135,096)

(315,860)

(47,752)

(28,615)

(4.321)

(50,461)

(131.149)

59,640

43,665

246.673

494,813

50.686

259.790

310,476

(27,787)

(564,350)

$

158,741

$

1,345,719

137,846

(85,965)

383,102

$

Cash Flows from
Operating Activities

144,835

Cash Flows from Capital and Related
Financing Activities:
Proceeds from Issuance of Bonds .
Acquisition and Constoiction of
Capital Assets

(185,508)

(113,324)

Capital Grant Receipts

(891,065)

(96)

63,252

59,908

3,344

Bond Issuance Costs

(184)

(184)

Payment to Refund Bonds
Principal Paid on Bonds

(42,853)

(21,208)

(38,835)

(146,795)

(249,691)

Interest Paid

(72,479)

(37.267)

(59,713)

(285,247)

(454,706)

37,944

127.583

165.527

(23,791)

(20,564)

(44,355)

Passenger Facility Charges
Noise Mitigation Program
Deposit

6,295

6,295

Cash Flows from Capital and
Related Financing Activities

(1,094,451)

(171,799)

(51,857)

(569,859)

(96)

130,706

89.115

(91,773)

180,803

4.629

2.201

1,040

26,737

(34)
3

308,817
34,610

135.335

91.316

(90,733)

207,540

(31)

343,427

(20,670)

(20,843)

(98,925)

(115,646)

75,321

82,826

241,357

739,794

54.651

61,983

(300,840)

Cash Flows from Investing Activities:
Sale (Purchases) of Investments, Nel
Investment Interest
Cash Flows from
Investing Activities
Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash and
Cash Equivalents

(127)

(256,211)

Cash and Cash Equivalents,
Beginning of Year

2,340

1,141.638

Cash and Cash Equivalents,
End of Year

$

See notes to basic financial statements.

31

$

142,432

$

624,148

$

2,213

$

885.427

 Exhibit 9 - Concluded
CITY OF CHICAGO. ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
PROPRIETARY FUNDS
Year Ended December 31,2009
(Amounts are In Thousands of Dollars)
Business-type Activities - Enterprise Funds
Major Funds
Chicago

O'Hare

Intemational

International

Chicago

Airport

Airport

Skyway

Sewer

Water

Chicago-

Midway

Total

Reconciliation of Operating Income to
Cash Flows from Operating Activities:
Operating Income (Loss)

$

97,358

43,642

Depreciation and Amortization

38,748

21,878

47,667

178.717

Provision for Uncollectible Accounts

10,396

5,803

(968)

2.153

298.785
17,384

(25,655)

(15,210)

(3.850)

(5,685)

(50,400)

2,771

(7,569)

(388)

(3,449)

(8,635)

(13,842)

11,447

47,338

79,989

$

(25,007)

$

41,441

$

(11,775)

$

145,659

Adjustments to Reconcile.
11,775

Change in Assets and Liabilities:
(Increase) Decrease in Receivables
(Increase) Decrease in Due From Other Funds ....
Increase (Decrease) in Voucher Warrants
Payable and Due to Other Funds

15,518

4,264

5,507

5,121

6,826

20,704

578

6

Increase (Decrease) in Defen-ed Revenue
and Other Liabilities
(Increase) Deaease in Inventories and
Other Assets
Cash Flows from
Operating Activities

-

584

$

144,835

$

59,640

$

43,865

$

246,673

$

$

494,813

$

21,942

$

41,168

$

20,484

$

133,808

$

$

217,402

Supplemental Disclosure of
Noncash Items:
Capital asset additions in 2009
included in accounts payable
and accrued and other liabilities

See notes to basic financial statements.

32

 Exhibit 10
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF FIDUCIARY NET ASSETS
FIDUCIARY FUNDS
December 3 1 , 2009
( A m o u n t s are in T h o u s a n d s of Dollars)
Pension
Trust

Agency

ASSETS
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investments
Investments, at Fair Value
Bonds and U.S. Government
Obligations
Stocks
Mortgages and Real Estate
Other
Cash and Investments with
Escrow Agent
Property Tax Receivable
Accounts Receivable, Net
Due From City
:
Invested Securifies Lending Collateral

$

232,167

5,322
55,100

2,031,978
6,233,313
360,355
1,625,841

665,065
26,678
1,352,612

Total Assets

$

12,528,009

$

298,549

14,119
94,756
212,580

381,877

LIABILITIES
Voucher Warrants Payable
Accrued and Olher Liabilities
Securities Lending Collateral

18,987
362,890

1,352,612

Total Liabilities

1,651,161

NET ASSETS
Reserved for Employee
Benefit Plans

10,876,848

Total Net Assets

$

See notes to basic financial statements.

33

10,876,848

381,877

 Exhibit 11
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN PLAN NET ASSETS
FIDUCIARY FUNDS - PENSION TRUST FUNDS
Year Ended December 31, 2009
(Amounts are in Thousands of Dollars)
Total
ADDITIONS
Contributions:
Employees
City
Total Contributions

$

Investment Income:
Net Appreciation in
Fair Value of Investments
Interest, Dividends and Other
Investment Expense

285,738
447,255
732,993

1,568,421
230,888
(42,713)

Net Investment Income

1,756,596

Securifies Lending Transacfions:
Securities Lending Income
Securities Lending Expense

44,215
(8.457)

Net Securities Lending Transacfions

35.758

Total Additions

2,525,347

DEDUCTIONS
Benefits and Refunds of Deductions
Administrative and General

1,472,537
19,347

Total Deductions

1,491.884

Net Increase in Net Assets

1.033,463

Net Assets Held in Trust for
Pension Benefits:
Beginning of Year
End of Year

9,843,385
$

See notes to basic financial statements.

34

10,876,848

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009
1) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The City of Chicago (City), incorporated in 1837, is a "home rule" unit under State of Illinois (State) law. The City has
a mayor-council form of government. The Mayor is the Chief Executive Officer of the City and is elected by general
election. The City Council is the legislafive body and consists of 50 members, each representing one of the City's 50
wards. The members of the City Council are elected through popular vote by ward for four-year terms.
The accounfing policies of the City are based upon accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America as prescribed by the Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB).
a) Reporting Entity - The City includes the Chicago Public Library and the City-related funds of the Ptjblic
Building Commission. The financial statements for the City have been prepared in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP), applicable to governmental
units, as required by the Municipal Code of Chicago (Code).
The City's financial statements blend the following legally separate component units because they are fiscally
dependent on the City and perform services primarily for City employees:
The Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago is governed by a five-member board: three
members are elected by plan participants and two are members ex-officio.
The Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago is governed by an
eight-member board: two members are elected by plan participants, two are members ex-officio, two
members are appointed by the City Department of Human Resources, one member is elected by retired plan
participants and one member is elected by the local labor union.
The Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago is governed by an eight-member board: four members
are elected by plan participants and four are appointed by the Mayor.
The Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago is governed by an eight-member board: four members
are elected by plan participants and four are members ex-officio.
Financial statements for each of the pension plans may be obtained at the respective fund's office.
Related Organizations - City officials are responsible for appointing a voting majority of the members of the
boards of other organizations, but the City's accountability for these organizations does not extend beyond
making appointments and no fiscal dependency exists between the City and these organizations. Therefore,
the Chicago Park District, Chicago Public Schools, Community College District No. 508, Chicago Housing
Authority and the Chicago Transit Authority are deemed to be related organizations.
b) Government-wide and fund financial statements - The government-wide financial statements (i.e., the
statement of net assets and the statement of acfivifies) report informafion on all of the nonfiduciary acfivities
of the government. For the most part, the effect of interfund acfivity has been removed from these
statements. Governmental activities, which normally are supported by taxes and intergovernmental
revenues, are reported separately from business-type activities, which rely to a significant extent on user fees
and charges for services.
The statement of activities demonstrates the degree to which the direct expenses of a given function or
segment is offset by program revenues. Direct expenses are those that are cleariy identified with a specific
function or segment. Program revenues include: 1) charges to customers or applicants who purchase, use or

35

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
directly benefit from goods, services, or privileges provided by a given function or segment and 2) grants and
contritjutions that are restricted to meeting the operational or capital requirements of a particular function or
segment. Taxes and other items not property included among program revenues are reported instead as
general revenues. Separate fund financial statements are provided for governmental funds, proprietary
funds, and fiduciary funds, even though the fiduciary funds are excluded from the government-wide financial
statements. Major individual govemmental funds and major individual enterprise funds are reported as
separate columns in the fund financial statements.
c) Measurement focus, basis of accounting, and financial statement presentation - The government-wide
financial statements are reported using the economic resources measurement focus and the accrual basis of
accounting as are the proprietary fund and fiduciary fund financial statements. Revenues are recorded when
earned and expenses are recorded when a liability is incurred, regardless of the timing of related cash flows.
Property taxes are recognized as revenues in the year for which they are levied. Grants and similar items are
recognized as revenue as soon as all eligibility requirements imposed by the provider have been met.
Governmental fund financial statements are reported using the current financial resources measurement
focus and the modified accrual basis of accoun//ng. Revenues are recognized as soon as they are both
measurable and available. Revenues are considered to be available when they are collectable within the
current period or soon enough thereafter to pay liabilities of the current period. For this purpose, the City
considers revenues to be available if they are collected within 90 days of the end of the ctjrrent fiscal period
with the exception of property tax revenue, which is deferred unless taxes are received within 60 days
subsequent to year-end. Licenses and permits, charges for services and miscellaneous revenues are not
considered to be susceptible to accrual and are recorded as revenues when received in cash. All other
revenue items are considered to be measurable and available only when cash is received by the City.
Expenditures generally are recorded when a liability is incurred, as under accrual basis of accounfing, except
for interest and principal on long-term debt, the long-term portion of compensated absences, claims and
judgments and pension obligations.
The City reports the following major govemmental funds:
The General Fund is the City's primary operafing fund. It accounts for all financial resources except
those required to be accounted for in another fund.
Federal, State and Local Grants Fund accounts for the expenditures for programs, which include
general government, health, public safety, transportation, aviation, cultural and recreational, and capital
oufiays. The majority of revenues are provided by several agencies of the Federal government,
departments of the Illinois State govemment and City resources.
Special Taxing Areas Fund accounts for expenditures for special area operations and maintenance and
for redevelopment project costs as provided by tax levies on special areas.
Service Concession Agreement Fund accounts for deferred inflows from long-term concession and
lease transactions whose proceeds are restricted to expenditure for specified purposes.
Reserve Fund accounts for a Mid-term and Long-term Reserve. The Mid-term is subject to
appropriation; whereas the Long-term's principal is legally restricted. These reserves were created as a
result of the Skyway Lease and Meter Parking System transactions.
Bond. Note Redemption and Interest Fund accounts for the expenditures for principal and interest as
provided by property tax, utility tax, sales tax, transportation tax, and investment income.
Community Development and Improvement Projects Funds account for proceeds of debt used to
acquire property and finance construcfion and supporting services for various redevelopment projects.

36

 CITY OF CHICAGO. ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
The City reports the following major proprietary funds as business-type activities:
Water Fund accounts for the operafions of the Chicago Water System (Water). The Water system
purifies and provides Lake Michigan water for the City and 125 suburbs. The Water Fund operates two
water treatment facilities and 12 pumping stations with a combined pumping capacity of 3,661 million
gallons per day.
Sewer Fund accounts for the operafions of the Wastewater Transmission System (Sewer). The Sewer
system transports wastewater to the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago for
processing and disposal. This service is provided for the residents and businesses of the City and certain
suburban customers.
Chicago Midway International Airport Fund records operafions of Chicago Midway Internafional
Airport (Midway) that provides regional travelers with access to airiines that generally specialize in lowcost, point-to-point, origin and destination passenger service. Midway Airport is conveniently located 10
miles from downtown Chicago. The Chicago Department of Aviafion celebrated the completion of the
historic Midway Airport Terminal Development Program in 2004, an eight year program that transformed
Chicago's southwest side airport. Throughout the redevelopment of Midway, the airport experienced
record-breaking growth, and today remains one of the fastest growing airports in the nafion.
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Fund records operafions of Chicago-O'Hare International Airport
(O'Hare), the primary commercial airport for the Cily. The airiines servicing the airport operate oul of four
terminal buildings. Three domestic terminal buildings, having a total of 157 gates, serve domesfic flights
and certain international departures. The International Terminal, having a total of 21 gates and five
remote aircraft parking positions, serves the remaining international departures and all international
arrivals requiring customs clearance.
Chicago Skyway Fund records operations of the Chicago Skyway (Skyway) which provides vehicle
passage across the Calumet River, between the State of Indiana and the State of Illinois (State) through
the operation of a tollway which consists of a 7.8-mile span connecting the Dan Ryan Expressway to the
Indiana Toll Road. Facilities include a single toll plaza consisting of a central office, maintenance garage
and toll collection area. In January 2005, the City entered into a long-term Concession and Lease
Agreement of the Skyway, granting a private company the ability to operate and to collect toll revenue
during the 99-year term of the agreement. The City received a one-time upfront payment of $1.83 billion.
Additionally, the City reports the following fiduciary fund types:
Pension Trust Funds report expenditures for employee pensions as provided by employee and
employer contributions and investment earnings.
Agency Funds account for transactions for assets held by the City as agent for certain activities or for
various entities. Payroll deductions and special deposits are the primary transactions accounted for in
these funds.
Private-sector standards of accounting and financial reporting issued prior to December 1, 1989, generally
are followed in both the government-wide and propnetary fund financial statements to the extent that those
standards do not conflict with or contradict guidance of the GASB. Governments also have the option of
following subsequent private-sector guidance for their business-type acfivities and enterprise funds, subject to
this same limitation. The City has elected not to follow subsequent private-sector guidance.
As a general rule the effect of interfund activity has been eliminated from the government-wide financial
statements. Exceptions to this general rule are payment-in-lieu of taxes and other charges between the City's
water, sewer, airports and skyway funds. Elimination of these charges would distort the direct costs and
program revenues reported for the various functions concerned.
37

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31. 2009 - CONTINUED
Amounts reported as program revenues include: 1) charges to customers or applicants for goods and
services, or privileges provided, or fines. 2) operating grants and contributions, and 3) capital grants and
contributions, including special assessments. Internally dedicated resources are reported as general
revenues rather than as program revenues. Likewise, general revenues include all taxes.
Certain indirect costs have been included as part of the program expenses reported.for the various functional
activities.
In the fund financial statements, proprietary funds distinguish operating revenues and expenses from
nonoperating items. Operating revenues and expenses generally result from providing services and
producing and delivering goods in connection with a proprietary fund's principal ongoing operations. The
principal operating revenues of the water, sewer and skyway funds are charges to customers for sales and
services. The airport funds principal operating revenues are derived from landing fees and terminal use
charges as well as rents and concessions. Operating expenses for enterprise funds include the cost of sales
and services, administrative expenses, and depreciation on capital assets. All revenues and expenses not
meeting this definition are reported as nonoperating revenues and expenses.
When both restricted and unrestricted resources are available for use, it is the City's policy to use restricted
resources first, then unrestricted resources, as they are needed.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make certain
estimates and assumpfions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of
contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues
and expenses during the reporting period. Accordingly, actual results could differ from those estimates.
d) Assets, liabilities, deferred inflows, and net assets or equity
i)

Cash, Cash Equivalents and Investments generally are held with the City Treasurer as required by the
Code. Interest eamed on pooled investments is allocated to participating funds based upon their average
combined cash and investment balances. Due to contractual agreements or legal restrictions, the cash
and investments of certain funds are segregated and earn and receive interest directiy. The City uses
separate escrow accounts in which certain tax revenues are deposited and held for payment of debt.
The Code permits deposits only to City Council-approved depositories, which must be regularly organized
state or national banks and federal and stale savings and loan associations, located within the City,
whose deposits are federally insured.
Investments authorized by the Code include interest-bearing general obligations of the City, State and
U.S. Government; U.S. Treasury bills and other noninleresl-bearing general obligations of the U.S.
Government purchased in the open market below face value; domestic money market funds regulated
and in good standing with the Securities and Exchange Commission and tax anticipation warrants issued
by the City. The City is prohibited by ordinance from investing in derivatives, as defined, without City
Council approval. The City values its investments at fair value or amortized cost. U.S. Government
securities purchased at a price other than par with a maturity of less than one year are reported at
amortized cost.
The City's four retirement plans are authorized to invest in bonds, notes, and other obligations of the U.S.
Government; corporate debentures and obligations; insured mortgage notes and loans; common and
preferred stocks; stock options; real estate; and other investment vehicles as set forth in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes. These investments are reported at fair value.

38

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
Repurchase agreements can be purchased only from banks and certain other institutions authorized to
do business in the State. The City Treasurer requires that securities that are pledged to secure these
agreements have a market value equal to the cost of the repurchase agreements plus accrued interest.
Investments generally may not have a maturity date in excess of ten years from the date of purchase.
Certain other investments are held in accordance with the specific provisions of applicable ordinances.
Cash equivalents include certificates of deposit and olher investments wilh maturities of three months or
less when purchased.
Deficit cash balances result in interfund borrowings from the aggregate of funds other than escrowed
funds. Interest income and expense are generally not recognized on these interfund borrowings.
State statutes and the City's Pension Plans' policies permit lending Pension Plan secunties to brokerdealers and other entities with a simultaneous agreement to return the collateral for the same securities in
the future. Securities lent at year-end for cash collateral are presented as not categorized in the schedule
of custodial credit risk; securities lent for securities collateral are classified according to the category for
the collateral.
ii)

Receivables and Payables activity between funds are representative of services rendered, outstanding
at the end of the fiscal year, and are referred to as either "due to/from olher funds" (i.e., the current
portion of interfund loans) or "advances to/from other funds" (i.e., the noncun^ent portion of interfund
loans). Any residual balances outstanding between the governmental activities and business-type
activities are reported in the government-wide financial statements as "internal balances."
All trade and property tax receivables are shown nel of an allowance for uncollectibles. The allowance is
based on historical trends. The estimated value of services provided but unbilled at year-end has been
included in receivables.

iii) Inventory includes government-wide inventories, which are stated al cost determined principally, using
the average cost method. For proprietary funds, the costs of inventories are recorded as capital assets
when used (consumption method). Governmental fund inventories are accounted for using the
purchases method and are offset by a reservation of fund balance to indicate that they do not represent
expendable available financial resources.
iv) Assets Held for Resale includes land and buildings of $17.4 million, recorded at lower of cost or mari<et
in the Federal, Slate and Local Grant Funds. These assets are purchased through the use of federal
grants and City resources and are intended to be resold.
v)

Restricted Assets include certain proceeds of the City's enterprise fund revenue bonds, as well as
certain resources set aside for their repayment. These assets are classified as restricted in the basic
financial statements because they are maintained in separate bank accounts and their use is limited by
applicable bond covenants.
The Skyway Lease Transaction legally requires the Long-term reserve's principal to be restricted.
The Water and Sewer funds maintain Rate Stabilization Accounts where any net revenues remaining
after providing sufficient funds for all required deposits in the bond accounts may be transferred upon the
direction of the City to be used for any lawful purpose of the specific fund.
The O'Hare and Midway funds maintain Passenger Facility Charge accounts as restricted as they are
subject to Federal Aviation Administration regulation and approval, to finance specific eligible capital and
debt related activities.

39

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31. 2009 - CONTINUED
vi) Capital Assets, which include property, plant, equipment, and infrastnjcture assets (e.g. roads, bridges,
sidewalks, and similar items), are reported in the applicable governmental or business-type activities
columns in the government-wide financial statements. Capital assets are defined by the City as assets,
or a network of assets, with an inifial cost of more than $5,000 (not rounded) and an estimated useful life
in excess of one year. Such assets are recorded at historical cost or estimated historical cost if
purchased or constructed. Donated capital assets are recorded at esfimaled fair mart<et value at the date
of donafion.
The costs of normal maintenance and repairs that do not add to the value of the asset or materially
extend assets' lives are nol capitalized.
Major oufiays for capital assets and improvements are capitalized as projects are constructed. Interest
incurred during the construction phase of capital assets of business-type activities is included as part of
the capitalization value of the assets constructed. The total interest expense (Governmental and
Business Activities) incurred by the City during the cunrent fiscal year was $809.5 million, of which $64.7
million was capitalized as part of the capital assets under construcfion projects in proprietary funds.
Property, plant, and equipment of Uie Cily are depreciated using the straight-line method, in the year
subsequent to acquisition or when placed into service, over the following estimated useful lives:
Utility plant
Utility stnjctures and improvements
Buildings and improvements
Airport runways, aprons, tunnels; taxiways, and paved roads
Bridge infrastructure
Lighting infrastructure
Street infrastructure
Transit infrastructure
Equipment (vehicle, office, and computer)

25- 100
50 - 100
5-40
5 - 40
10- 50
25
10- 25
10- 40
4-33

years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years

The City has a collection of artwork and historical treasures presented for public exhibition and education
that are being preserved for future generations. The proceeds from sales of any pieces of the collection
are used to purchase other acquisitions. A portion of this collection is not capitalized or depreciated as
part of capital assets.
vii) Employee Benefits are granted for vacation and sick leave, workers' compensation and health care.
Unused vacation leave is accrued and may be carried over for one year. Sick leave is accumulated at
the rate of one day for each month worked, up to a maximum of 200 days. Severance of employment
terminates all rights to receive compensation for any unused sick leave. Sick leave pay is not accrued.
Employee benefit claims outstanding, including claims incurred but not reported, are estimated and
recorded in the government-wide and proprietary fund financial statements. A liability for these amounis
is reported in governmental funds only if they have matured, for example, as a result of employee
resignations and retirements.
Employees are eligible to defer a portion of their salaries until future years under the City's deferred
compensation plan created in accordance with Internal Revenue Code Section 457. The deferred
compensation is not available to employees until termination, retirement, death or unforeseeable
emergency. Third-party administrators who maintain the investment portfolio administer the Plan. The
plan's assets have been placed in trust accounts with the plan administrators for the exclusive benefit of
participants and their beneficiaries and are not considered assets of the City.
The City is subject to the State of Illinois Unemployment Compensation Act and has elected the
reimbursing employer opfion for providing unemployment insurance benefits for eligible former
40

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
employees. Under this option, the City reimburses the State for claims paid by the State. Expenditures
for wort<ers' compensation are recorded when paid in the governmental funds. A liability for these
amounts is recorded in the government-wide and proprietary fund financial statements.
viii) Judgments and claims are included in the government-wide financial statements and proprietary fund
types in the fund financial statements. Uninsured claim expenditures and liabilities are reported when it is
probable that a loss has occurred and the amount of that loss can be reasonably estimated. These
losses include an estimate of claims that have been incurred but not reported. In the fund financial
statements, expenditures for judgments and claims are recorded on the basis of settlements reached or
judgments entered within the current fiscal year. Amounts that related to deferred compensatory time
and reserves for questioned costs are treated the same way.
ix) Long-term obligations are included in the government-wide financial statements and proprietary fund
types in the fund financial statements. Long-term debt and other long-term obligafions are reported as
liabilities in the applicable govemmental activities, business-type activities, or proprietary fund type
statement of net assets. Bond premiums and discounts, as well as issuance costs, are deferred and
amortized over the life of the related debt, except in the case of refunding debt transactions where the
amortization period is over the lerm of the refunding or refunded debt, whichever is shorter.
The City enters inlo interest rate swap agreements to modify interest rates on outstanding debt. Olher
than the net interest expenditures resulting from these arrangements, no amounts are recorded in the
financial statements. All interest rale swaps and swaptions are approved by City Council.
In the fund financial statements, governmental funds recognize bond premiums and discounts, as well as
bond issuance costs, during the current period. The face amounl of debt issued is reported as other
financing sources. Premiums received and discounts given on debt issued are reported as other
financing sources or uses. Issuance costs, whether or not withheld from the actual debt proceeds
received, are reported as expenditures.
Certain debt obligations are lo be paid from sales tax. motor fuel or special area taxes.
Long-term purchase obligation represents an agreement with DuPage Water Commission to construct
electrical generation facilities not to exceed $15.0 million. The payment of the obligation will be in the
form of credits against the charges for water supplied.
x) Deferred inflows represent amounts to be recognized as revenue on a straight line basis over the life of
the related long-term lease and concession agreements.
xi) Fund equity in the government-wide statements is classified as net assets and displayed in three
components:
(1) Invested in capital assets, net of related debt - Consists of capital assets including restricted capital
assets, net of accumulated depreciation and reduced by the outstanding balances of any bonds,
mortgages, notes or any other borrowings that are attributable lo the acquisition, construction, or
improvement of those assets.
(2) Restricted net assets - Consists of net assets with constraints placed on the use either by (1) external
groups such as creditors, grantors, contributors, or laws or regulations of other governments, or (2)
are legally restricted through constitutional provisions or enabling legislation. Restricted nel assets
for govemmental activities represent restrictions associated with the nonmajor special revenue funds.
Restricted net assets for business activities are provided in Exhibit #7, Statement of Net Assets.
Proprietary Funds.

41

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
(3) Unrestricted net assets - All olher net assets that do not meet the definition of "restricted" or "invested
in capital assets, net of related debt."
2)

Reconciliation of Government-wide and Fund Financial Statements
a) Explanation of certain differences between the governmental funds balance sheet and the
government-wide statement of net assets.
i)

The govemmental funds balance sheet includes a reconciliation between fund balance - total
governmental funds and net assets - governmental activities as reported in the government-wide
statement of net assets. One element of that reconciliation explains that "Other long-term assets are not
available to pay for current-period expenditures and therefore are deferred in the funds." The details of
this $1,389.5 million are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Deferred revenue - property tax
Other assets - pension excess
Accounts payable - infrastructure retainage
Net adjustment to increase fund balance - total
governmental funds - to arrive at net assets governmental activities

$

1,199,921
206,362
(16,752)

$

1,389,531

II) Another element of that reconciliafion explains that "Certain liabilifies, including bonds payable, are not
due and payable in the current period and therefore are not reported in the funds." The details of this
$12,342.5 million are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Long-term liabilities:
Total bonds, notes and certificates payable
Pension obligation
Lease obligation
Pollution remediation
Claims and judgments

$

Total Long-term liabilities

7,835,419
3,453,365
169,282
37,368
627,370
12,122,804

Bonds, notes and other obligations payable current
Other assets - issuance costs
Accrued interest
Accrued and other liabilities - pension accrual
Accrued and other liabilities - other post employment benefits
Accrued and other liabilities - compensated absences
Net adjustment to reduce fund balance - total
govemmental funds - to arrive at net assets governmental activities

42

(153,257)
(70,267)
5,170
329,040
109,021

$

12,342,511

 CITY OF CHICAGO. ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31. 2009 - CONTINUED
b) Explanation of certain differences between the governmental funds statement of revenues,
expenditures, and changes in fund balances and the government-wide statement of activities.
i)

The governmental funds statement of revenues, expenditures, and changes in fund balances includes a
reconciliation between net changes in fund balances - total governmental funds and changes in net
assets - governmental activities as reported in the government-wide statement of activities. One element
of that reconciliation explains that "Governmental funds report capital outlays as expenditures. However,
in the statements of activities the cost of those assets is allocated over their estimated useful lives and
reported as depreciation expense." The details of this $101.8 million are as follows (dollars in
thousands):
Capitalized asset expenditures
Depreciation expense
Loss - disposal of equipment

$

Net adjustment to increase net changes in fund
balances - total governmental funds - to arrive at
changes in net assets - governmental activities

_$

482,741
(374,180)
(6,775).

101,786

ii) Another element of that reconciliation slates that "Bond proceeds provide current financial resources to
govemmental funds, but issuing debt increases long-term liabilities in the statement of net assets." The
details of this $370.5 million are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Proceeds of debt
Premium
Payment of refunded bond escrow agent
Principal retirement
Payment of cost of issuance
Interest expense
Net adjustment to reduce net changes in fund
balances - total governmental funds - to arrive at
changes in net assets - governmental activities

$

(999,043)
(2,259)
213,435
434,905
J1,607
(29,194)

_$

(370,549)

iii) A third element of that reconciliation states that "Certain expenses reported in the statement of activities
do not require the use of current financial resources and therefore are not reported as expenditures in
governmental funds." The details of this $669.0 million are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Claims and judgments
Pension benefit liability
Other post employment benefits
Vacation
Lease obligations
Inventory
Net adjustment to reduce net changes in fund
balances - total governmental funds - to arrive at
changes in net assets - governmental activities

43

$

(22,309)
(577,247)
(59,765)
(2,195)
(9,055)
1,542

$

(669,029)

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
3) Stewardship, Compliance and Accountability
a) Annual Appropriation Budgets are established for the General Fund and the Vehicle Tax, Pension,
Chicago Public Library and certain Miscellaneous, Special Events, Tourism and Festivals and Health and
Welfare nonmajor Special Revenue Funds, on a non-GAAP budgetary basis:
i)

Prior to November 15, the Mayor submits to the City Council a proposed budget of expenditures and the
means of financing them for the next year.

ii) The budget document is available for public inspection for al least ten days prior to passage of the annual
appropriation ordinance by the City Council, which is also required to hold at least one public hearing.
iii) Prior to January 1, the budget is legally enacted through passage of the appropriation ordinance.
iv) Subsequent to the enactment of the appropriation ordinance, the City Council has the authority to make
necessary adjustments to the budget, which results in a change in total or individual appropriations. The
legal level of budgetary control is designated in the budget by object grouped by purpose except for the
Motor Fuel Tax Fund, which is subsequentiy re-appropriated by project. A separate Motor Fuel Tax Fund
Report demonstrates compliance wilh annual and project-length budgets required by the State. The
separately issued Supplement to the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report provides budgetary
information for all other budgeted funds. Copies of this report are available upon request.
v) All annual appropriations unused and unencumbered lapse at year-end. Encumbered appropriations are
carried forward to the following year. Project-length financial plans are adopted for Capital Project Funds.
Appropriations for Debt Service Funds are established by bond ordinance.
b) Reconciliation of GAAP Basis to Budgetary Basis - The City's budgetary basis of accounting used for
budget vs. actual reporting differs from GAAP. For budgetary purposes, encumbrances are recorded as
expenditures but are reflected as reservations of fund balances for GAAP purposes. For budgetary purposes,
proceeds of long-term debt and transfers in are classified as revenues. For budgetary purposes prior "years'
resources used to cover current year budgetary expenditures are recorded as revenues. For GAAP
purposes, proceeds of long-term debt and transfers out are treated as other financing sources. Provision for
doubtful account expenditures are nol budgeted. A reconciliation of the different basis of revenue and
expenditure recognition for the year ended December 31, 2009 is as follows (dollars in thousands):
General
Fund
2,561,626

Revenues, GAAP Basis
Add:
Proceeds of Debt
Transfers In
Prior Year's Surplus Utilized

$

Revenues, Budgetary Basis

S

3,037.734

Expenditures, GAAP Basis
Add:
Transfers Out
Encumbered in 2009
Deduct:
Payments on Prior Years' Encumbrances
Provision for Doubtful Accounts

S

3,014,077

Expenditures, Budgetary Basis

$

58,500
416,135
1,473

44

17,463
26,189
(17,159)
(354)
3,040,216

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
c) Individual Funds over Budget includes the Motor Fuel Tax Fund ($8.6 million).
d) Individual Fund Deficits include the Vehicle Tax Fund, Motor Fuel Tax Fund, the Special Events, Tourism.
Festivals Fund, and Service Concession Agreements Fund, which are Special Revenue Funds, and the
Chicago Skyway Fund, an Enterprise Fund, have fund deficits of $5.3 million. $26.2 million, $6.7 million,
$1,681.5 million, and $1,402.1 million, respectively, which management anticipates will be funded through
operations.
4) Restricted and Unrestricted Cash, Cash Equivalents and Investments
a) Investments As of December 31, 2009, the City had the following Investments (dollars in thousands);
Investment Type

Investment Maturities (in Years)

Less Than 1

6-10

1-5

More Than 10

Fair Value

City Funds
U.S. Treasuries
U.S. Agencies
Commercial Paper
Corporate Bonds
Corporate Equities
Certificates'of Deposit and
Other Short-tenn

$

Total City Funds

$

3,180.963

$

83.616

Pension Trust Funds
U.S. and Foreign
Govemment Agencies
Commercial Paper
Corporate Bonds
Cotporate Equities
Pooled Funds
Real Estate
Investments Held by Master
Custodian under Secunties Loans... .
Securities Received from
Secunties Lending
Venture Capital
Certificates of Deposit and
Other Short-term
Other

i)

112,480
341,977

$

1,063'
1,567.191

$

236,806

259
336

-

-

2.725,911

;

;

S

29.282
490,305

$

78,058
-

142.825
2,636,279
78,317
336
2.725,911

$ 1,568,254

$ 236,806

$

597.645

$

5,583,668

$

208.716

$ 163,273

$

401.414

$

857,019

387,241
-

275.288
-

166,057'
5.989,836
1.024.293 '
365.995
.

370.746
-

1.199.332
5.989,836
1.024.293
365,995

.

.

.

1,352,612
380.490

-

-

-

1.352.612
380,490

554.959
105.848

:

;

-

554,959
105,848

'

Total Pension Tnjst Funds

$ 10,023.706

$

595.957

$ 438,561

$

772.160

$ 11.830.384

Total

$ 13.204.669

$ 2.164,211

$ 675,367

$ 1,369,805

$ 17.414,052

/merest Rate Risk As a means of limiting its exposure to fair value losses arising from rising interest
rates, the City's investment policy limits all securities so purchased, except tax anticipation warrants,
municipal bonds, notes, commercial paper or other instruments representing a debt obligation of the City,
shall show on their face that they are fully payable as to principal and interest, where applicable, if any,
within ten years from the date of purchase.

45

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
ii) Credit Risk The Code limits investments in commercial paper to banks whose senior obligations are rated
in the top two rating categories by al least two national rating agencies and who are required to maintain
such rating during the term of such investment. The Code also limits investments to domestic money
market mutual funds regulated by, and in good standing with, the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Certificates of Deposit are also limited by the Code to national banks which provide collateral of at least
105 percent by marketable U.S. government securities marked to market at least monthly; or secured by
a corporate surely bond issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in Illinois and having a
claims-paying rafing in the top rafing category, as rated by a nafionally recognized stafistical rating
organization maintaining such rating during the term of such investment. The following schedule
summarizes the City's and Pension Trust Funds exposure lo credit risk (dollars in thousands):
Quality Rating
Aaa/AAA
Aa/AA
A/A
Baa/BBB
Ba/BB

$

City
5,371,845
73,508
-

BIB
Caa/CCC
Ca
CC/C
DID
Not Rated
Not Applicable
Total Funds

S

Pension Trust Funds
$
426,664
82,475
243,809
/277,286
87,265

-

88,755

138.315

44,572
3,366
1,101
452
373,630
477,912

5,583.668

$

2,107,287

iii) Custodial Credit Risk - Cash and Cert/f/cates ofi Depos/t This is the risk that in the event of a bank
failure, the City's deposits may not be returned. The City's Investment Policy states that in order to
protect the City's deposits, depository institutions are to maintain collateral pledges on Cily deposits
during the term of the deposit of at least 105 percent of marketable U.S. govemment, or approved
securities or surety bonds, issued by top-rated insurers. Collateral is required as security whenever
deposits exceed the insured limits of the FDIC. The bank balance of cash and certificates of deposit wilh
the City's various municipal depositories was $301.9 million. Of the bank balance, 100 perceni was
either insured or collateralized with securities held by City agents in the City's name. The remainder was
uninsured and uncollateralized.
iv) Custodial Credit Risk - /nvestments For an investment, this is the risk that, in the event of the failure of
the counterparty, the City will not be able to recover the value of its investments or collateral securities
that are in possession of an outside party. Of the investment in corporate bonds of $78.3 million the City
has no custodial credit risk exposure because the related securities are insured, registered and held by
the Cily.

46

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
v) Foreign Currency Risk - In the case of the Pension Trust Funds, is the risk that changes in exchange
rates will adversely affect the fair value of an investment or a deposit. The risk of loss is managed by
limiting its exposure to fair value loss by requiring their international securities managers to maintain
diversified portfolios. The following schedule summarizes the Pension Tmst Funds exposure to foreign
currency risk (dollars in thousands):

Foreign Currency Risk
Australian dollar
Brazilian real
British pound
Canadian dollar
Chilean peso
Columbian peso
Czech Republic koruny
Danish krone
Egyptian pound
European euro
Hong Kong dollar
Hungarian forint
Indian rupee
Indonesian rupiah
Japanese yen
Malaysian
ringgit
Mexican peso
Moroccan dirham
New Israeli shekel
New Taiwan dollar
New Zealand dollar
Norwegian krone
Pakistan rupees
Philippines peso
Polish zioty
Singapore dollar
South African rand
South Korean won
Swedish krona
Swiss franc
Thailand baht
Turkish lira
United Arab Emirates dirham
Total Pension Tmst Funds

47

$

81,709
59,123
304.118
79,323
2.918
1,245
766
18,432
2,229
457,702
129,675
1,231
27,958
11,595
309,898
6,915
19,733
177
5,151
38,292
2,212
18,111
213
512
2.253
35,224
28,083
39,056
37,789
119,192
4,211
7,599
564

~$

1,853,209

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31. 2009 - CONTINUED
vi) The following schedule summarizes the cash and investments reported in the basic financial statements
(dollars in thousands):
Per Note 4:
Investments - City
Investinents - Pension Trust Funds

Per Financial Statements:
Resfi-icted Investments
Unrestricted Investments
Investments with Fiduciary Funds
Investments with Escrow Agent
Invested Securities Lending Collateral
Investments included as cash and cash
equivalents on the Statements of Net Assets

$

5.583,668
11,830,384

$

17,414,052

$

1,745,429
916,321
10,306,587
505,745
1,352,612

$

17,414,052

2,587,358

5) Property Tax
The City's property tax becomes a lien on real property on January 1 of the year it is levied. The Cook County
Assessor (Assessor) is responsible for the assessment of all taxat3le real property within Cook County (County),
except for certain railroad property assessed directiy by the State. The County Board has established a triennial
cycle of reassessment in which one-third of the County will be reassessed each year on a repeating schedule
established by the Assessor.
Property in the County is separated into nine classifications for assessment purposes. After the Assessor establishes
the fair martlet value of a parcel of land, that value is mulfiplied by one of the classification percentages lo arrive at
the assessed valuation (Assessed Valuation) for that parcel. These percentages range from 16.0 percent for certain
residential, commercial, and industrial property to 38.0 percent for other commercial and industrial property.
The Illinois Department of Revenue has the statutory responsibility of ensuring uniformity of real property
assessments throughout the State. Each year, the Department of Revenue furnishes the county clerks with an
adjustment factor to equalize the level of assessment among counties. This factor (Equalizafion Factor) is then
applied to the Assessed Valuafion to compute the valuation of property lo which a tax rate will be applied (Equalized
Assessed Valuation). The County Clerk adds the Equalized Assessed Valuation of all real property in the County to
the valuation of property assessed directiy by the State (to which the Equalization Factor is not applied) to arrive at
the base amount (Assessment Base) used in calculating the annual tax rates.
The County Clerk computes the annual tax rate by dividing the levy by the Assessment Base and then computes the
rate for each parcel of real property by aggregating the tax rates of all governmental units having jurisdiction over that
particular parcel. The County Treasurer then issues the tax bills. Property taxes are deposited with the County
Treasurer, who remits to the City its respective share of the collections. Taxes levied in one year become due and
payable in two installments during the following year on March 1 and August 1 or 30 days from mailing of tax bills if
later than July 1. The first installment is estimated and is one-half of the prior year's tax bill. The second installment
is based on the current levy, assessment and equalization and also reflects any changes from the prior year.

48

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
The Cily Council has adopted an ordinance beginning in 1994, limiting the City's aggregate property tax levy to an
amount equal to the prior year's aggregate property tax levy plus the lesser of (a) five percent or (b) the percentage
increase in the annualized Consumer Price Index, all as defined in the ordinance. The ordinance provides a safe
harbor for that portion of any property tax debt service levy equal to the aggregate interest and principal payments on
the City's general obligation bonds and notes during the 12-month period ended January 1, 1994, subject to annual
increase in the manner described above for the aggregate levy, all as provided by the ordinance. Increases in the
debt service portion of each levy may. however, reduce amounts available within such levy to finance operations.
6) Interfund Balances and Transfers
a) The following balances at December 31, 2009 represent due from/to balances among all funds (dollars in
thousands):
Fund Type/Fund

Due From

Governmental activities:
General
Federal, State and Local Grants
Special Taxing Areas
Reserve
Bond, Note Redemption and Interest
Community Development and Improvement Projects....
Nonmajor govemmental funds

$

Total Governmental activities

293.587
45,513
5,212
25,068
34,938
98,066

Due To

$

502,384

Business-type activities:
Water
Sewer
Chicago Midway International Airport
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport
Chicago Skyway
Total Business-type activities
Fiduciary activities:
Pension Trust

256,721
54,967
9,382
2,140
35,293
40,672
139,021
538.196

17,541
35,440
3,564
20,820
-_

45.345
10,017
7,808
5,046
15_

77,365

68,231

26,678

Total Fiduciary activities

26,678

Total

$

606,427

$

606,427

The balances resulted from the time lag between the dates that (1) interfund goods and services are provided
or reimbursable expenditures occur, (2) transactions are recorded in the accounting system and (3) payments
between funds are made.

49

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
b) The following balances at December 31, 2009 represent interfund transfers among all funds (dollars in
thousands):
Transfer Out

Transfer In

Fund Type/Fund
Governmental activities:
General
Federal, State and Local Grants
Special Taxing Areas
Service Concession Agreements
Reserve
Bond, Note Redemption and Interest
Community Development and Improvement Projects....
Nonmajor govemmental funds

$

416,135

68,182

951,355
651,137
16,334
150,316
2,253,459

Total Governmental activities

$

17,463

32,344
1,702,492 .
404,845
15,194
3,734
77,387
2,253,459

Transfers are used lo move revenues from the fund that statute or budget requires lo collect them to the fund
that statute or budget requires to expend them and lo move receipts restricted to debt service from the funds
collecting the receipts to the debt service fund as debt service payments become due.

50

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 3 1 , 2009 - CONTINUED
7)

Capital A s s e t s
a)

Capital Assets activity for the year ended December 3 1 , 2009 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Balance
January 1,
2009

Governmental activities:
Capital assets, not being depreciated:
Land
Works of Art and Histoncal Collections
Construction in Progress
Total capital assets, not being depreciated

S

Disposals
and
Transfers

Additions

1,271,593
11,632
345,457
1,628,682

$

101,149
1,500
261,380
364,029

Balance
December 3 1 ,
2009

$
(381,514)
(381,514)

1,372,742
13,132
225,323
1,611,197

Capital assets, being depreciated:
Buildings and Other Improvements
Machinery and Equipment
Infrastructure
Total capital assets, being depreciated

2,115,543
1,146,951
6,333,755
9,596,249

136.571
89,553
275,357
501,481

Less accumulated depreciation for:
Buildings and Other Improvements
Machinery and Equipment
Infrastructure

603,545
802,804
2,610,093

58,781
91,069
224,330

(16,844)

662,326
877,029
2,834,423

Total accumulated depreciation

4,016,442

374,180

(16,644)

4,373,778

Total capital assets, being depreciated, net

5,579,607

127,301

(6,775)

5,700,333

Total governmental activities
;
Business-type activities:
Capital assets, not being depreciated:
Land
Construction in Progress
Total capital assets, not being depreciated
Capital assets, being depreciated:
Buildings and Other Improvements
Machinery and Equipment
Total capital assets, being depreciated

2,252,114
1,212,885
6,609,112
10,074,111

(23,619)
(23,619)

$

7,208,469

S

491,330

$

(368,289)

$

7,311,530

$

791,345
1,134,996
1,926,341

$

48,198
710,291
758,489

$

(342,837)
(342,837)

S

839,543
1,502,450
2,341,993

11,213,067
543,232
11,756,299

564,488
26,561
591,049

(35,759)
(2,457)
(38,216)

11,741,796
567,336
12,309,132

Less accumulated depreciation for:
Buildings and Olher Improvements
Machinery and Equipment
{.

3,205,576
265,194

250,240
14,661

(632)
(1,369)

3,455,184
278,466

Total accumulated depreciation

3,470,770

264.901

(2,021)

3,733,650

Total capital assets, being depreciated, nel

8.285,529

326,146

(36,195)

8,575,482

•

Total business-type activities

$ 10,211,870

$

1,084,637

$

(379,032)

S 10,917,475

Total Capital Assets

$ 17,420,359

$

1,575,967

$

(767.321)

S 18,229,005

51

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
b) Depreciation expense was charged to functions/programs of the City as follows (dollars in thousands):
Governmental activities:
General government
Public safety
Streets and sanitation
Transportation
Health
Cultural and recreational

$

70,553
37,268
13,115
227,169
2,829
23,246

_$

374,180

$

39,119
21,336
39,872
152,911
11,663

$

264,901

;

Total depreciation expense - governmental activities
Business-type activities:
Water
Sewer
Chicago Midway International Airport
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport
Chicago Skyway
Total depreciation expense - business-type activities

8)

Leases
a) Operating Leases
The City leases building and office facilities under noncancelable operating leases. Total costs for such
leases were approximately $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The future minimum lease
payments for these leases are as follows (dollars in thousands):
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015-2019

$

17,517
16,926
15,949
15,575
10,559
6,460

$

82,986

:

Total Future Rental Expense

:..

b) Capital Leases
During 2003, the City entered into lease and lease back agreements with third parties pertaining to 911
Center Qualified Technological Equipment (QTE), with a book value of $143.3 million at December 31, 2003.
Under the QTE lease agreement, which provides certain cash and tax benefits to the third party, the City
entered into a long-term lease for applicable assets back to the City under a sublease. Under the sublease,
the City is required to make future minimum lease payments.

52

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
During 2005, the City entered into sale and lease back agreements with third parties pertaining to the Cily
owned portion of a rapid transit line with a book value of $430.8 million al December 31, 2005. Under the
lease agreement, which provides certain cash and lax benefits to the third party, the City entered into a longterm lease for applicable assets back to the Cily under a sublease. Under the sublease, the City is required
to make future minimum lease payments.
The future minimum payments for these leases are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Year Ending
December 31,
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015-2019
2020-2024
2025 - 2029
2030 - 2032

Total
$

1,303
10,216
12,731
9,104
9,000
48,980
90,021
2,000
165,164

.'

348,519
179,237

Total Minimum Future Lease Payments
Present Value of Minimum
Future Lease Payments

c)

$

169,282

Lease Receivables
Most of the O'Hare land, buildings and terminal space are leased under operating lease agreements to
airiines and other tenants. The following is a schedule of the minimum future rental income on
noncancellable operating leases as of December 31, 2009 (dollars in thousands):
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015-2019
2020-2024
2025 - 2029
2030 - 2034

$

86,331
69,798
69,720
69.086
20,104
66.939
8,144
9,433
7,651

$

407,206

.-i

Total Minimum Future Rental Income

Contingent rentals that may be received under certain leases based on the tenants' revenues or fuel flow are
not included in minimum future rental income. Rental income for O'Hare, consisting of all rental and
concession revenues except ramp rentals and automobile parking, amounted to $348.7 million, including
contingent rentals of $71.9 million.

53

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
Most of the Midway land and terminal space is leased under operating lease agreements to airiines and other
tenants. The following is a schedule of the minimum future rental income on noncancellable operating leases
as of December 31. 2009 (dollars in thousands):
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014

$

18.524
18,543
15.412
15,420
14,654

Total Minimum Future Rental Income

$

82,553

Contingent rentals that may be received under certain leases based on tenants' revenues are not included in
minimum future rental income. Rental income for Midway, consisting of all rental and concession revenues
except ramp rentals and automobile parking, amounted to $89.3 million, including contingent rentals of $34.6
million.

9) Short-term Debt
Matured bonds represent principal due on coupon bonds in which the coupons have not been presented for
payment. For the year ended December 31, 2009, there was minor activity; the balance remained at $0.7 million.

54

 CITY OF CHICAGO. ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Y E A R E N D E D D E C E M B E R 3 1 , 2009 - C O N T I N U E D
10)

Long-term Obligations
a)

L o n g - t e r m D e b t activity for the y e a r e n d e d D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 2 0 0 9 w a s a s f o l l o w s ( d o l l a r s in t h o u s a n d s ) :

Balance
January 1,
2009
Governmental activities:
Bonds, notes and certificates payable:
General obligation debt
Installment purchase agreement
Tax increment
Revenue

$

6,455,979
5.500
210.213
562,690

Additions

$

908,151
90,892

Reductions

Balance
December 31,
2009

$

$

500,703
2,000
24,055
88,740

6.863,427
3,500
1 86,158
564,842

Amounts
Due
within
One Year

$ 155.092
2.300
21,350
5,425

7,234,382

999,043

615,498

7,617.927

184,167

134,773
179,514
185,454
7,637

33.090
2.259
29.049
-

8,053
8,426
6.625
3,714

159,810
173.347
207.878
3,923

1.522
-

Total bonds, notes and certificates payable

7,456,940

997.261

618,782

7.835,419

185.689

Other liabilities:
Pension obligations
Lease obligations
Pollution Remediation
Claims and judgments

2,874,722
207,065
33.200
609.230

578.643
9,055
4,168
18,140

46,838
-

3,453,365
169,282
37,368
627,370

87,514

Total other liabilities

3,724,217

610,006

46,838

4,287.385

88,817

$ 11,181.157

$ 1.607.267

$

665,620

$ 12.122.804

$ 274,506

$

$

$

39,085
21,209
146,795
49,509

$

$

Less unamortized debt refunding transactions
Add unamortized premium
Add accretion of capital appreciation bonds
Less converted portion of conversion bonds

Total governmental activities
Business-type activities:
Revenue bonds and notes payable:
Water
Sewer
Chicago-O'Hare International Airport
Chicago Midway International Airport

1.503.924
924,049
5,785.105
1,254,664
9,467,742

Less unamortized debt refunding transactions
Less unamortized discount (premium)
Add accretion of capital appreciation bonds

148,883
(125,342)
69,358

Total business-typo activities

$

9,513,559

Total long-term obligations

$ 20.694,716

$

259,790
61,360
321,150

256,598

10,257
8,904

12,128
867
3,768

1,464.839
902,840
5,898,100
1,266.515
9,532,294
136,755
(115,952)
74.494

1,303

40,521
24,030
96,890
54.650
216,091

4.034

319.797

$

247.371

$

9.585,985

$ 220.125

$ 1.927.064

$

912.991

$ 21.708.789

$ 494,631

T h e P e n s i o n o b l i g a t i o n liability will be l i q u i d a t e d t h r o u g h a S p e c i a l R e v e n u e F u n d ( P e n s i o n F u n d ) as p r o v i d e d b y tax
levy a n d S t a t e P e r s o n a l P r o p e r t y R e p l a c e m e n t T a x r e v e n u e s .

55

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
b) Issuance of New Debt
I)

General Obligation Notes
The General Obligation Tender Notes, Series 2009 ($70.4 million) were sold in July 2009 at an initial
short-term intermediate rate of 1.34 percent through July 8. 2010. The notes mature no later than May
31, 2011. The Series 2009 notes were issued to meet cash flow requirements of the City's Library
Funds; the notes are payable from tax collections in the following year or from any other resources legally
available to the City. Principal payments for the notes do not require the current appropriation and
expenditure of Governmental Fund financial resources.
At the discretion of the City, the notes may bear interest at a weekly, short-term intermediate or fixed rate.
Interest on notes in the short-term intermediate mode is payable on the first business day immediately
following the short-term intermediate rate period. Interest on the notes in the weekly mode is payable on
the first business day of each month. Interest on notes in the fixed mode is payable on each January 31
and July 31.
The City has appointed a remari^efing agent for the notes in the weekly and short-term intermediate
modes. The remarketing agent will use its best efforts to resell the notes at favorable rates following
either an optional or mandatory tender. In the event the remarketing agent is unable to resell the notes,
the City has obtained an unconditional, irrevocable letter of credit which may be drawn upon for the
purchase of the notes until the remarketing agent is able to resell the Series 2009 notes.
The letter of credit securing the Series 2009 notes totals $71.8 million and terminates on the eariiest of
June 6, 2011 or upon redemption of the notes. Advances under the letter of credit (none at December
31, 2009) are due on two years from the date of the advance. Advances bear interest from the date of
advance through the 60'" day at the greater of the prime rate or the sum of the one-month LIBOR rate
plus two percent per annum (Base Rate) plus .75 percent. For the period from the date 61 days after any
advance through the date 180 days after the date of any advance, the Base Rate plus.1.75 percent.
Thereafter until due and payable, advances bear interest at the Base Rate plus two percent. Upon the
occurrence of an event of default, the interest rate per annum shall equal the Base Rate plus 3.5 percent
and interest shall be payable upon demand. The'maximum rate of interest cannot exceed 18.0 percent.
The letter of credit was issued by a third-party financial institution that is expected to be financially
capable of honoring its agreements.
During 2009, the City issued $135.7 million in commercial paper notes for certain capital and operating
uses.
In 2009, the City entered into a promissory note for $91.0 million for the Michael Reese Hospital Site.
The promissory note has an interest rate of 5.0 percent through June 29, 2014 and a rate of 7.5 percent
thereafter until maturity which is June 30, 2024.

56

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
ii) General Obligation Bonds
General Obligation Bonds, Project and Refunding Series 2008C-E ($611.0 million) were sold at a
discount in January 2009. The bonds have interest rates ranging from 1.0 percent to 6.05 percent and
maturity dates from January 1, 2010 to January 1, 2040. Net proceeds of $603.0 million will be used to
finance infrastructure improvements; transportation improvements; grants or loans to assist not-for-profit
organizafions or educafional or cultural institutions; or to assist other municipal corporations or units of
local government, or school districts; cash flow needs of the City; acquisition of personal property;
acquisition, demolition, remediation or improvement of real property for industrial, commercial or
residential purposes; constructing, equipping, altering and repairing various municipal facilities including
fire stations, police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and other municipal facilities;
enhancement of economic development within the City by making grants or deposits to secure
obligations of not-for-profit or for-profit organizations doing or seeking to do business in the City; the
funding of litigation judgments or settlement agreements involving the City, including escrow accounts or
other reserves needed for such purposes; payment of certain pension contributions; providing for
facilities, services, and equipment to protect and enhance public safety; and other uses permitted by the
Ordinance ($405.4 million); and to advance refund certain maturities of general obligation bonds
outstanding ($116.9 million; and to fund capitalized interest ($80.7 million). The advance refunding of the
bonds increased the City's total debt service payments by $133.0 million and resulted in an economic
loss (difference between the present values of the debt service on the old and new debt) of $20.5 million.
iii) Sales Tax Revenue Bonds
Sales Tax Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2009A-C ($90.9 million) were sold at a premium in October
2009. The bonds have interest rates ranging from 3.75 percent to 6.0 percent and maturity dates from
January 1, 2018 to January 1, 2034. Net proceeds of $96.7 million will be used to advance refund certain
maturities of the outstanding Sales Tax Revenue Bonds. The advance refunding of the bonds increased
the City's total debt service payments by $66.4 million and resulted in an economic loss (difference
between the present values of the debt service on the old and new debt) of $11.7 million.
iv) Enterprise Fund Revenue Bonds and Notes
During 2009, $259.8 million of Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Commercial Paper Notes, Series A,
B and C were issued. The proceeds were used to firiance portions of the costs of aijthorized airport
projects, to repay the expenses of issuing the notes and refund a portion of certain outstanding bonds.
During 2009, $61.4 million of Chicago Midway International Airport Commercial Paper Notes, Series A, B
and D were issued. The proceeds were used to repay debt obligations that were in bank mode, finance
portions of the cost of authorized airport projects and refund a portion of certain outstanding bonds.
During 2009, the City terminated the interest rate swap agreement with Lehman Brothers for the Series
2008C Wastewater Transmission Revenue Bonds. The City paid $38.1 million to terminate the swap and
received an up-front payment to execute a new swap of $38.7 million. The termination fee and the 2009
portion of the upfront payment are recorded within other non-operating expense, net within the
statements of revenues, expenses, and changes in net assets.
v)

Financial Market Related Conversions
The global economic downturn has adversely impacted the City's variable rate debt. The credit crisis and
the effect on monoline insurers' credit ratings, as a result of their exposure to subprime mortgages, have
resulted in downgrades by the major rating agencies. As a result in 2008 and 2009, credit spreads
increased on the City's variable rate debt, especially with insured bonds; therefore the City refinanced or
converted many of its variable rate debt issues. In 2009, the City utilized liquidity facilities to convert two
variable rate issues in the amount of $409.2 million and thereby removing the monoline insurers or
57

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
impaired banks providing credit support. The remaining bond series that were unable to be remarketed
and are still in bank bond mode have the annual debt service requirements disclosed based on the
repayment terms in effect at December 31, 2009.
c)

Annual requirements listed below for each year include amounts payable January 1 of the following year.
Bonds maturing and interest payable January 1, 2010 have been excluded because funds for their payment
have been provided for. Annual requirements to amortize debt outstanding as of December 31, 2009 are as
follows (dollars in thousands):

Year Ending
December 31,
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015-2019
2020-2024
2025-2029
2030-2034
2035-2039
2040 - 2044

General Obligation
Principal
Interest
$

165,785
244,391
174,765
223,362
231,179
1,364,901
1,431,340
1,199,797
972,938
503,314
50,270

$

$ 6,562,042

$

Year Ending
December 31,
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015-2019
2020-2024
2025-2029
2030 - 2034
2035 - 2039

Installment Purchase
Principal
Interest

303,484
313,265
307,884
299,205
294,291
1,314,628
1,007,008
701,664
421,922
187,913
3,137

$

5,154,401

$

2,300
1,200
-

5,715
16,295
17,150
18,040
18,980
94,935
117,455
134,638
101,484
34,725

$ 559,417

$

229
47
-

$

.
.
.

3,500

19,303
25,971
25,121
24,227
23,286
102,206
77,288
60,420
67,342
3,529

$ 428,693

$

22,990
25,040
20,815
30,264
15,237
51,775
13,750

.
.
.

-

Revenue
Principal
Interest
$

$

Tax Increment
Principal
Interest
$

10,082
8,793
7,389
6,212
11,853
13,093
1,661
.
.
.
-

$

59,083

.
.
.

-

:

276

$ 179,871

Business-type Activities
Principal
Interest
$

281,301
270,793
257,927
302,336
294,926
1,631,410
1.714,124
2,009,098
1,936,300
336,185

$

432,969
420,210
408,021
400,821
387,919
1,728,654
1,310,875
866,008
292,686
34,934

$ 9,034,400

$

6,283,097

Debt service requirements above exclude commercial paper issues as the timing of payments is not certain.
For the requirements calculated above, interest on variable rale debt was calculated at the rate in effect or the
effective rate of a related swap agreement, if applicable, as of December 31, 2009. Standby bond purchase
agreements were issued by third party financial institutions that are expected to be financially capable of
honoring their agreements.

58

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
d)

Derivatives
i)

Pay-Fixed, Receive-Variable Interest Rate Swaps
(1) Objective of the swaps. In order to protect against the potential of rising interest rates, the City has
entered into various separate pay-fixed, receive-variable interest rate swaps at a cost less than what
the City would have paid to issue fixed-rate debt.
(2) Terms, fair values, and credit nsk. The terms, including the fair values and credit ratings of the
outstanding swaps as of December 31, 2009, are as follows. The notional amounts of the swaps
match the principal amounts of the associated debt. The City's swap agreements contain scheduled
reductions to outstanding notional amounts that are expected to approximately follow scheduled or
anticipated reductions in the associated "bonds payable" category. Under the swaps, the City pays
the counterparty a fixed payment and receives a variable payment computed according to the London
Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) and/or The Securities Industry and Financial Martlets Association
(SIFMA) Municipal Swap Index (dollars in thousands):

59

 CITY OF CHICAGO. ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 3 1 , 2009 - CONTINUED

Associated
Bond Issue
GO VRDB (Series 2007EFG)

Notional
Amounts

Effective
Date

Rate
Paid

Rate
Received

Fair
Values

Swap
Termination
Date

Counterparty
Credit
Rating

Aa1/AA01/01/2042 A2/A

$ 200,000

11/08/2007

3.998%

SIFMA

$ (15.029)

GO VRDB (Senes 2005D)

222,790

08/17/2005

4.104

SIFMA

(20,095)

A1/A
01/01/2040 Aa1/AA-*

Chicago Midway Intemational
Airport Revenue Bonds
(Series 2004C&D)

152,150

12/14/2004

4.174

SIFMA
Plus .05%

(12,963)

A1/A
01/01/2035 Aa1/AA-'

Wastewater Transmission
Variable F?ate Revenue
Bonds (Series 2008C)"*"

332,230

07/29^2004

3.886

SIFMA

(36,085)

Aal/AAA2/A
01/01/2039 />a1/AA-'

Water Variable Rate Revenue
Refunding Bonds (Series 2004)

196,890

08/05/2004

3.8669

SIFMA

(22,501)

11/01/2031 Aaa/AA-

Water Variable Rate Revenue
Refunding Bonds (Series 2004)

195,335

04/16/2008

3.8694

SIFMA

(21,938)

11/01/2025 Aa3/A+

Second Lien Water Revenue
Refunding Bonds (Series 2000)

100.000

04/16/2008

3.8694

SIFMA

(13,443)

11/01/2030 Aa3/A+

GO VRDB (Series 20038)

202,500

08/07/2003

4.052

66.91% of
lOYrUBOR

(8,308)

WR/NR
01/01/2034 Aa1/AA-'

66.91% of
75% of
10 Yr LIBOR 1 Mo. UBOR

(5,373)

03/01/2011

GO VRDB (Series 2003B)

03/02/2008

AaVfiA-

GO VRDB (Neighborhoods Alive 21
Program, Series 2002B)

206,700

10/03/2002

3.575

70% of
1 Mo. LIBOR

(15,422)

Aal/AA01/01/2037 A 2 / A " "

Sales Tax Revenue
Refunding Bonds
(VRDB Series 2002)

114,575

06/27/2002

4.230

SIFMA
Plus .13%

(17,272)

01/01/2034

Tax Increment Allocation Bonds
(Near North TIF, Series 1999A)

44,900

09/01/1999

5.084

67%
1 Mo. LIBOR

(7,045)

Tax Increment /ylocation Bonds
(Near North TIF, Series 1999B)

3,000

09/01/1999

6.890

67%
1 Mo. LIBOR

6,015

02/10/1997

5.375

SIFMA

Aal/AA

01/01/2019 A2/A

01/01/2010 A1/AA-

Tax Increment Allocation Bonds
(Stockyards TIF, Series 1996A&B)...
Total

****

51,977,085

(526)

12/01/2014 A2/A

S (196,000)

Two counterparties hold 70 and 30 percent respectively.
Two counterparties hold 60 and 40 percent respectively. .
Three counterparties hold 70, 15 and 15 percent respectively.
Two counterparties hold 75 and 25 percent respectively.
Wastewater Transmission Variable Rate Revenue Bonds Series 2004A were refunded and'the swap
transferred to Wastewater Transmission Variable Rate Revenue Bonds Series 2008C.
60

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31. 2009 - CONTINUED
(3) Fair Value. As of December 31, 2009. the swaps had a negative fair value of $196.0 million. As per
industry convention, the fair values of the City's outstanding swaps were estimated using the zerocoupon method. This method calculates the future net settiement payments required by the swap,
assuming that the forward rates implied by the yield curve correctiy anticipate future spot rates.
These payments, are then discounted using the spot rates implied by the current yield curve for
hypothetical zero-coupon bonds due on the date of each future net settlement on the swap. Because
interest rates are below the Fixed Rate Paid, the City's swaps had negative values.
(4) Credit Risk. The City is exposed to credit risk (counterparty risk) through the counterparties with
which it enters into agreements. If minimum credit rating requirements are not maintained, the
counterparty is required to post collateral to a third party. This protects the City by mitigating the
credit risk, and therefore the ability to pay a terminafion payment, inherent in a swap. Collateral on all
swaps is to be in the form of cash or Eligible Collateral held by a third-party custodian. Upon credit
events, the swaps also allow transfers, credit support, and termination if the counterparty is unable to
meet the said credit requirements.
(5) Basis R/sk. Basis risk refers to the mismatch between the variable rate payments received on a swap
contract and the interest payment actually owed on the bonds. The two significant components
driving this risk are credit and SIFMA/LIBOR ratios. Credit may create basis risk because the City's
bonds may trade differently than the swap index as a result of a credit change in the City.
SIFMA/LIBOR ratios (or spreads) may create basis risk. Wilh percentage of LIBOR swaps, if the
City's bonds trade at a higher percentage of LIBOR over the index received on the swap, basis risk is
created. This can occur due to many factors including, without limitation, changes in marginal tax
rates, tax-exempt status of bonds, and supply and demand for variable rate bonds. The City is
exposed to basis risk-on all swaps except those that are based on Cost of Funds, which provide cash
flows that mirror those of the underlying bonds. For all other swaps, if the rate paid on the bonds is
higher than the rate received, the City is liable for the difference. The difference would need to be
available on the debt service payment date and it would add additional underiying cost to the
transaction.
(6) Tax Flisk. The swap exposes the City to lax risk or a permanent mismatch (shortfall) between the
floating rate received on the swap and the variable rate paid on the underiying variable-rate bonds
due to tax law changes such that the federal or state tax exemption of municipal debt is eliminated or
its value reduced. There have been no tax law changes since the execution of the City's swap
transactions.
(7) Termination Risk. The risk that the swap could be terminated as a result of certain events including a
ratings downgrade for the issuer or swap counterparty, covenant violation, bankruptcy, payment
default or other defined events of default. Termination of a swap may result in a payment made by
the issuer or to the issuer depending upon the market at the time of termination.
(8) Swap payments and assoc/ated debt. Bonds maturing and interest payable January 1, 2010 have
been excluded because funds for their payment have been provided for. As of December 31, 2009,
debt service requirements of the City's outstanding variable-rate debt and net swap payments,
assuming current interest rates remain the same, for their term are as follows (dollars in thousands):

61

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
Interest
Rate

Variable-Rate Bonds
Principal

Year Ending
December 31,

2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015-2019....
2020-2024...
2025-2029....
2030 -2034....
2035- 2039....
2040 - 2044...,

8,720
15,310
21,395
22,645
36,955
287,255
452,360
347,725
475,760
262,000
43,535

$

5,219
5.193
5,144
• 5,077
5,005
23.170
18,550
13,034
7,599
2,418
143

$ 1,973,660

$

90,552

$

Total

Swaps, Nel

Interest

$

73,323
72,944
72,310
71.482
70,596
326,670
260,564
184,754
109,664
35,726
2,485

$ 1,280,518

$

87,262
93,447
98,849
99,204
112,556
637,095
731,474
545,513
593,023
300,144
46,163

$ 3,344,730

ii) Swaptions
(1) Objective of the swaptions. The City entered into several swaption contracts that provided the City
upfront payments totaling $42.1 million. The term swaption refers to the Cily selling an opfion lo a
counterparty lo execute a swap at a certain date in the future if certain conditions exist. If the
conditions do not exist, the counterparty will not execute the option, no swaptions have been
exercised. In the event the options are executed and the City enters inlo a fixed lo floating rate swap,
the City would be exposed lo the risks as described under Swaps.
(2) Terms. The terms, including fair values of the swaptions as of December 31, 2009, are as follows
(dollars in thousands):

Associated
B o n d Issue
GO Bonds
(GO. Series 2001A: GO
Senes 2002A; G O , Series 2003A;
and G O , Series 2004A)

Notional
Amounts

$

Ctiicaqo Midway Airport Revenue
Bonds (Series 1998A(AMT); Series
1998B(Non-AMT): and Refunding
Senes 1998C(Non-AMT))
Sales Tax Revenue
Bonds (Series 1999)

Trade
Date

Variable
Rate
Paid

Fixed
Rate
Received

318,670

12/18/2003

S1FMA+
30bps

5.000%

383,445

10/27/1999

SIFMA+
25bps

23,285

06/21/2002

01/01/2024

5.100

(18,052)

01/01/2030

23,500

SIFMA+
30bps

4 984

(314)

01/01/2019

728

5 250

(2,470)

01/01/2028

2,562

5 375

n.952)

01/01/2027

Sales Tax Revenue
Bonds (Senes 1998)

69.275

06/21/2002

Sales Tax Revenue
Bonds (Senes 1997)

60.645

06/21/2002

SIFMA+
30bps

$

$

Up-Front
Payment

(12,764)

SIFMA+
30bps

Total

Fair
Values

Swap
Termination
Date

S

855.320

62

f35.5521

$

13,384

1.964
42.138

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
(3) Fair value. As of December 31. 2009, the swaptions had a negative fair value of $35.6 million. As
per industry convention, the fair values of the City's outstanding swaptions were estimated using the
zero-coupon method. This method calculates the future net settiement payments required by the
swap, assuming that the forward rates implied by the yield curve correctiy anticipate future spot rates.
These payments are then discounted using the spot rates implied by the current yield curve for
hypothefical zero-coupon bonds due on the date of each future net settiement on the swap. Because
interest rates are below the Fixed Rate Received, the City's swaptions had negative values. The
negative value is also driven by the upfront payment received by the City upon execution of the
swaption agreement.
(4) Credit Risk. The City is exposed to credit risk (counterparty risk) through the counterparties with
which it enters into agreements. If minimum credit rating requirements are not maintained, the
counterparty is required to post collateral to a third party. This protects the City by mitigating the
credit risk, and therefore the ability to pay a termination payment, inherent in a swap. Collateral on all
swaptions is to be in the form of cash or Eligible Collateral held by a third-party custodian. Upon
credit events, the swaptions also allow transfers, credit support, and termination if the counterparty is
unable to meet the said credit requirements.
(5) Basis Risk. Basis risk refers to the mismatch between the variable rate payments received on a
swap contract and the interest payment actually owed on the bonds. The two significant components
driving this nsk are credit and SIFMA/LIBOR ratios. Credit may create basis risk because the City's
bonds may trade differently than the swap index as a result of a credit change in the City.
SIFMA/LIBOR ratios (or spreads) may create basis risk. With percentage of LIBOR swaps, if the
City's bonds trade at a higher percentage of LIBOR over the index received on the swap, basis risk is
created. This can occur due to many factors including, without limitation, changes in marginal tax
rates, tax-exempt status of bonds, and supply and demand for variable rate bonds. The City is
exposed lo basis risk on all swaptions except those that are based on Cost of Funds, which provide
cash flows that mirror those of the underiying bonds. For all other swaptions. if the rate paid on the
bonds is higher than the rate received, the City is liable for the difference. The difference would need
to be available on the debt service payment date, and it would add additional underiying cost to the
transaction.
(6) Tax Risk. The swap exposes the City to tax r\sk or a permanent mismatch (shortfall) between the
floating rate received on the swap and the variable rate paid on the underiying variable-rate bonds
due to lax law changes such that the federal or state tax exemption of municipal debt is eliminated or
its value reduced. There have been no tax law changes since the execution of the swaption
transactions.
(7) Termination R/sk. The risk that the swap could be terminated as a result of certain events including a
ratings downgrade for the issuer or swap counterparty, covenant violation, bankruptcy, payment
default or other defined events of default. Termination of a swap may result in a payment made by
the issuer or to the issuer depending upon the market at the fime of termination.
e) Debt Covenants
i)

Water Fund - The ordinances authorizing the issuance of outstanding Water Revenue Bonds provide for
the creation of separate accounts into which net revenues, as defined, or proceeds are to be credited, as
appropriate. The ordinances require that net revenues available for bonds, as adjusted, equal 120
percent of the current annual debt service on the outstanding senior lien bonds and that City
management maintains all covenant reserve account balances at specified amounts. The above
requirements were met at December 31, 2009. The Water Rate Stabilization account had a balance in
restricted assets of $51.4 million at December 31, 2009.

63

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
The ordinances authorizing the issuance of outstanding Second Lien Water Revenue Bonds provide for
the creation of separate accounts into which monies will be deposited, as appropriate. The ordinances
require that net revenues are equal to the sum of the aggregate annual debt service requirements for the
fiscal year of the outstanding senior lien bonds and 110 percent of the aggregate annual debt service
requirements of the outstanding second lien bonds. This requirement was met at December 31, 2009.
ii) Sewer Fund - The ordinances authorizing the issuance of outstanding Wastewater Transmission
Revenue Bonds provide for the creation of separate accounts into which net revenues, as defined, or
proceeds are to be credited, as appropriate. The ordinances require that net revenues available for
bonds equal 115 percent of the current annual debt service requirements on the outstanding senior lien
bonds. This requirement was met at December 31, 2009. The Sewer Rate Stabilizafion account had a
balance in restricted assets of $14.6 million al December 31, 2009.
The ordinances authorizing the issuance of outstanding Second Lien Wastewater Transmission Revenue
Bonds provide for the creation of separate accounts into which monies will be deposited, as appropriate.
The ordinances require that net revenues equal 100 percent of the sum of the current maximum annual
debt service requirements of the outstanding senior lien bonds and the maximum annual debt service
requirements of the second lien bonds. This requirement was met at December 31, 2009.
iii) Chicago Midway International Airport Fund - The master indenture securing the issuance of Chicago
Midway Internafional Airport Revenue Bonds requires that the City set rates and charges for the use and
operation of Midway so that revenues, together with any other available monies and the cash balance
held in the Revenue Fund on the first day of such year not required to be deposited in any fund or
account, will be at least sufficient (a) to provide for the operation and maintenance expenses for the year
and (b) to provide for the greater of (i) tfie amounis needed to be deposited into the First and Junior Lien
Debt Service Fund, the Operations & Maintenance Reserve Account, the Working Capital Account, the
First Lien Debt Service Reserve Fund, the Repair and Replacement Fund, and the Special Project Fund
and (ii) an amount not less than 125 percent of the Aggregate First Lien Debt Service for such fiscal year
reduced by an amount equal to the sum of any amount held in any capitalized interest account for
disbursement during such fiscal year to pay interest on First Lien Bonds. These requirements were met
at December 31, 2009.
iv) Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Fund - In 1983, the City Council adopted the General Airport
Revenue Bond ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of Chicago-O'Hare International Airport
General Airport Revenue Bonds in unlimited series for the purpose of financing the cost of improvements
and expansion of O'Hare and to redeem its existing outstanding bond obligations. The ordinance further
permits the issuance of second lien notes, bonds and olher obligafions which are payable from, and
secured by, a pledge of amounis deposited in the junior lien obligation debt service account created
under the ordinance. The ordinance requires that net revenues in each year equal not less than the sum
of (i) the amount required to be deposited for such year in the debt service reserve fund, the maintenance
reserve fund, the special capital projects fund and the junior lien debt service fund, and (ii) 110 percent of
the aggregate first lien and second lien debt service for the bond year commencing during such fiscal
year reduced by an amount equal to the sum of any amount held in any capitalized interest account for
disbursement during such fiscal year lo pay interest on bonds. This requirement was met at December
31, 2009. The ordinance provides for the creation of separate accounts that are to be credited with
revenues in a specified priority. At the end of each year, any excess funds over amounts required in
accounts other than Special Capital Projects, Emergency Reserve and Airport Development accounts are
reallocated with the following year's revenues.

64

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
The Master Indenture of Trust securing Chicago-O'Hare International Airport Third Lien Obligations
requires that Revenues in each Fiscal Year, together with Other Available Moneys deposited with the
Trustee with respect to that Fiscal Year and any cash balance held in the Revenue Fund on the first day
of that Fiscal Year not then required to be deposited in any Fund or Account, will be at least sufficient: (i)
to provide for the payment of Operation and Maintenance Expenses for the Fiscal Year; and (ii) to provide
for the greater of (a) the sum of the amounts needed to make the deposits required to be made pursuant
to all resolutions, ordinances, indentures and trust agreements pursuant to which all outstanding First
Lien Bonds, Second Lien Obligations. Third Lien Obligations or other Airport Obligations are issued and
secured, and (b) 110 percent the Aggregate First, Second and Third Lien Debt Service for the Bond Year
commencing during that Fiscal Year, reduced by any proceeds of Airport Obligations held by the Trustee
for disbursement during that Bond Year to pay principal of and interest on First Lien Bonds, Second Lien
obligations or Third Lien obligations. This requirement was met at December 31, 2009.
The master indenture securing the Passenger Facility Charge (PFC) Revenue Bonds requires PFC
revenues, as defined, to be deposited into the PFC Revenue Fund. The PFC Revenue Fund is required
to transfer amounts no later than Ihe twentieth day of each month to various funds, as defined, as
appropriate to meet debt service and debt service reserve requirements.
No-Commitment Debt and Public Interest Loans include various special assessment, private activity
bonds and loans. These types of financings are used to provide private entities with low-cost capital financing
for construction and rehabilitation of facilities deemed to be in the public interest. Bonds payable on nocommitment debt are not included in the accompanying financial statements because the Cily.has no
obligation to provide for their repayment, which is the responsibility of the borrowing entities. In addition,
federal programs/grants, including Community Development Block Grants and Community Service Block
Grants, provide original funding for public interest loans. Loans receivable are not included as assets
because payments received on loans are used lo fund new loans or other program activities in the current
year and are not available for general Cily operating purposes. Loans provided lo third parties are recorded
as curreni and prior year programs/grants expenditures. Funding for future loans will be from a combination
of the repayment of existing loans and additional funds committed from future programs/grants expenditures.

65

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
g) Defeased Bonds have been removed from the Statement of Net Assets because related assets have been
placed in irrevocable trusts that, together with interest earned thereon, will provide amounts sufficient for
payment of all principal and interest. Defeased bonds at December 31. 2009, not including principal
payments due January 1, 2010. are as follows (dollars in thousands):

Emergency Telephone System - Series 1993
General Obligation Refunding Bonds - Series 1993B
General Obligation Refunding Bonds - Series 1995A-2
General Obligation Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 1998
General Obligation Projeci and Refunding Bonds - Series 1999A
General Obligation Bonds - Series 2000A
General Obligation Bonds - Series 2000C
General Obligation Bonds - Series 2001A
General Obligation Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 2002A
General Obligation Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 2003A
General Obligation Project Bonds - Series 2003C
General Obligation Project Bonds - Series 2004A
General Obligation Project and Refunding Bonds - Series 2006A
Neighborhoods Ai'we 21 Program - Series 2000A
Neighborhoods Alive 21 Program - Series 2001A
Neighborhoods Alive 21 Program - Series 2002A
Neighborhoods Alive 21 Program - Series 2003
Lake Millenium Project Parking Facilities Bonds - Series 1998
Lake Millenium Project Parking Facilities Bonds - Series 1999
Sales Tax Revenue Bonds-Series 1998
'.
Sales Tax Revenue Refunding Bonds - Series 2005
Near South Redevelopment Project Tax Increment - Series 1994A
Water Revenue Senior Lien Bonds - Series 2000
Water Revenue Senior Lien Bonds - Series 2001
Wastewater Transmission Revenue Bonds - Series 2001
Chicago Skyway Tollbridge Revenue Bonds - Series 2000
Special Transportation Revenue Bonds - Series 2001

Amount
Defeased
$ 213,730
17,535
17,875
271,050
214,415
233,490
112,965
346,385
135,690
89,760
75,375
166,645
7,420
175,255
209,150
36,820
59,925
149,880
44,495
65,740
12,655
23,000
100,445
235,905
101,650
125,120
118,715

Outstanding
$ 148,620
17,535
13,625
4,975
21,475
205,850
112,965
320,020
122,270
88,635
65,125
1 66.645
5,765
175,255
205,010
20,665
56,580
43.880
44.495
3,315
6,465
12,325
100,445
222,430
98,615
_
125,120
106,340

Total

$ 3,361,090

$ 2,514,445

66

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
11) Pension Trust Funds
a) Retirement Benefit - Eligible City employees participate in one of four single-employer defined benefit
pension plans (Plans). These Plans are: the Municipal Employees'; the Laborers' and Retirement Board
Employees'; the Policemen's; and the Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Funds of Chicago. Plans are
administered by individual retirement boards represented by elected and appointed officials. Certain
employees of the Chicago Board of Education participate in the Municipal Employees' or the Laborers' and
Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Funds for which the City levies taxes to make the required
employer contributions. Each Plan issues a publicly available financial report that includes financial
statements and required supplementary information.
The financial statements of the Plans are prepared using the accrual basis of accounting. Employer and
employee contributions are recognized in the period in which employee services are performed. Benefits and
refunds are recognized when payable.
Plan investments are reported al fair value. Short-term investments are reported at cost, which approximates
fair value. Securities traded on national or international exchanges are valued at the last reported sales price
al curreni exchange rates. Fixed income securities are valued principally using quoted market prices
provided by independent pricing services. For collective investments, the net asset value is determined and
certified by the investment managers as of the reporting date. Real estate investments are generally valued
by appraisals or other approved methods. Investments that do not have an established market are reported
at estimated fair value.
The Plans have a securities lending program. At year-end, the Plans have no credit risk exposure to
borrowers because the amounis the Plans owe the borrowers exceed the amounts the borrowers owe the
Plans. The contract with the Plans' master custodian requires it to indemnify the Plans if the borrowers fail to
return the securities (and if the collateral is inadequate to replace the securities lent) or fail to pay the fund for
income distributions by the securities' issuers while the securities are on loan. All securities loans can be
terminated on demand by either the Plans or the borrower, although the average lerm of the loans has not
exceeded 87 days. The Plans' custodian lends securities for collateral in the form of cash, irrevocable
letters of credit and/or U.S. government obligations equal to at least 102 percent of the fair value of securities
or international securities for collateral of 105 perceni. Cash collateral is invested in the lending agents' shortterm investment pool, which at year-end has a weighted average maturity that did not exceed 81 days. The
Plans cannot pledge to sell collateral securities received unless the borrower defaults. Loans outstanding as
of December 31, 2009 are as follows: market value of securities loaned $1,312.3 million, market value of cash
collateral from borrowers $1,352.6 million and market value of non-cash collateral from bon-owers $2.0
million.
The Plans provide retirement, disability, and death benefits as established by State law. Benefits generally
vest after 20 years of credited service. Employees who refire at or after age 55 (50 for policemen and
firemen) with 20 years of credited service qualify to receive a money purchase annuity and those with more
than 20 years of credited service qualify to receive a minimum formula annuity. The annuity is computed by
multiplying the final average salary by a percentage ranging from 2.0 percent to 2.4 percent per year of
credited service. The final average salary is the employee's highest average annual salary for any four
consecutive years within the last 10 years of credited service.
State law requires City contributions at statutorily, not actuarially determined rales. The City's contribution is
equal to the total amount of contributions by employees lo the Plan made in the calendar year two years pnor.
multiplied by 1.25 for the Municipal Employees', 1.00 for the Laborers', 2.00 for the Policemen's, and 2.26 for
the Firemen's State law also requires covered employees to contribute a percentage of their salaries.

67

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 3 1 . 2009 - CONTINUED
The City's annual pension cost for the current year and related information for each Plan is as follows (dollars in
thousands):
Municipal
Employees'

Laborers'

8.5%
8.5

8.5%
8.5

Contribution rates:
City (a)
Plan members
Annual required contribution
Interest on net pension obligation
Adjustment to annual required
contribution
Annual pension cost
Contributions made
Increase in net pension obligation
Net pension obligation (excess),
beginning of year
Net pension obligation (excess).
end of year

Actuarial valuation date
Actuarial cost method
Amortization method
Remaining amortization period
/Vsset valuation method
Actuarial assumptions:
Investment rate of return (b)
Projected salary increases (b):
Inflation
Seniority/Merit
Postretirement benefit increases
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

(g)

$

$

'

413,509
33,217

$

Policemen's

Firemen's
9.1%
9.1

9.0%
9.0

33,517
(18,061)

$

Total

339,488
108,839

$

203.867
87,922

$

990,381
211,917

(34,150)
412,576
148,046

18,568
34,024
14,627

(74,355)
373,972
172,044

(90,392)
201,397
89,212

(180,329)
1,021,969
423,929

264,530

19,397

201,928

112,185

598,040

415,208

(225.759)

1,360,491

1,099,023

2,648,963

679,738

$ (206,362)

$ 1,562,419

$ 1,211,208

$ 3,247,003

Municipal
Employees'

Laborers'

Policemen's

Firemen's

12/31/2009

12/31/2009

12/31/2009

12/31/2009

Entry age normal Entry age normal
Entry age nonnal
Entry age normal
Level dollar, open Level dollar, open Level percent, open Level dollar, open
30 years
30 years
30 years
30 years
5-yr. Smoothed
5-yr. Smoothed
5-yr. Smoothed
5-yr Smoothed
Market
Market
Market
Market
8.0%

8.0%

8.0%

8.0%

3.0
(c)
(f)

3.0
(d)
(f)

3.0
(e)
(g)

3.0
(e)
(g)

Percentage represents amount applied to the employees account and not the total contributed.
Compounded Annually
Service-based increases equivalent to a level annual rate increase of 2.0 percent over a full career.
Service-based increases equivalent to a level annual rate increase of 1.9 percent over a full career
Service-based increases equivalent to a level annual rate increase of 2.7 percent over a full career.
3.0 percent per year beginning at the eariier of:
1) the latter of the first anniversary of retirement and age 60
2) the latter of the third anniversary of retirement and age 53
Uses 3.0 percent per year for annuitants age 55 or over, born before 1955 with at least 20 years of service
and 1.5 percent per year for 20 years for annuitants age 60 or over, born in 1955 or later.

68

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
The following tables of information assist users in assessing each fund's progress in accumulating sufficient assets to
pay benefits when due. The three-year historical information for each Plan is as follows (dollars in thousands):
Annual
Pension
Cost

Year
Municipal Employees';
2007
2008
2009
Laborers':
2007
2008
2009
:
Policemen's:
2007
2008
2009
Firemen's:
2007
2008
2009

$

343,127
359,933
412,576

Net Pension
(Excess)
Obligation

% of Annual
Pension Cost
Contributed

$

40.69%
40.79
35.88

202,078
415,207
679,738
(228,692)
(225,759)
(206,362)

22,260
18,166
34,024

59.25
83.85
42.99

338,507
348,273
373,972

50.40
49.63
46.00

1,185,054
1,360,492
1,562,419

186,226
187,710
201,397

38.67
43.29
44.30

992,571
1,099,024
1,211,208

SCHEDULE OF FUNDING PROGRESS
(dollars in thousands)

Year
Municipal Employees':
2007
2008
2009
Laborers':
2007
2008
2009
Policemen's:
2007
2008
2009
Firemen's:
2007
2008
2009

Unfunded
(Surplus)
AAL as a
Percentage
of Covered
Payroll
((b-a)/c)

Actuarial
Valuation
Date

Actuarial
Value of
Assets
(a)

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
(AAL)
Entry Age
[bj

12/31/07
12/31/08
12/31/09

$6,890,463
6,669.502
6,295,788

$9,968,747
10,383.158
10,830,119

$3,078,284
3,713,656
4,534,331

12/31/07
12/31/08
12/31/09

1,757.711
1,698,427
1,601,352

1,808,295
1,915,324
1,975,749

50,584
216,897
374,397

97
89
81

192,847
216,744
208,626

26
100
179

12/31/07
12/31/08
12/31/09

4.231,682
4,093,720
3,884,978

8,220,353
8,482,574
8,736,102

3,988,671
4,388.854
4,851,124

51
48
44

1,038,957
1.023,581
1,011,205

384
429
480

12/31/07
12/31/08
12/31/09

1,374,960
1,335,695
1,269,231

3,215,874
3,311,269
3,428,838

1,840,914
1,975,574
2,159,607

43
40
37

389.125
396,182
400,912

473
499
539

69

Unfunded
(Surplus)
AAL
(b-a)

Funded
Ratio
(a/b)
69%
64
58

Covered
Payroll
(c)
$1,564,459
1,543,977
1,551,973

197%
241
292

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
b) Other Postemployment Benefits (OPEB) - Under Stale, law, certain health benefits are available lo
employees who retire from the City based upon their participation in the City's pension plans. The Pension
Plans and the City agreed to share in the cost of the Settlement Health Care Plan (see Note 12). This single
employee defined benefit plan is administered by the City. Substantially all employees who qualify as
Municipal or Laborers' pension plan participants older than age 55 with at least 20 years of service and Police
and Fire pension plan participants older than age 50 with at least 10 years of service may become eligible for
postemployment benefits if they eventually become an annuitant. Health benefits include basic benefits for
annuitants and supplemental benefits for Medicare eligible annuitants. The' amounts below represent the
accrued liability of tfie City's pension plans related to their own employees and a subsidy paid to the City (see
Note 12). The plan is financed on a pay as you go basis (dollars in thousands).
Annual OPEB Cost and Contributions Made
For Fiscal Year Ending December 31, 2009
Municipal
Employees'
Contribution Rates City:
Annual Required Contribution
Interest on Net OPEB Obligation
Adjustment to Annual Required ConU'ibution

Laborers'

Policemen's

Firemen's

Total

A portion of the City's contribution from the tax levy is used to
finance the health insurance supplement benefit payments.
$

22,967
1,319

S

(1,722)

3,682
115

S

11,810
254

S

(201)

(151)

4.370
168

$

42,829
1,856
(2,293)

(219)

Annual OPEB Cost
Contributions Made

22,564
9,651

3,646
2,563

11,863
9,266

4,319
2,645

42,392
24,125

Increase in
Net OPEB Obligation

12,913

1,083

2,597

1,674

18,267

Net OPEB Obligation,
Beginning of Year

29,307

2,564

5,640

3,723

41,234

Net OPEB Obligation,
End of Year

$

42,220

$

3,647

S

8,237

S

5,397

$

59,501

Actuarial Method and Assumptions - Projections of benefits for financial reporting purposes are based on the
substantive plan (the plan understood by the employer and plan members) and included the types of benefits
provided at the time of each valuafion and the historical pattern of sharing of benefit costs between the employer and
plan members to that poinL The actuarial method and assumptions used include techniques that are designed lo
reduce the effects of short term volatility in actuarial accrued liabilities and the actuarial value of assets, consistent
with the long term perspective of the calculations.

70

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
Municipal
Employees'

Laborers'

Policemen's

Firemen's

Actuarial Valuation Date

12/31/2009

12/31/2009

12/31/2009

12/31/2009

Actuarial Cost Method

Entry Age
Normal

Entry Age
Normal

Entry Age
Normal

Entry Age
Normal

Level Dollar,
Open

Level Dollar,
Open

Level Percent,
Open

Level Dollar,
Open

30 years

30 years

30 years

30 years

No Assets
(Pay-as-you-go)

No Assets
(Pay-as-you-go)

No /Xssets
(Pay-as-you-go)

No Assets
(Pay-as-you-go)

4.5%

4.5%

4.5%

4.5%

3.0%

3.0%

3.0%

3.0%

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

Amortization Method
Remaining
Amortization Method
Asset Valuation Method

Actuarial assumptions:
OPEB Investment
Rate of Return (a)
Projected Salary Increases (a)
Inflation
Seniority / Merit
Healthcare Cost Trend Rate (f):

( a ) Compounded Annually
( b ) Service-based increases equivalent to a level annual
( c ) Service-based increases equivalent to a level annual
( d ) Service-based increases equivalent to a level annual
( e ) Service-based increases equivalent to a level annual
( f ) Trend not applicable - fixed dollar subsidy

rate of increase
rate of increase
rate of increase
rate of increase

of
of
of
of

2.0
1.9
2.8
2.7

percent
percent
percent
percent

over a full career
over a full career
over a full career
over a full career

OPEB COST SUMMARY
(dollars in thousands)
Annual
OPEB
Cost

Year
$

23,287
23,580
22,561

% of A n n u a l
OPEB
Obligation

Net
OPEB
Obligation

Municipal Employees'

2007
2008
2009

Laborers'

2007
2008
2009

3,568
3,546
3,646

61.74
66.20
70.29

1,365
2,563
3,647

Policemen's

2007
2008
2009

11,220
11,378
11,863

72.26
77.78
78.11

3,112
5,640
8,237

Firemen's

2007
2008
2009

4,177
4,281
4,319

53.83
58 09
61.24

1,929
3,723
5,397

71

36.63%
38.29
42.77

$

14,756
29,307
42,220

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 3 1 , 2009 - CONTINUED
Actuarial valuations of an ongoing plan involve estimates of the value of reported amounts and assumptions about the
probability of occurrence of events far into the future. Examples include assumpfions about future employment,
mortality, and the healthcare cost trend. Amounts determined regarding the funded status of the plan and the annual
required contributions of the employer are subject to continual revisions as the results are compared with past
expectations and new estimates are made about the future. The schedule of funding progress, presents, as required,
supplementary information following the notes to the financial statements (dollars in thousands, unaudited).

Actuarial
Valuation
Date

Actuarial
Value of
Assets ( a )

Actuarial
Accrued '
Liability (AAL)
Entry Age ( b )

Municipal
Employees'

12/31/2009

$

S

Laborers'

12/31/2009

Policemen's
Rremen's

Unfunded
(Surplus)
UAAL
( b-a)

Funded
Ratio
( a/b)

Covered
Payroll
(c}

Unfunded
(Surplus)
AAL as a
Percentage
of Covered
Payroll
(( b-a ) / c )

224,173

S 1,551,973

14.44

41,738

41,738

208,626

20.01

12/31/2009

164,800

164,800

1,011,205

16.30

12/31/2009

47,933

47.933

400,912

11.96

224.173

$

12) Other P o s t e m p l o y m e n t Benefits - City Obligation
The annuitants who retired prior to July 1, 2005 received a 55 percent subsidy from the Cily and the annuitants who
retired on or after July 1, 2005.received a 50, 45. 40 and zero percent subsidy from the City based on the annuitant's
length of actual employment with the City for the gross cost of retiree health care under a court approved settlement
agreement. The pension funds contributed $65 for each Medicare eligible annuitant and $95 for each Non-Medicare
eligible annuitant to their gross cost. The annuitants contributed a total of $60.8 million in 2009 lo the gross cost of
their retiree heath care pursuant to premium amounts set forth in the above-referenced settiement agreement.
The cost of health benefits is recognized as an expenditure in the accompanying financial statements as claims are
reported and are funded on a pay-as-you-go basis. In 2009, the net expense lo the City for providing these benefits
to approximately 24,000 annuitants plus their dependents was approximately $98.0 million.
The City's net expense and the annuitants' contribution indicated above are preliminary and subject to the
reconciliafion per the court approved settiement agreement.
Plan Description S u m m a r y - The City of Chicago is party to a written legal settlement agreement outlining the
provisions of the retiree health program. The Settlement Health Care Plans (the Plans), through June 30, 2013. The
agreement does not require or extend continuation of the Plans after June 30, 2013. Pursuant to the Settlement, the
City administers a single employer defined benefit healthcare plan (the Health Plan), for which the Cily pays a portion
of the costs on a pay as you go method. Under the Settlement agreement, the City of Chicago sponsors health
benefit plans for employees, former employees and retired former employees. The provisions of the program provide
in general, that the City pay a percentage of the cost (based upon an employee's service) for hospital and medical
coverage to eligible retired employees and their dependents for a specified period, until June 30, 2013.

72

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 3 1 . 2009 - CONTINUED
In addition, Illinois Compiled Statutes authorize the four respective Pension Funds (Police, Fire. Municipal, and
Laborers) to provide a fixed monthly dollar subsidy to each annuitant who has elected coverage under the Health
Plan through June 30, 2013. After that date, no supplements are authorized.
The liabilities for the monthly dollar supplements paid to annuitants enrolled in the retiree medical plan by their
respective Pension Funds are included in the liabilities and reports of the respective four Pension Funds (see Note
11).
Funding Policy - The City's retiree health plan is a single employer plan which operates on a pay as you go funding
basis. No assets are accumulated or dedicated to funding the retiree health plan benefits.
A n n u a l OPEB Cost and Net OPEB Obligation - The City's annual other postemployment benefit (OPEB) cost
(expense) is calculated based on the annual required contribution of the employer (ARC). The ARC (Annual
Required Contribution) represents a level of funding, that if paid on an ongoing basis, is projected to cover the normal
cost each year and to amortize any unfunded actuarial liabilities over a period of four and one-half years (the
remaining years of coverage under the Settlement agreement).
The following table shows the components of the City's annual OPEB costs for the year for the Settlement Plan, the
amount actually contributed to the plan and changes in the City's net OPEB obligation to the Retiree Health Plan.
The Net OPEB Obligation is the amount entered upon the City's Statement of Net Assets as of year end as the net
liability for the other postemployment benefits - the retiree health plan. The amount of the annual cost for the retiree
health plan which is to be recorded in the Statement of Changes in Net Assets for 2009 is the Annual OPEB Cost
(expense).
A n n u a l OPEB Cost and C o n t r i b u t i o n s Made
(dollars in thousands)
Retiree
Settlement
Health Plan
(^ntnbution Rates:
City
Plan Members

Pay As You Go
N/A

Annual Required Contribution
Interest on Net OPEB Obligation
Adjustment to Annual Required Contribution

$

Annual OPEB Cost
Contributions Made

220,891
11,714
(74,796)
157,809
98,044

Increase in Net OPEB Obligation

59,765

Net OPEB Obligation, Beginning of Year
Net OPEB Obligation, End of Year

73

269,275
$

329,040

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 3 1 , 2009 - CONTINUED
The City's annual OPEB cost, the percentage of annual OPEB cost contributed to Ihe plan, and the nel OPEB
obligation for fiscal year 2009 is as follows (dollars in thousands):
Schedule of Contributions,
OPEB Costs and Nel obligations
Fiscal
Year

Ended

Annual
OPEB
Cost

Percentage of
Annual OPEB
Cost Contnbuted

Net
OPEB
Obligation

12/31/2009
12/31/2008
12/31/2007

$ 157,809
218,897
245.591

62.1%
44.8
39.6

$ 329,040
269,275
148,346

Funded Status and F u n d i n g Progress - As of January 1, 2009, the most recent actuarial valuation date, the
actuarial accrued liability for benefits was $787,395 all of which was unfunded. The covered payroll (annual payroll of
active employees covered by the plan) was approximately $2,475,107 and the ratio of the unfunded actuarial accrued
liability to the covered payroll was 32 percenL
Actuarial valuations of an ongoing plan involve estimates of the value of reported amounts and assumptions about the
probability of occurrence of events far into the future. Examples include assumptions about future employment,
mortality, and the healthcare cost trend. Amounis determined regarding the funded status of the plan and the annual
required contributions of the employer are subject to continual revisions as the results are compared with past
expectations and new estimates are made about the future. The schedule of funding progress, presents, as required,
supplementary information following the notes to the financial statements (dollars in thousands, unaudited).

Actuarial
Valuation
Dale
12/31/2008

Actuarial
Value of
Assets

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability (AAL)
$

787,395

Unfunded
Actuarial
Accaied Liabilily
(U/kAL)
787,395

Funded
Ratio
0%

Covered
Payroll
$

2,475,107

Actuarial Method and A s s u m p t i o n s - Projections of benefits for financial reporting purposes are based on the
substantive plan (the plan understood by the employer and plan members) and included the types of benefits
provided at the time of each valuation and the historical pattem of sharing of benefit costs between the employer and
plan members to that point. The actuarial method and assumptions used include techniques that are designed to
reduce the effects of short term volatility in actuarial accrued liabilities and the actuarial value of assets, consistent
with the long term perspective of the calculations.
For the Settlement Plan benefits (not provided by the Pension Funds) in the actuarial valuation for the fiscal year
ended December 3 1 , 2009, the projected unit credit actuarial cost method was used. The actuarial assumptions
included an annual healthcare cost trend rale of 12 percent initially, reduced by decrements to an ultimate rale of 9
perceni. Both rales included a 3 percent inflation assumption. The plan has not accumulated assets and does not
hold assets in a segregated trust. However, the funds expected to be used to pay benefits are assumed to be
invested for durations which will yield an annual return rate of 4.35 percent. The Unfunded Accrued Actuarial Liability
is being amortized as a level dollar amount over 4.5 years.

74

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
Summary of Assumptions and Methods
Settlement
Health Plan
Actuarial Valuation Date

December 31,2008

Actuarial Cost Method

Projected Unit Credit

Amortization Method

Level Dollar, Closed

Remaining Amortization Period
Asset Valuation Method

4.5 years
Market Value

Actuarial Assumptions:
Investment Rale of Relum
Projected Salary Increases
Healthcare Inflation Rale

4.35%
2.50%
12% initial lo 9% ultimate

13) Risk Management
The City is exposed to various risks of loss related to torts; theft of. damage to and destruction of assets; errors and
omissions; certain benefits for and injuries to employees and natural disasters. The Cily provides worker's
compensation benefits and employee health benefits under self-insurance programs except for insurance policies
maintained for certain Enterprise Fund activities. The City uses various risk management techniques to finance these
risks by retaining, transferring and controlling risks depending on the risk exposure.
Risks for O'Hare, Midway, and certain other major properties, along wilh various special events, losses from certain
criminal acts committed by employees and public official bonds are transferred to commercial insurers. Claims have
not exceeded the purchased insurance coverage in the past three years, accordingly, no liability is reported for these
claims. All other risks are retained by the City and are self-insured. The Cily pays claim settlements and judgments
from the self-insured programs. Uninsured claim expenditures and liabilities are reported when it is probable that a
loss has occurred and the amount of that loss can be reasonably estimated. These losses include an estimate of
claims that have been incurred but not reported. The General Fund is primarily used to record all non-Enterprise
Fund claims. The estimated portion of non-Enterprise Fund claims not yet settled has been recorded in the
Govemmental Activities in the Statement of Net Assets as claims payable along with amounts related to deferred
compensatory time and estimated liabilities for questioned costs. As of December 31, 2009, the total amount of nonEnterprise Fund claims was $462.8 million. This liability is the City's best estimate based on available information.
Changes in the reported liability for all funds are as follows (dollars in thousands):

Balance, January 1
Claims incurred on current and
pnor year events
Claims paid on current and
prior year events
Balance, December 31

2009

2008

$ 497,527

$503,636

605,506

627,660

(589,700)

(633.769)

$ 513,333

75

$497,527

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
14) Commitments and Contingencies
The City is a defendant in various pending and threatened individual and class action litigation relating principally to
claims arising from contracts, personal injury, property damage, police conduct, alleged discrimination, civil rights
actions and other matters. City management believes that the ultimate resolution of these matters will nol have a
material adverse effect on the financial position of the City.
The City participates in a number of federal-and state-assisted grant programs. These grants are subject to audits by
or on behalf of the grantors lo assure compliance with grant provisions. Based upon past experience and
management's judgment, the City has made provisions in the General Fund for questioned costs and other amounts
estimated to be disallowed. City management expects such provision to be adequate to cover actual amounts
disallowed, if any.
As of December 31, 2009, the Enterprise Funds have entered into contracts for approximately $439.2 million for
construction projects.
The City's pollution remediation obligation of $37.4 million is primarily related to Brownfield redevelopment projects.
These projects Include removal of underground storage tanks, cleanup of contaminated soil, and removal of other
environmental pollution identified at the individual sites. The estimated liability is calculated using the expected cash
flow technique. The pollution remediation obligation is an estimate and subject to changes resulting from price
increases or reductions, technology, or changes in applicable laws or regulations.
15) Service Concession Agreements
On January 1, 2009, the City created a new major fund entitied Service Concession Agreements for the primary
purpose of accounting for the deferred inflows associated with govemmental fund long-term lease and concession
transactions. Deferred inflows are amortized over the life of the related lease and concession agreements. Proceeds
from these transactions maybe transferred from this fund in accordance with ordinances approved by cily council that
define the use of proceeds. As a result of the creation of this new fund, the City transferred the $551.1 million
deferred inflow associated with the lease of the City's downtown underground public parking system from the Bond,
Note Redemption and Interest Fund effective January 1, 2009.
In February 2009, the City completed a $1.15 billion concession agreement to allow a private operator to manage and
collect revenues from the City's metered parking system for 75 years. The City received an upfront payment of $1.15
billion which was recognized as a deferred inflow that will be amortized and recognized as revenue over the term of
the agreement. In 2009, the City recognized $15.3 million of revenue and will continue to recognize $15.3 million for
each subsequent year through 2083.
In September 2008, the Cily of Chicago received a winning bid of $2,521 billion from Midway Investment and
Development Company, LLC for a ninety-nine year lease of Midway Airport. Amid the global credit crisis, the
transaction to privafize Midway Airport was nol executed. However, in April 2009, the City received a non-refundable
security deposit payment of $126 million.
In December 2006, the City completed a long-term concession and lease of the City's downtown underground public
parking system. The concession granted a private company the right to operate the garages and collect parking and
related revenues for the 99-year term of the operating lease. The City received an upfront payment of $563.0 million
of which $347.8 million was simultaneously used to purchase three of the underground garages from the Chicago
Park District. The City recognized a deferred inflow that will be amortized and recognized as revenue over the term of
the lease. In 2007, the City recognized $5.7 million of revenue and will continue lo recognize $5.7 million for each
subsequent year through 2105.
In January 2005, the City completed a long-temi concession and lease of the Skyway. The concession granted a
private company the right to operate the Skyway and to collect toll revenue from the Skyway for the 99-year term of
the operating lease. The City received an upfront payment of $1.83 billion; a portion of the payment ($446.3 million)
76

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2009 - CONTINUED
advance refunded all of the outstanding Skyway bonds. The City recognized a deferred inflow of $1.83 billion that will
be amortized and recognized as revenue over the 99-year term of the operating lease. In 2005, the City recognized
$18.5 million of revenue related to this transaction and will recognize $18.5 million for each subsequent year through
2103. Skyway land, bndges, other facilities and equipment continue to be reported on the Statement of Net Assets
and will be depreciated, as applicable, over their useful lives. The deferred inflow of the Skyway is reported in the
Proprietary Funds Statement of Net Assets.
16) Subsequent Events
In January 2010, the City sold General Obligation Refunding Bonds Series 2009A, General Obligation Taxable
Project and Refunding Bonds Series 2009B, General Obligation Taxable Project (Build Amenca Bonds) Series 2009C
and General Obligation Taxable Project (Recovery Zone Economic Development Bonds) Senes 2009D ($793.3
million). The bonds were issued at interest rates ranging from 4.0 percent to 6.257 percent and matunty dates from
January 1, 2018 to January 1, 2040. Proceeds will be used to pay a portion of the costs of vanous capital projects
and to refund certain outstanding general obligation bonds of the City.
In March 2010, Moody's Investors Service downgraded Chicago O'Hare International Airport's Passenger Facility
Revenue Bonds from " A l " to "Al." In addition, Moody's Investors Service assigned the Third Lien Revenue
Refunding Bonds Series 2010A-F, issued in March 2010, a rating of "/\2."
In the first quarter of 2010, $31.2 million of Chicago Midway Commercial Paper Notes, Series A-C were issued. The
proceeds will be used to finance portions of the costs of authorized airport projects and to repay the expenses of
issuing the notes.
In April 2010, the City sold Chicago O'Hare Internafional Airport General Airport Third Lien Revenue Bonds Series
201 OA, General Airport Third Lien Revenue Taxable (Build America Bonds) Series 2010B, General Airport Third Lien
Revenue (Non-AMT) Bonds Series 201OC, General Airport Third Lien Revenue Refunding (AMT) Bonds Series
201OD, General Airport Third Lien Revenue Refunding (AMT) Bonds Senes 2010E and General Airport Third Lien
Revenue (Non-AMT) Bonds Series 201 OF ($1.04 billion). The bonds were issued at interest rates ranging from 1.75
percent to 5.25 percent and maturity dates from January 1, 2011 to January 1, 2040. Proceeds will be used to pay a
portion of the costs of certain projects at Chicago O'Hare International Airport including the O'Hare Modernization
Program, to repay the City's outstanding commercial paper notes issued for O'Hare purposes and to refund certain
outstanding General Airport Second Lien Revenue bonds.
In April 2010, to improve the transparency and ensure a greater degree of comparability, Moody's Investors Service
and Fitch Ratings implemented ratings recalibrations across U.S. long-term municipal bond ratings resulting in an
upward shift of credit ratings. The City of Chicago ratings recalibrations are as follows:
Ratings Agency
Moody's Investor
Service
Fitch Ratings

City:
General Obligation Bonds
Water:
Senior Lien - Revenue Bonds
Junior Lien - Revenue Bonds
Wastewater:
Junior Lien - Revenue Bonds
Sales Tax:
Sales Tax - Revenue Bonds
Motor Fuel:
Motor Fuel Tax - Revenue Bonds.
77

Aa2

/\A+

Aa2
Aa3

AAA
AA+

Aa3

AA

Aa2

AA+

Aa3

A-

 CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
NOTES TO BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2008 - CONCLUDED
In April 2010, Filch Ratings downgraded the Chicago Midway International Airport's First Lien Airport Revenue Bonds
from "A+" to "A" and the Second Lien Airport Revenue Bonds from "A" to "A-." In addition, Fitch Ratings assigned the
Second Lien Revenue Refunding Bonds Series 2010, issued in April 2010, a rating of "A-."
In May 2010, the City sold Chicago Midway Airport Second Lien Revenue Variable Rate Demand Taxable Bonds
Series 2010 A-1 and Series 2010 A-2 ($80.5 million) in the daily rate mode and maturity dates from January 1, 2021
lo January 1, 2025. Proceeds will be used to refund certain outstanding Chicago Midway Airport Second Lien
Revenue Bonds, to refund certain other outstanding Airport obligations and to repay a portion of the City's Chicago
Midway Airport Commercial Paper Notes.
In May 2010, the City sold Chicago O'Hare International Airport Passenger Facility Charge Revenue (Non-AMT)
Bonds Series 2010A, Passenger Facility Charge Revenue (Non-AMT) Series 2010B, Passenger Facility Charge
Revenue Taxable Bonds Series 2010C and Passenger Facility Charge Revenue Refunding (Non-AMT) Bonds Series
2010D ($137.7 million). The bonds were issued at interest rates ranging from 2.0 percent to 6.395 percent and
maturity dates from January 1, 2011 to January 1, 2040. Proceeds will be used to pay a portion of the costs of certain
projects at Chicago O'Hare International Airport including the O'Hare Modernization Program and to refund certain
outstanding Passenger Facility Charge Revenue bonds.
In June 2010, the City negotiated a novation of the fixed payer swap associated with the Series 2003B variable rate
bonds from Lehman Brothers Special Financing Inc. to Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. All economic terms of the interest
rate swap remained Identical and the City did not Incur any cost In association with replacing the counterparty to the
swap.
The global economic downturn has adversely impacted the City's variable rate debt. In 2008 and 2009 global
financial markets incurred substantial declines in value due to the credit crisis. Monoline insurers' credit ratings came
under review due to subprime mortgage exposure resulting in downgrades by the major rating agencies. As a result,
credit spreads increased on the City's variable rate debL especially with insured bonds, therefore the Cily refinanced
or converted many of its variable rale debt issues. In 2010, the Cily has utilized liquidity facilities lo convert two
variable rate issues in the amount of $284.7 million and thereby removing the monoline insurers. Various bonds
series that were unable lo be remarketed in 2008 were converted out of bank bond mode during 2009 and 2010.

78

 REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
SCHEDULE OF OTHER POSTEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS FUNDING PROGRESS
Last Three Years (dollars are in thousands)

Actuarial
Valuation
Date

Actuarial
Value
of Assets

Actuarial
Accrued
Liability (AAL)
Entry Age

(a)

(A)

Municipal
Employees'
2007
2008
2009

12/31/2007
12/31/2008
12/31/2009

Laborers'
2007
2008
2009

12/31/2007
12/31/2008
12/31/2009

Policemen's
2007
2008
2009

12/31/2007
12731/2008
12/31/2009

179,040
169,972
164,800

Firemen's
2007
2008
2009

12/31/2007
12/31/2008
12/31/2009

City of Chicago
2006
2007
2008

12/31/2006
12/31/2007
12/31/2008

$

217,868
222,691
224,173

Unfunded
Actuarial
Accrued
Liability
(UAAL)
(b-a)

Funded
Ratio
(a/b)

Covered
Payroll

$ 1,564.459
1,543,977
1.551.973

217,868
222,691
224,173

Unfunded
(Surplus)
AAL as a
Percentage
of Covered
Payroll
(( b-a ) / c )

13.93
14.42
14.44

%

192,847
216,744
208,626

21.47 %
19.41
20.01

179,040
169,972
164,800

1,038,957
1,023,581
1,011,205

17.23 %
16.61
16.30

47,097
47,309
47,933

47,097
47,309
47,933

389,125
396,182
400,912

12.10
11.94
11.96

1.301,417
1.062,864
787,395

1,301,417
1,062,864
787,395

2,502,154
2,562,067
2,475,107

52.01
41.48
31.81

41,411
42,064'
41,738

79

41,411
42,064
41,738

%

  PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

 

APPENDIX 

FORNIS OF OPINIONS OF COUNSEL

 

 PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

Form of Co-Bond Counsel Opinions for
General Obligation Bonds, Refunding Series 201 OA

2010

City of Chicago
City Hail
Chicago, Illinois
We have examined a record of proceedings relating to the issuance of $_
aggregate principal amount of General Obligation Bonds, Refunding Series 20! OA (the "Bonds") of the
City of Chicago (the "City"). The Bonds are authorized and issued pursuant to the provisions of Section
6 of Article VII of the Illinois Constitution of 1970 and by virtue of an ordinance adopted by the City
Council of the City on July 28, 2010 (the "Bond Ordinance").
The Bonds are issuable in fully registered form in the denominations of $5,000 or any integral
multiple thereof, are dated as of
, 2010 and bear interest from their dated date, payable
on July 1, 2011 and semiannually thereafter on January 1 and July 1 of each year.
The Bonds mature on January I of each of the following years in the respective principal amount
set forth opposite each such year in the following table and bear interest at the respective rate of interest -,
per annum set forth opposite such principal amount:
Year

Principal Amount

Interest Rate
%

The Bonds maturing on and after January 1,
are subject to redemption prior to maturity at
the option of the City, in such principal arnounts and from such maturities as the City shall determine and
by lot for a partial redemption of Bonds having the same maturity, on
,
and on
any date thereafter, at a redemption price equal to the principal amount thereof to be redeemed, plus
accrued interest thereon to the date fixed for redemption.
The Bonds maturing on January 1 of the years
and
are subject to mandatory
redemption by the application of sinking ftind installments, in part and by lot, at a redemption price equal
to the principal amount thereof on January 1 of the following years and in the following principal
amounts:
D-1

 Bonds Due
Year

Bonds Due

Principal Amount

Year

Principal Amount

In our opinion, the Bonds are valid and legally binding general obligations of the City, and the
City has power and is obligated to levy ad valorem taxes upon all the taxable property within the City for
the payment of the Bonds and the interest thereon, without limitation as to rate or amounL The
enforceability of rights or remedies with respect to the Bonds, however, may be limited by bankruptcy,
insolvency or other laws affecting creditors' rights and remedies heretofore or hereafter enacted.
We are ftirther of the opinion that, under existing law, interest on the Bonds is not includable in
the gross income of the owners thereof for Federal income tax purposes. I f there is continuing
compliance with the applicable requirctnents of the Intemal Revenue Code of 1986 (the "Code"), we are
of the opinion that interest on the Bonds will continue to be excluded from the gross income of the
owners thereof for Federal income tax purposes. We are fiirther of the opinion that the Bonds are not
"private activity bonds" within the meaning of Section 141(a) of the Code; accordingly, interest on the
Bonds is not an item of tax preference for purposes of computing individual or corporate altemative
minimum taxable income. Interest on the Bonds, however, is includable in eamings and profits of a
corporation and therefore must be taken into account when computing corporate altemative ininimum
taxable income for purposes of the corporate alternative minimum tax.
The Code contains certain requirements that must be satisfied from and after the date hereof in
order to preserve the exclusion from gross income for Federal income tax purposes of interest on the
Bonds. These requirements relate to the use and investment of the proceeds of the Bonds, the payinent of
certain amounts to the United States, the security and source of payment of the Bonds and the use of the
property financed with the proceeds of the Bonds. The City has covenanted in the Bond Ordinance to
comply with these requirements.
With respect to the exclusion from gross income for Federal income tax purposes of interest on
the Bonds we have relied on the verification report of Robert Thomas, CPA LLC, certified public
accountants, regarding the computation of the arbitrage yield on the Bonds and of certain investments
made with the proceeds of the Bonds.
Interest on the Bonds is not exempt from Illinois income taxes.
Respectfully submitted,

D-2

 Fonn of Co-Bond Counsel Opinions for
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project Series 2010B (Build America Bonds - Direct Payment) and
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding Series 20IOC
2010

City of Chicago
City Hall
Chicago, Illinois
We have examined a record of proceedings relating to the issuance of $
aggregate principal amount of General Obligation Bonds, Ta.xable Project Series 2010B (Build America
Bonds - Direct Payment) (the "Series 201 OB Bonds") and $
aggregate principal
amount of General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding Series 20IOC (the "Series 20IOC
Bonds" and together with the Series 201 OB Bonds, the "Bonds") of the City of Chicago (the "City"). The
Bonds are authorized and issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 6 of Article VII of the Illinois
Constitution of 1970 and by virtue of an ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on July 28,
2010. Certain matters with respect to the Bonds are determined pursuant to the Notification of Sale with
respect to the Bonds dated
, 2010 (the "Notification of Sale").
The Bonds are issuable in fully registered form in the denominations of $5,000 or any integral
multiple thereof, are dated as of
, 2010 and bear interest from their dated date, payable
on July 1,2011 and semiannually thereafter on January I and July I of each year.
The Series 201 OB Bonds mature on January 1 of each of the following years in the respective
principal amount set forth opposite each such year in the following table and bear interest at the
respective rate of interest per annum set forth opposite such principal amount:
Year

Principal Amount

Interest Rate
%

The Series 2010B Bonds are subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the City, in
such principal amounts and from such mamrities as the City shall determine and for a partial redemption
of Series 201 OB Bonds having the same maturity, pro-rata as provided in the Notification of Sale and
subject to the operational procedures of the Depository Trust Company ("DTC"), on any date, at a
redemption price determined pursuant to the Notification of Sale, plus accrued interest to the redemption
date.
The Series 201 OB Bonds maturing on January 1, 2 0 _ are subject to mandatory redemption, in
part pro-rata as provided in the Notification of Sale and subject to the operational procedures of the DTC,
on January 1 of the years and in the respective principal amounts set forth in the following table, at the
redemption price of par and by the application of sinking fimd installments as provided in the Notification
of Sale.

D-3

 Year

Principal Amount

Year

Principal Amount

The Series 20IOC Bonds mature on January 1 of each of the following years in the respective
principal amount set forth opposite each such year in the following table and bear interest at the
respective rate of interest per atmum set forth opposite such principal amount:
Year

Principal Amount

Interest Rate
%

The Series 20IOC Bonds arc subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the City, in
such principal amounts and from such maturities as the City shall determine and for a partial redemption
of Series 2010C Bonds having the same maturity, pro-rata as provided in the Notification of Sale and
subject to the operational procedures of DTC, on any date, at a redemption price determined pursuant to
the Notification of Sale, plus accrued interest to the redemption date.
The Series 20IOC Bonds maturing on January 1, 20 are subject to mandatory redemption, in
part and pro-rata as provided in the Notification of Sale and subject to the operational procedures of DTC,
on January 1 of the years and in the respective principal amounts set forth in the following table, at the
redemption price of par and by the application of sinking fund installments as provided in the Notification
ofSale.
Year

Principal Amount

Year

Principal Amount

In our opinion, the Bonds are valid and legally binding general obligations of the City, and the
City has power and is obligated to levy ad valorem taxes upon all the taxable property within the City for
the payment of the Bonds and the interest thereon, without limitation as to rate or amount. The
enforceability of rights and remedies with respect to the Bonds, however, may be limited by bankruptcy,
insolvency or other laws affecting creditors'rightsand remedies heretofore or hereafter enacted.

D-4

 Interest on the Bonds is not excludable from gross income for Federal income tax purposes.
Interest on the Bonds is not exempt from Illinois income taxes.
Respectftilly submitted.

D-5

  PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT 

 

APPENDIX 

DESCRIPTION OF REFUNDED BONDS

 

 PAGE LEFT 

DESCRIPTION OF REFUNDED BONDS
Bonds Refunded by the General Obligation Bonds, Refunding Series 2010A

Series
Designation

Maturity
Date
(January 1)

Principal
Amount
Refunded

Series

General Obligation Bonds:

Series

General Obligation Refunding Bonds:

Series

Series

Interest Rate

Redemption
Date

Redemption
Price

Original
CUSIP*^

Prior
Unrefunded
CUSIP*'-

General Obligation Project and Refunding Bonds:

General Obligation Project Bonds:

Copyright 2010. American Bankers Association. CUSIP data herein are provided by CUSIP Global Services LLC, managed on
behalf of the American Bankers Association by Standard & Poor's, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. The CUSIP
numbers listed are being provided solely for the convenience of the Bondholders only at the time of issuance of the Bonds and the
City does not make any representation with respect to such numbers or undertake any responsibility for their accuracy now or at any
time in the future. The CUSIP number for a specific maturity is subject to being changed after the issuance of the Bonds as a result
of various subsequent actions including, but not limited to. a refunding in whole or in part of such maturity or as a result of the
procurement of secondary market portfolio insurance or olher similar enhancement by investors that is applicable to all or a portion
of certain maturities of the Bonds.
Original CUSIP is the CUSIP number assigned to the maturity upon original issue.
Prior Unrefunded CUSIP is the CUSIP number assigned to the unrefunded bonds of a mamrity upon a partial refunding of the
maturity.

E-1

 Bonds Refunded bv the General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project and Refunding Scries 20 IOC

Series
Designation

Maturity
Date
(January I)

Principal
Amount
Refunded

Scries

General Obligation Bonds:

Series

General Obligation Refunding Bonds:

Series

General Obligation Project Bonds:

Interest Rate

Redemption
Date

Redemption
Price

Original
CUSIP**

Prior
Unrefunded
CUSIP*"

* Copyright 2010. American Bankers Association. CUSIP data herein are provided by CUSIP Global Services LLC, managed on
behalf of the American Bankers Association by Standard & Poor's, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. The CUSIP
numbers listed arc being provided solely for the convenience of the Bondholders only at the time of issuance of the Bonds and the
City does not make any representation with respect to such numbers or undertake any responsibility for their accuracy now or at any
rime in the future. The CUSIP number for a specific maturity is subject to being changed after the issuance of the Bonds as a result
of various subsequent actions including, but not limited to, a refunding in whole or in part of such maturity or as a result of the
procurement of secondary market portfolio insurance or other similar enhancement by investors that is applicable to all or a portion
of certain maturities of the Bonds.
• Original CUSIP is the CUSIP number assigned to the maturity upon original issue.
Prior Unrefunded CUSIP is the CUSIP number assigned to the unrefunded Ixjnds of a maturity upon a partial refunding of the
maturity.

E-2

 CITY OF CHICAGO • GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS, REFUNDING SERIES 2010A, TAXABLE PROJECT SERIES 2010B AND TAXABLE PROJECT AND REFUNDING SERif:s 2010C

 EXHIBIT 

SUPPLEMENTAL OF CO-BOND COUNSEL

B-l

[Date of Issuance of the Bonds]

December _ , 2010
City of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois
Loop Capital Markets, LLC, as Representative of
the Underwriters listed in the Bond Purchase
Agreement, dated December , 2010
Chicago, Illinois
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have acted as Co-Bond Counsel in connection with the issuance by the
City of Chicago (the "City") of its $
aggregate principal amount of
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project Series 201 OB (Build America Bonds - Direct
Payment) (the "Series 201 OB Bonds") (the "Bonds"). We have delivered our separate
approving legal opinions as Co-Bond Counsel as to the validity of the Bonds
(collectively, the "Opinions").
The following opinion is fumished pursuant to Section 10(a)(iii) of the
Bond Purchase Agreement, dated December , 2010 (the "Bond Purchase Agreement"),
between the City and the Underwriters named therein, and is based upon the same
examination of the record of proceedings and accompanying certificates, and is subject to
the same limitations, as described in our separate approving legal opinions as Co-Bond
Counsel described above.
Based upon our examination opinion, we are of the opinion that:
The Bond Purchase Agreement and the Continuing Disclosure
Undertaking have been duly authorized, executed and delivered by the City and,
assuming the due authorization, execution and delivery of the Bond Purchase
Agreement by the other parties thereto, constitute binding agreements of the City,
except that the enforcement of the provisions thereof may be limited by
bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium and other similar laws
affecting creditors' rights generally, and except that enforcement of the provisions
thereof by an equitable or similar remedy is subject to general principles of law or
equity goveming such a remedy, including the exercise of judicial discretion
whether to grant any particular form of relief
The Bonds constitute exempt securities within the meaning of Section
3(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "Securities Act"), and
B-2

 Section 304(a)(4)(A) of the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended (the "Trust
Indenture Act"), and it is not necessary, in connection with the public offering and
sale of the Bonds, to register any security under tlae Securities Act or to qualify
the Ordinance under the Trust Indenture Act.
The statements contained in the Official Statement, dated December
,
2010 (the "Official Statement"), under the headings "THE BONDS" (except for
the statements contained under the caption "Book-Entry System" and "Global
Clearance Procedures"), and "SECURITY FOR THE BONDS" (except for the
statements under the headings "Property Tax Limits" and "Additional General
Obligation Debt"), present a fair and accurate summary of such provisions. We
hereby confirm the opinions attributed to us in the Official Statement and consent
to the references to such opinions contained in the Official Statement. Based
upon our participation in the preparation of the Official Statement as Co-Bond
Counsel and without having undertaken to detennine independently the accuracy
or completeness of the statements contained in the Official Statement (other than
the opinions of this firm referred to in the preceding sentence), we have no reason
to believe, as of the date hereof, that the Official Statement (except for (i) the
financial statements and other financial and statistical data included in the Official
Statement, including, but not limited to, Appendices A, B and C attached thereto,
(ii) the description of The Depository Trust Company, Clearstream, Euroclear and
the Global Clearance Procedures and (iii) the information under the caption
"Information Conceming Offering Restrictions in Certain Jurisdictions Outside
the United States" and any information or notices to prospective investors outside
the United States of America (as to which no view is expressed)), contains any
untrue statement of a material fact or omits to state any material fact required to
be staled therein or necessary to make the statements therein, in the light of the
circumstance under which they were made, not misleading.
You may each rely on the Opinions as though the Opinions were
addressed specifically to you.
All capitalized terms used herein and not herein defined shall have the
meanings attributed to them in the Bond Purchase Agreement.
Respectfully yours,

B-3

 

OPINION OF CORPORATION COUNSEL OF THE CITY

C-I

December _ , 2010

Loop Capital Markets LLC
200 West Jackson Street
Suite 1600
Chicago, Illinois 60606
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This opinion is given to you pursuant to Section 10(a)(iv) of that certain contract
dated December , 2010 (the "Bond Purchase Agreement") between the City of Chicago
(the "City") and Loop Capital Markets LLC as representative of a group of Underwriters,
respecting the purchase of City of Chicago $
General Obligation Bonds,
Taxable Project Series 201 OB (Build America Bonds - Direct Payment) (the "Bonds")
which are being issued pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City
on July 28,2010 (the "Ordinance"). Unless otherwise defined herein, capitalized terms
used herein shall have the meanings assigned to them in the Bond Purchase Agreement.
In connection with the issuance of the Bonds, I have caused to be examined a
certified copy of the record of proceedings of the City Coimcil of the City pertaining to
the issuance of the Bonds by the City, the Official Statement dated December
,2010.
relating to the Bonds (the "Official Statement"), and executed counterparts, where
applicable, of the following documents:
(a)

the Ordinance;

(b)

the Bond Purchase Agreement; and

(c)

that certain Continuing Disclosure Undertaking dated the date hereof
pursuant to the requirements of Section (b) (5) of Rule 15c-12 of the
Securities and Exchange Commission (the "Undertaking").

On the basis of such examination and review of such other information, records
and documents as was deemed necessary or advisable, I am of the opinion that:
1.

The City is a home rule unit of local govemment duly organized and
existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois with full
power and authority, among other things, to adopt the Ordinance, to
authorize, issue and sell the Bonds, and to execute and deliver the Bond
Purchase Agreement and the Undertaking.

2.

The Bond Purchase Agreement and the Undertaking have been duly
authorized, executed and delivered by, and the Ordinance has been duly
C-2

 adopted by, the City, and, assuming the due execution and delivery by the
other parties thereto, as appropriate, such instruments constitute legal and
valid obligations of the City in each case enforceable in accordance with
their respective terms except as may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency
and other laws affecting creditors' rights or remedies and the availability
of equitable remedies generally.
3.

To my knowledge, compliance with the provisions of the Bonds, the
Ordinance, the Bond Purchase Agreement and the Undertaking does not
conflict in a material manner with, or constitute a material breach of or
material default under, any applicable law, administrative regulation, court
order or consent decree of the State of Illinois, or any department,
division, agency or instrumentality thereof or of the United States of
America or any ordinance, agreement or other instrument to which the
City is a party or is otherwise subject.

4.

To my knowledge, all approvals, consents and orders of and filings
(except with respect to state "blue sky" or securities laws) with any
govemmental authority, board, agency or commission having jurisdiction
which would constitute conditions precedent to the performance by the
City of its obligations under the Ordinance, the Bond Purchase
Agreement, the Undertaking and the Bonds have been obtained.

5.

There is no litigation or proceeding pending, or to my knowledge,
threatened, materially affecting the existence of the City or seeking to
restrain or enjoin the issuance, sale or delivery of the Bonds, or contesting
the validity or enforceability of the Bonds, the Ordinance, the Bond
Purchase Agreement or the Undertaking, or the completeness or accuracy
of the Official Statement, or the powers of the City or its authority with
respect to the Bonds, the Ordinance, the Bond Purchase Agreement or the
Undertaking.

Nothing has come to my attention which would lead me to believe that the
Official Statement (excluding information under the caption "THE BONDS - Book-Entry
System," relating to DTC, Clearstream and Euroclear, information under the captions
"RATINGS," "UNDERWRITING," and "TAX MATTERS," Appendices C, D and E,
information sourced in Appendices A and B to sources other than the City or departments
thereof, all information and notices set forth under the caption "Information Concerning
Offering Restrictions in Certain Jurisdictions Outside the United States," any information
in or omitted from the Official Statement relating to any information fiimished by the
Underwriters for use in the Official Statement, the fmancial statements and all other
financial and statistical data contained in the Official Statement, including the
Appendices thereto) contains an untme statement of a material fact or omits to state a
material fact necessary to make the statements therein, in the light of the circumstances
under which they were made, not misleading in any material respect.

C-3

 No opinion is expressed as to any "blue sky" or other securities laws or as to the
laws regarding taxation of any state or the United States of America or any foreign
jurisdiction, or any disclosure or compliance related thereto.
The statements contained herein are made in an official capacity and not
personally and no personal responsibility shall derive from them. Further, the only
opinions that are expressed are the opinions specifically set forth herein, and no opinion
is implied or should be inferred as to any other matter or transaction.
No one other than you shall be entitled to rely on this opinion.
Very tmly yours.

Mara S. Georges
Corporation Counsel

C-4

 EXHIBIT 

OPINION OF COUNSEL

December

,2010

Loop Capital Markets LLC
as Representative of the Underwriters named in the Bond Purchase Agreement, dated
December 1, 2010 between such Underwriters and the City of Chicago
(the "BondPurchase Agreement")
Re:

City of Chicago
General Obligation Bonds
Taxable Project Series 2010B (Build America Bonds - Direct Payment)

Dear Ladies and Gentlemen;
We have acted as Underwriters' Counsel to Loop Capital Markets LLC, as
Representative of the Underwriters named in the Bond Purchase Agreement, dated December 1,
2010 (the "Bond Purchase Agreement") between the City of Chicago (the "City") and Loop
Capital Markets LLC, as Representative of the Underwriters, in connection with the purchase by
the Underwriters of $213,555,000 aggregate original principal amount of General Obligation
Bonds, Taxable Project Series 201 OB (Build America Bonds - Direct Payment) (the "Bonds").
This opinion is being rendered at the request of the Representative pursuant to Section 10(a)(v)
of the Bond Purchase Agreement. Capitalized terms used and not otherwise defined herein have
the meanings as defined in the Bond Purchase Agreement.
For purposes of rendering this opinion, we have examined originals or executed copies
of: (i) the Bond Purchase Agreement, (ii) the Ordinance, (iii) the Undertaking, and (iv) the legal
opinions, agreements and certificates delivered pursuant to Section 10(a) of the Bond Purchase
Agreement (collectively, the "Documents"). We have also participated in the preparation of the
Official Statement dated December
, 2010 (the "Official Statement") relafing to the Bonds.
In our examinations, we have assumed the legal capacity of natural persons, the genuineness of
signatures on, and the authenticity of, all documents so examined, the conformity to originals of
all documents submitted to us as copies, and that all records and other information made
available to us, and on which we have relied, are complete in all respects.
Based upon and subject to our examination as described above and subject to the
qualifications set forth herein, we are of the opinion that:
1.
No registration is required under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, with
respect to the issuance of the Bonds, and no ordinance or indenture in respect of the
Bonds is required to be qualified under the Tmst Indenture Act of 1939, as amended.
2.
The Undertaking complies with the requirements of paragraph (b)(5) of
Regulation §240.15c2-12 (Rule 15c2-12) adopted by the Securities and Exchange
Commission under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as in effect as of the date of the
Closing.
D-2

 3.
The statements contained in the Official Statement under the captions
"UNDERWRITING" and "SECONDARY MARKET DISCLOSURE" insofar as such
statements purport to summarize or describe certain provisions of the Bond Purchase
Agreement or the Undertaking, as the case may be, constitute a fair and accurate
summary of such provisions.
We are not expressing (and cannot express) any opinion or view with respect to the
authorization, issuance, delivery or validity of the Bonds, the tax exemption of the Bonds, i f any,
or the interest paid on the Bonds. Because the purpose of our professional engagement was not
to establish factual matters and because of the wholly or partially nonlegal character of many of
the determinations involved in the preparation of the Official Statement, we are not passing upon
and do not assume responsibility for the accuracy, completeness or faimess of the statements
contained in the Official Statement and make no representation that we have independently
verified the accuracy, completeness or faimess of such statements. Without limiting the
foregoing, we assume no responsibility for, and have not independently verified, the accuracy,
completeness or faimess of the financial statements, notes to financial statements, tables and
other financial, economic, market and statistical data included or incorporated by reference in the
Official Statement and the appendices to the Official, and we have not reviewed the accounting,
financial or statistical records from which such financial statements, schedules, appendices and
data are derived. We note that we are not experts within the meaning of the Securities Act of
1933, as amended, with respect to such financial statements or schedules or the other financial,
economic, market, or statistical data included or incorporated by reference therein. During the
preparation of the Official Statement, however, we participated in conferences with you, CoBond Counsel, Corporation Counsel for the City and officials, employees and agents of the City,
at which conferences the contents of the Official Statement and related matters were discussed.
On the basis of the foregoing, but without independent verificadon of factual matters, nothing
has come to our attention which would lead us to believe that the Official Statement and the
Appendices thereto contain any statement which, at the time and in the light of the circumstances
under which it is made, is false or misleading with respect to any material fact or omits to state a
material fact necessary to make the statements therein, at the time and in the light of the
circumstances under which they are made, not false or misleading; provided that we express no
view as to: (i) any financial or statistical information included in the Official Statement or the
Appendices thereto, including Appendix B and Appendix C thereto; and (ii) the description of
DTC, Clearstream and Euroclear in the Official Statement and the infomiation included in the
Official Statement under the caption "THE BONDS — Book-Entry System" or (iii) any
information or notices to prospective investors outside the United States of America.
Our opinions and advice expressed herein are limited to the matters expressly stated
herein and no opinion is implied or may be inferred beyond the matters expressly stated.
Our opinions and advice expressed herein are rendered as of the date hereof and are
based on existing law which is subject to change. We do not undertake to advise you of any
changes in the opinions and advice expressed herein from matters that may hereafter arise or be
brought to our attention or to revise or supplement such opinions and advice should the present
laws of any jurisdiction be changed by legislative action, judicial decision, or otherwise.
D-3

 This opinion and advice are solely for the information of the addressees hereof and are
not to be quoted in whole or in part or otherwise referred to. (except in a list of closing
documents), nor are they to be filed with any govemmental agency or other person, without our
prior written consent. Other than the addressees hereof, no one is entitled to rely on this opinion
and advice.
Very tmly yours.

D-4

 EXHIBIT E
REPRESENTATION LETTER
City of Chicago
Department of Finance
33 North LaSalle Street, 6'*' Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602
Attn.: Deputy Comptroller of Financial Policy

Loop Capital Markets LLC
200 West Jackson Blvd, Suite 1600
Chicago, Illinois 60606
Attention: Clarence Boume

Pursuant to the Bond Purchase Agreement dated December I , 2010 (the ""Purchase
Agreement") among the City of Chicago (the ""City") and Loop Capital Markets LLC, as
representative (the ""Representative") of the underwriters named therein (each an ""Underwriter")
relating to the City's $213,555,000 General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project Series 201 OB
(Build America Bonds—^Direct Payment) (the ""Bonds"), each of the undersigned Underwriters
severally represents to the City that:
(1)
Neither the Underwriter, nor any Affiliate thereof is listed on any of the following
lists maintained by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S. Department of the Treasury,
the Bureau of Industry and Security of the U.S. Department of Commerce, the U.S. Department
of State or their successors, or on any other list of persons or entities with which the City may
not do business under any applicable law, mle, regulation, order or judgment: the Specially
Designated Nationals List, the Denied Persons List, the Unverified List, the Entity List, the List
of Statutorily Debarred Parties and the Excluded Parties List.
For purposes of this representation, "Affiliate, " when used to indicate a relationship
with a specified person or entity, means a person or entity that, directly or indirectly, through
one or more intermediaries, controls, is controlled by or is under common control with such
specified person or entity, and a person or entity shall be deemed to be controlled by another
person or entity, if controlled in any manner whatsoever that results in control in fact by that
other person or entity (or that other person or entity and any persons or entities with whom that
other person or entity is acting jointly or in concert), whether directly or indirectly and whether
through share ownership, a trust, a contract or otherwise. .
(2)
The undersigned Underwriters agree that in the event that any Underwriter or any
of its Affiliates appears on any of the lists described in paragraph (1) above, at any time prior to
the Closing (as defined in the Purchase Agreement) with respect to the Bonds, that Underwriter
shall be deemed to have submitted to the Representative, Exhibit D to the Agreement Among
Underwriters (Instmctions, Terms And Acceptance) - Withdrawal From Agreement Among
Underwriters.

E-1

 IN "WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation
Letter in connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized
representatives as of the date written below.
Dated: December 1,2010
LOOP CAPITAL MARKETS LLC
By
Its: Senior Vice President
WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION
By:
Its:
DUNCAN WILLIAMS, INC.
By:
Its:
ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.
By:
Its:
INCAPITAL LLC
By:.
Its:
MELVIN & COMPANY LLC
By:
Its:
ROBERT W. BAIRD & CO., INC.
By:
Its:
STIFEL NICOLAUS & CO.
By:
Its:

E-2

 fN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation
Letter in connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized
representatives as of the date written below.
Dated: December _ , 2010
LOOP CAPITAL MARKETS LLC
By:
Its: Senior Vice President
WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION

Its: Director
DUNCAN WILLIAMS, INC.
By:.
Its;
ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.
By:
Its:
INCAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:
MELVIN & COMPANY LLC
By:
Its:
ROBERT W. BAIRD & CO., INC.
By:
Its:
STIFEL NICOLAUS & CO.
By:
Its:

E.2

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation
Letter in connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized
representatives as of the date written below.
Dated: December _ , 2010
LOOP CAPITAL MARKETS LLC
By:
Its: Senior Vice President
WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION
By:
Its:

DUNCAN WILLIAMS, INC.

ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.
By:.
Its:
INCAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:
MELVIN & COMPANY LLC
By:
Its:
ROBERT W. BAIRD & CO., INC.
By:.
Its:
STIFEL NICOLAUS & CO.
By:
Its;

E-2

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation
Letter in connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized
representatives as of the date written below.
Dated: December

, 2010
LOOP CAPITAL MARKETS LLC
By:
Its: Senior Vice President
WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION
By:
Its:
DUNCAN WILLIAMS, INC.
By:
Its:
ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.
By:
Its:

, ,
^^i^'nsr N l u ^

I— ^ ,
fi-gsJ^wT"

INCAPITAL LLC
By:.
Its:
MELVIN & COMPANY LLC
By:
Its:
ROBERT W. BAIRD & CO., INC.
By:.
Its:
STIFEL NICOLAUS & CO.
By:
Its:

E-2

 Withdrawal From Agreement Among Underwriters.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation
Letter in connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized
representatives as of the date written below.
Dated: December

, 2010
LOOP CAPITAL MARKETS L L C
By:
Its: Senior Vice President
WELLS FARGO BANK,
ASSOCIATION

NATIONAL

By:
Its:
DUNCAN WILLIAMS, INC.
By:
Its:
ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.
By:
Its:
INCAPITAL

„

MELVIN & COMPANY L L C
By:.
Its:
ROBERT W. BAIRD & CO., INC.
By:.
Its:
STIFEL NICOLAUS & CO.
By:
E-2

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation
Letter in connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized
representatives as of the date written below.
Dated: December^, 2010
LOOP CAPITAL MARKETS LLC
By:
Its: Senior Vice President
WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION
By:.
Its:
DUNCAN WILLIAMS, INC.
By:.
Its:
ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC
By:.
Its:
INCAPITAL LLC
By:
Its:
& COMPANY LLC

RO'BERJAV. BAIRD & CO., INC
By:
Its:
STIFEL NICOLAUS & CO.
By:
Its:

E-2

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation
Letter in connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized
representatives as of the date written below.
Dated: December _ . 2010
LOOP CAPITAL MARKETS L L C
By:
Its: Senior Vice President
WELLS FARGO BANK,
ASSOCIATION
By:
Its:

NATIONAL

[

DUNCAN WILLIAMS, INC.
By:
Its;.
ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.
By:
Its:
INCAPITAL L L C
By:
Its:
MELVIN & COMPANY L L C
By:
Its:
ROBERT W. BAIRD & Cp., INC.

By: _ HPimHlH_
Its: Z^^^^^^^—^^^^^EL
STIFEL NICOLAUS & CO.
By:
Its:

E-2

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Representation
Letter in connection with the Bonds to be executed by their duly authorized
representatives as of the date written below.
Dated: December _ , 2010
LOOP CAPITAL MARKETS L L C
By:
Its: Senior Vice President
WELLS FARGO BANK,
ASSOCIATION

NATIONAL

By:
Its:
DUNCAN WILLIAMS, INC.
By:
Its:
ESTRADA HINOJOSA & COMPANY,
INC.
By:.
Its:
INCAPITAL L L C
By:
Its:
MELVIN & COMPANY L L C
By:
Its:
ROBERT W. BAIRD & CO., INC.
By:
Its:
STIFEL NICOLAUS & CO.

E-2

 EXHIBIT 

OFFICIAL STATEMENT

Schedule I
TERMS AND AUTHORIZATION

$213,555,000 GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS
TAXABLE PROJECT SERIES 20I0B
(BUILD AMERICA BONDS—DIRECT PAYMENT)

1.

Aggregate Principal Amount: $213,555,000

2.

Dated: December 14, 2010

3.

Matunty, Interest Rate, Price and CUSIP Number:

,

Term Bonds due January 1, 2040, 7.517%, Price 100.00%, CUSIP: 167486MK2
4.

Interest Payment Dates.
July 1, 2011 and semiannually thereafter on each January 1 and July I .

5.

Redemption

The Series 201 OB Bonds are subject to both optional and mandatory redemption prior to
maturity, as described below. The Series 201 OB Bonds shall be redeemed only in principal
amounts of $5,000 and integral multiples thereof
Optional Redemption of the Series 20I0B Bonds. The Series 2010B Bonds shall be
subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole or in part, on any date
at a redemption price equal to the greater o f (A) the principal amount of Series 201 OB Bonds to
be redeemed, or (B) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of
principal and interest on the Series 201 OB Bonds to be redeemed (exclusive of interest accrued to
the date fixed for redemption) discounted to the date of redemption on a semiannual basis
(assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury Rate (defined
below) plus 50 basis points plus accrued and unpaid interest on the Series 201 OB Bonds being
redeemed to the date fixed for redemption. The City's Chief Financial Officer or the City
Comptroller shall confirm and transmit the redemption price as so calculated on such dates and
to such parties as shall be necessary to effectuate such redemption.
The "Treasury Rate" means, as of any redemption date, the yield to maturity as of such
redemption date of United States Treasury securities with a constant maturity (as compiled and
published in the most recent Federal Reserve Statistical Release 11.15 (519) that has become
publicly available four Business Days (as defined below) prior to the redemption date (excluding
inflation indexed securities) (or, if such Statistical Release is no longer published, any publicly
available source of similar market data)) most nearly equal to the period from the redemption
date to the maturity date of the Series 2010B Bonds to be redeemed; provided, however, that i f
the period from the redemption date to such maturity date is less than one year, the weekly
average yield on actually traded United States Treasury securities adjusted to a constant maturity

 of one year will be used. "Business Day" means any day other than a day on which banks in
New York, New York, Chicago, Illinois, or the city in which the Bond Registrar maintains its
designated office are required or authorized to close. The Treasury Rate will be determined by
an independent accounting firm, investment banking firm or fmancial advisor retained by the
City at the City's expense.
The City is authorized to sell or waive any right the City may have to call the Series
2010B Bonds for optional redemption.
Extraordinary Optional Redemption of the Series 2010B Bonds. The Series 2010B
Bonds shall be subject to redemption prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole or in
part on any date upon the occurrence of an "Extraordinary Event" (as defined below), at a
redemption price equal to the greater of: (A) the principal amount of Series 201 OB Bonds to be
redeemed, or (B) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal
and interest on the Series 201 OB Bonds to be redeemed (exclusive of interest accrued to the date
fixed for redemption) discounted to the date of redemption on a semiannual basis (assuming a
360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury Rate plus 100 basis points plus
accmed interest on the Series 201 OB Bonds being redeemed to the date fixed for redempfion.
An "Extraordinary Event" means any determination by the City that a change has
occurred to Section 54AA or 6431 of the Code or any other applicable Section of the Code or
there is any guidance published by the Intemal Revenue Service or the United States Treasury
with respect to such Sections or any other determination by the Intemal Revenue Service or the
United States Treasury, pursuant to which the Subsidy Payments from the United States Treasury
with respect to the Series 2010B Bonds is reduced, eliminated or adversely adjusted.
Mandatory Redemption of the Series 2010B Bonds. The Series 2010B Bonds are
subject to mandatory redemption, in part, at a redemption price equal to the principal amount
thereof, on January 1 of the following years and in the following principal amounts, and, i f less
than all of the Series 201 OB Bonds are to be redeemed prior to maturity, the Series 201 OB Bonds
being redeemed, or portions thereof to be redeemed, will be selected on a pro-rata pass-through
distribufion of principal basis to the extent permitted by and in accordance with procedures of
The Depository Tmst Company ("DTC").
Year
2036
2037
2038
2039

,

Principal Amount
$38,735,000
40,630,000
42,615,000
44,695,000

If the DTC operational procedures do not allow for the redemption of the Series 201 OB
Bonds on a pro-rata pass-through distribution of principal basis, then the Series 201 OB Bonds
will be selected for redemption in accordance with DTC procedures, by lot.

608)0397

 ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF FILING NOTIFICATION OFSALE

The foregoing Notification of Sale of $213,555,000 aggregate principal amount of
General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Project Series 201 OB (Build America Bonds - Direct
Payment) of the City of Chicago (the "City") has been filed in my office as City Clerk of the
City and is part of the official files and records of my office.

In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto affixed my signature and caused to be affixed
hereto the corporate seal of the City this f^*^ day of December, 2010.

[SEAL]

 