City of Chicago
F2014.34
Office of the City Clerk
Document Tracking Sheet

Meeting Date:

4/30/2014

Sponsor(s):

Dept./Agency

Type:

Communication

Title:

City of Chicago General Obligation Revolving Line of Credit
Closing Certificate

Committee(s) Assignment:

 ro

RECEIVED

m-n 5
$200,000,000

20l«iAPR25 PH 3:«»3

CITY OF CHICAGO

rr;

^

J

O

GENERAL OBLIGATION REVOLVING LINE OF CREDIT

OFFICE OF THE

CLOSfNG CERTIFICATE

CITY CLERK
This Closing Certificate is being delivered pursuant to the authority contained in the
ordinance adopted by the City Council (the "City Council") of the City of Chicago (the "City") on
May, 1, 2002 (the "Initial Ordinance"), as amended by an ordinance adopted by the City Council on
March 14, 2012, authorizing the City to execute and deliver one or more line of credit agreements
with one or more commercial banks and other financial institutions to proyide a revolying line of
credit to meet the City's need for working capital or interim financing for capital projects (the "2012
Ordinance"), and as further amended by an ordinance adopted by the City Council on February 5,
2014 (the "2014 Ordinance" and collectively wilh the Original Ordinance and Ihe 2012 Ordinance,
the "Ordinance"). Certified copies of the Ordinance are attached hereto as Exhibit A, and the .
Ordinance, as modified by its terms, collectiyely, remains in full force and effect. Pursuant to
Secfion 18 of the 2012 Ordinance, JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association has been selected to
serye as the bank providing a revolying line of credit to the City in the amount of $200,000,000.
The City has executed that certain Revolving Line of Credit Agreement dated as of April 25,
2014 between the City and JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association (the "Credit Agreement")
and that certain Note dated April 25, 2014 (the "Note") to evidence the $200,000,000 line of credit.
Attached hereto as Exhibits B and C are executed copies of the Credit Agreement and the
Note.
I , the undersigned, RAHM EMANUEL, Mayor of the Cily, hereby certify that, pursuant to
law and authorization vested in me, I have approved the Ordinance in the manner and capacity
indicated by my signature and title appended hereto.
I , the undersigned, LOIS A. SCOTT, Chief Financial Officer of the City, hereby certify that I
have executed the Credit Agreement and the Note, in the manner and capacity indicated by my
signature and title appended hereto.
I, the undersigned, LOIS A. SCOTT, Chief Financial Officer of the City, hereby certify that:
(i) the conditions specified in Section 5.01 of the Credit Agreement have been satisfied; (ii) (A)
there exists no Default or Event of Default under the Credit Agreement, (B) all representations and
warranties made by the City in the Credit Agreement are true, correct and complete as of the date
hereof; (iii) to the best knowledge ofthe City, except as otherwise disclosed to the Bank in writing,
there has been no event or circumstance since December 31,2012 lhal has had or could be reasonably
expected to have, either individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Change (as defined in the
Credit Agreement); and (iv) attached hereto as Exhibit D are copies ofthe most recent rating reports
from Standard & Poor's ("S&P"'), Moody's Investor Service ("Moody's") and Fitch Ratings
("Fitch"), concerning the City's general obligation credit, respectively. The City has not received
notice from S&P. Moody's or Fitch that the current ratings have been reduced, withdrawn or
suspended.

 
zvI, the undersigned, SUSANA A MENDOZA, City Clerk ofthe City, do further certify that
RAHM EMANUEL and LOIS A. SCOTT are, respectively, the duly authorized Mayor and Chief
Financial Officer ofthe City, and that the signatures of said RAHM EMANUEL and LOIS A. SCOTT
as they appear below are in all respects the true and genuine signatures of ihe officers of the City
authorized to approve the Ordinance, and to execute the Credit Agreement and the Note, respectively.
1, the undersigned SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk ofthe City, direct a copy of this
filing to the City Council.
IM WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto affixed our signatures and have caused to
be affixed hereto the Corporate Seal of the City this 25th day of April, 2014.

IGNATURES

^

OFFICIAL T I T L E
Mayor, City of Chicago
Chief Financial Officer, Cily of Chicago
ty Clerk, City of Chicago

[SEAL]

  

Respectfully submitted this 25th day of April, 2014.

CITY OF CHICAGO

Chief FinafTcial Officer

Closing Certificate
JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association
Revolving Line of Credit Agreemeni

  

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF FILING
The Closing Certificate ofthe City for its $200,000,000 Revolving Line of Credit
Program including all exhibits thereto was filed in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of
Chicago, this 25th day of April, 2014.

Susana A. Mendozi
City Clerk
[SEAL]

  

EXHIBIT A

THE ORDINANCE

SUSANA A. MENDOZA
CITY CLERK'S OFFICE-CITY OF CHICAGO

STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS.
COUNTY OF COOK )

I , SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk ofthe City of Chicago in the County of Cook and State
of Illinois, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the annexed and foregoing is a true and correct copy of
that certain ordinance now on file in my office Authorizing for Issuance of Commercial Paper
Notes, Series A and B.
I

DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was passed by the City Council ofthe

said City of Chicago on the first d") day of Mav. 2002.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the vote on the question of the passage of the said ordinance
by the said City Council was taken by yeas and nays and recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings
ofthe said City Council, and that the result of said vote so taken was as follows, to wit:
Yeas 47

Nays 0

I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was delivered to the Mayor ofthe said City
of Chicago after the passage thereof by the said City Council, without delay, by the City Clerk of
the said City of Chicago, and that the said Mayor failed to return the said ordinance to the said City
Council with his written objections thereto at the next regular meeting of the said Cily Council
occurring not less than five (5) days after the passage of the said ordinance.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the original, of which the foregoing is a true copy, is entrusted
to my care for safekeeping, and that I am the lawful keeper of the same.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my
hand and affixed the corporate seal of the City of
Chicago aforesaid, at the said City, in the County and
State aforesaid, this twentieth (20"") day of February,
2014.
[T.P.]

Z.A, City C
CleTk
SUSANA A. MENDOZA,

^

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83073

The following is said ordinance as passed:
WHEREAS, The City of Chicago (the "City") is a duly constituted and existing
municipality within the meaning of Section 1 of Article VII ofthe 1970 Constitution
ofthe State of Illinois (the "Constitution") having a population in excess of twentyfive thousand (25,000) and is a home rule unit of local government under
Section 6(a) of Article VU ofthe Constitution; and
•WHEREAS, The City proposes to establish a Commercial Paper Program (the "C.P.
Program") an Auction Rate Securities Program, (the "Auction Rate Program") a
Variable Rate Securities Program (the "Variable Rate Program') and a Line of Credit
Program (the "Line of Credit Program") for the City to provide interim financing for
capital projects of the City and for the short-term financing of the working capital
needs of the City (the "Borrowing Plan"); and
WHEREAS, There have been prepared and presented to this meeting forms of the
following documents:

 83074

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(1) Commercial Paper Trust Indenture (the "C.P. Indenture") between the City
and a bank or trust company to be designated as provided herein (the "CP;
Trustee") (Exhibit A); and
.. -.
(2) Commercial-Paper Dealer Agreement (the "C.P. Dealer Agreement") between
the City and a commercial paper dealer designated as provided herein (the
"Dealer") (Exhibit B); and
(3) Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement (the "C.P. Paying Agent Agreement")
between the City and an issuing and paying agent designated as provided herein
(Exhibit C); and
(4) Auction Rate Securities Trust Indenture (the "Auction Rate Indenture")
between the City and a bank or trust company to be designated as provided herein
(the "Auction Rate Trustee") (Exhibit D); and
(5) Auction Agreement (the "Auction-Agreement") between the City and an
auction agent designated as provided herein (the "Auction Agent") (Exhibit E); and
(6) Variable Rate Securities Trust Indenture (the "Variable Rate Indenture")
between the City and a bank or trust company to be designated as provided herein
(the "Variable Rate Trustee") (Exhibit F); and
WHEREAS, It is necessary and advisable to implement the Borrowing Plan; now,
therefore.
Be It Ordained

by the City Council of the City of Chicago:

SECTION 1. Findings
determines as foUows:

And

Determinations. The City hereby fmds and

(a) that from time to time interim financing of capital projects is needed prior to
the issuance of long-term bonds;
(b) that from time to time working capital needs of the City require the shortterm borrowing of funds;
(c) that the City's ability to borrow pursuant to the Borrowing Plan as herein
provided without further action by this City Council for such purposes wUl
enhance the City's opportunities
to obtain financing upon the most favorable
terms available; and
(d) that the delegations of authority that are contained herein cire necessary and
desirable because this City Council cannot itself as advantageously, expeditiously
or conveniently exercise such authority.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83075

Thus, authority is granted to the Chief Finandal Officer of the City appointed by
the Mayor or, i f there is no such officer then holding such office, the City
Comptroller (the "Chief Financial Officer") to implement the Borrowing Plan for the
purposes set forth herein, and from time to. time to cause to be issued Commercial
Paper Notes (the "C.P. Notes") pursuant to the C.P. Program, Auction Rate Bonds
or Notes (the "Auction Rate Securities') pursuant to the Auction Rate Program, Line
of Credit Notes (the "Line of Credit Notes') pursuant to the Line of Credit Program
and Variable Rate Demand Bonds or Notes (the "Variable Rate Securities") pursuant
to the Variable Rate Program, as and to the extent determined to be desirable and
i n the best financial interest of the City.
The C.P. Notes, the Line of Credit Notes, the Auction Rate Securities and the
Variable Rate Securities are herein sometimes collectively called the "Authorized
Debt" and the C.P. Indenture, the Auction Rate Indenture and the Variable Rate
Indenture- (each an "Indenture") are herein sometimes collectively called the
"Indentures".
SECTION 2. Purposes, The Borrowing Plan authorizes the issuance of one (1)
or more scries of Authorized Debt for any of the following purposes (or combination
thereof): (a) the payment, or the reimbursement ofthe City for the payment, o f t h e
cost of all or any portion of any capital project heretofore or hereafter approved by
this City Council; (b) cash flow needs o f t h e City; (c) the deposit of monies into f u n d s
and accounts as are provided for i n an Indenture; and (d) the payment of costs of
issuance incurred i n connection with each series of Authorized Debt. The proceeds
o f t h e issuance of each series of Authorized Debt shall be applied for the purposes
set forth above i n the manner and-in the amounts specified i n a certificate of the
Chief Financial Officer delivered i n connection with such issuance pursuant to the
applicable Indenture securing such series or, i n the case of the Line of Credit
Program, each request for funds under each line of credit agreement (as defined i n
Section 18 of this ordinance) entered into by the City pursuant to this ordinance.
- In order to facilitate the sale of the Authorized Debt, the Chief Financial Officer is
authorized to purchase or obtain from commercial banks or other financial
institutions one (1) or more letters of credit, lines of credit, bond insurance policies,
standby bond purchase agreements or similar credit enhancement and liquidity
facilities (each a "Credit Facility").
In connection with the Borrowing Plan and the use of the proceeds of the
Authorized Debt, the Chief Financial Officer is authorized to establish one (1) or
more funds, accounts, sub-funds and sub-accounts o f t h e City, one (1) or more of
which may be held in trust with a trustee pursuant to an Indenture.
SECTION 3. Maximum Amount And Term. Without further authorization of
this City Council, the maximum aggregate principal amount of all Authorized Debt
outstanding under this ordinance at any time shall not exceed Two Hundred Million
Dollars ($200,000,000) (exclusive of unpaid interest and fees). All Authorized Debt

 83076

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

shall mature on or prior to Januzuy 1, 2017.
SECTION 4. Limited Tax. General Obligations. The obligation of the City to
make payments on the Authorized Debt (prindped, interest and redemption
premium, if any, as appropriate) is a direct and general obligation of the City
payable from any funds legally available for such purpose. The City covenants and
agrees to take all necessary action to annually appropriate funds in a timely manner
so as to provide for the making of all payments ofthe Authorized Debt as described
in the Indentures and each Line of Credit Agreement; provided, however, that in no
event shall the City be obligated to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax in.
addition to other City taxes or any spedal ad valorem or other tax unlimited as to
rate or amount to pay such principal, interest or redemption premium.
SECTION 5. The CP.-Program, (a) The C.P. Notes.are hereby authorized to be
issued from time to time. The C.P. Notes shall be designated "Commercial Paper
Notes" and may be issued in one (1) or more series. Each C.P. Note shall mature
not later than two hundred seventy (270) days after its date of issuance, and shall
bear interestfromits date at a rate or rates not in excess ofthe lesser of (i) eighteen
percent (18%) per annum, computed in the manner set forth in the C.P. Indenture,
or (ii) during such period as such C.P. Note is secured by a Credit Facility (a "C.P.
Credit Fadlity"), the maximum interest rate provided for under such C.P. Credit
Facility. The C.P. Notes may be issued as notes the interest on which' is not
includable in gross income for federal income tax purposes or, if so determined by
the Chief Finandal Officer at the time of the sale thereof, as notes the interest on
which is includable in gross income for federal income tax purposes.
(b) The C.P. Notes shall be executed on behalf of the City with the manual or
facsimile signature of the Mayor of the City, and shaU be attested with the manual
or facsimile signature of the City Clerk of the City, and shall have impressed or
imprinted thereon the offidal seal of the City (or a facsimile thereof). In case any
officer ofthe City whose signature or whose facsimile signature shall appear on the
C.P. Notes shall cease to be such officer before the defivery of such C.P. Notes, such
signature or the facsimile signature thereof shall nevertheless be valid and suffident
for all purposes the same as if such officer had remained in office-until defivery.
(c) Subject to the limitations contained in this ordinimce, authority is hereby
delegated lo the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer to determine the aggregate
principal amount of C.P. Notes to beissued, the date or dates thereof, the maturities
thereof, the rate or rates of interest payable thereon or the method for determining
such rate or rates, and to sell the C.P. Notes to or with the assistance of one (1) or
more Dealers to be designated by the Chief Financial Officer, pursuant to one (1) or
more C.P. Dealer Agreements.
(d) To evidence the exerdse of the authority delegated to the Mayor or the Chief
Financial Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or the Chief Fineuidal Officer, as the
case may be, is hereby directed to execute and file with the City Clerk in connection

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83077

with the initial sale of C.P. Notes a certificate setting forth the determinations made
pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate shall constitute
conclusive evidence of the proper exerdse by them of such authority. Upon the
filing of such certificate, the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shall also file with
the City Clerk one (1) copy ofthe C.P. Indenture. The City Clerk shall direct a copy
of such filing to this City Council.
SECTION 6. Form Of C P . Indenture. The form of C.P. Indenture presented to
this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit A is hereby approved in all respects.
The Mayor or the Chief Finandal Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver
one (1) or more C.P. Indentures i n substantially the form of the C.P. Indenture
presented, to this meeting, with appropriate revisions i n text as the Mayor or the
Chief Finandal Officer shall determine are necessary or desirable, and the City
Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the corporate seal o f t h e City
or a facsimile thereof, the execution and defivery thereof to constitute conclusive
evidence of this City Council's approval of any and all such changes or revisions.
The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate a bank or trust
company to serve as Trustee under the C.P. Indenture.
SECTION 7. Form Of C.P. Dealer Agreement. The form of C.P. Dealer
Agreement presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit B is hereby
approved i n all respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial. Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more C.P. Dealer Agreements i n
substantially the form o f t h e C.P. Dealer Agreement presented to this meeting, with
appropriate revisions i n text as the Mayor or the Chief Finandal Officer shall
determine are necessary or desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the
same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the •
execution and delivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City
Council's approval of any and all such changes or revisions. The Chief Finandal
Officer is hereby authorized to designate one (1) or more banks or investment
banking firms to serve as "Dealer" under a C.P. Dealer Agreement.
SECTION 8. Form Of C.P. Paying Agent Agreement. The form of C.P. Paying
Agent Agreement presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit C is
hereby approved i n all respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more C.P. Paying Agent Agreements i n
substcmdally the form of the C.P. Paying Agent Agreement presented to this
meeting, with appropriate revisions in text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer shall determine are necessary or desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized
to attest the same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile
thereof, the execution and defivery thereof lo constitute conclusive evidence of this
City Council's approval of any and all such changes or revisions. The Chief
Financial Oflicer is hereby authorized to designate the C.P. Paying Agent with
respect to each series of C.P. Notes.
SECTION

9.

C.P.

Reimbursement

Agreements.

The Mayor or the Chief

 83078

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 / 2 0 0 2

Financial Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver one (1) or more
reirnbursement agreements (each, a "C.P. Reimbursement Agreement") in
substantially the form of reimbursement agreements executed and delivered by the
City in connection with previous variable rate financings, with appropriate revisions
in text as the Mayor or the Chief Finandal Officer shall determine are necessary or
desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the
corporate seal ofthe City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and defivery thereof
to constitute condusive evidence of this City Council's approval of any and all such
changes or revisions. Such revisions in text may include (a) provisions permitting
the stated amount of a C.P. Credit Facility to be increased and decreased froni time
to time to support the C.P. Notes then outstanding; and (b) such other provisions
as may be necessary or- desirable to implement the C P . Program as herein
contemplated. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby further authorized
to execute and defiver a promissory note pursuemt to each C.P. Reimbursement
Agreement (a "C.P. Reimbursement Note") to the extent required thereby, in
substantially the form used to support reimbursement agreements in previous
variable rate financings for the City, with appropriate revisions to reflect the terms
and provisions ofthe related C.P. Reimbursement Agreement, and the City Clerk is
hereby authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the corporate seal ofthe City
or a facsimile thereof, the execution and delivery thereof to constitute conclusive
evidence of this City Council's approval of any changes or revisions therein. The
interest rate payable on any such- C P . Reimbursement Note shaU not exceed
eighteen percent (18%) per annum (including the recovery by the financial
institution providing the related C.P. Credit Facifity of any amounts otherwise not '
payable to such finanded institution solely as a result of the interest rate limit set
forth in the related C.P: Reimbursement Note, any interest to be so recovered to be •
determined at an interest rate not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) per annum),
and the maturity of any obfigation thereunder shall not be greater than ten (10)
years from the date of the related advance (subject to extension and renewal as
therein provided). The maximum aimucd fee payable to any financial institution
under a C.P. Reimbursement Agreement shaU not exceed two percent (2%) ofthe
stated amount of the related C P . Credit Facility (emd any unused capacity
thereunder).
The obfigations ofthe City under each C.P. Reimbursement Agreement and under
each C.P. Reimbursement Note shall constitute direct and general obfigations ofthe
City and may be payable from any funds legally available for such purpose. The
City hereby covenants and agrees to take all necessary action to annually
appropriate funds in a timely memner so as to provide for the making of all
payments due under any C.P. Reimbursement Agreement and under each C.P.
Reimbursement Note; provided however, that in no event shall the City be obfigated
to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax in addition to other City taxe.s or any
special ad valorem tax or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to pay emy
emiount due under any C P Reimbursement Agreement or the principal of,
redemption premium on, or interest on any C P . Reimbursement Note.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83079

The Chief Finemdal Officer is hereby authorized to designate one (1) or more
finandal institutions to provide a C.P. Credit Facifity with respect to each series of
C.P. Notes. Nothing contained herein shall limit or restrict the Chief Financial
Officer's abifity (i) to appoint sepeirate financial institutions to issue separate C.P.
Credit Facifities; (u) to appoint more than one (1) financial institution to issue a
single C.P. Credit Facifity; or (iii) to replace or extend any C.P. Credit Facility.
SECTION 10. The Auction Rate Program, (a) The Auction Rate Securities are
hereby authorized to be issued from time to time. The Auction Rate Securities shall
be designated "Auction Rate Bonds" or "Auction Rate Notes", may be issued i n one
(1) or more series and may bear ein additional designation to identify each series.
Each Auction Rate Security shall bear interest from its date at a rate or rates not
i n excess o f t h e lesser of (i) eighteen percent (18%) per annum, computed i n the
manner set forth i n the Auction Rate Indenture, or (ii) during such period as such
Auction Rate Security is secured by a Credit Facifity (an "Auction Rate Credit
Facifity"), the meiximum interest rate provided for under such Auction Rate Credit
Facifity. The Auction Rate Securities may be issued as bonds or notes the interest
on which is not includable i n gross income for federal income tax purposes or, if so
determined by the Chief Finandal Officer at the time o f t h e sale'thereof, as bonds
or notes the interest on which is includable i n gross income for federal income tax
purposes.
(b) The Auction Rate Securities shaU be executed on behalf of the City with the
manual or facsimile signature o f t h e Mayor o f t h e City, emd shedl be attested with
the manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk of the City, and shaU have
impressed or imprinted thereon the officied seal o f t h e City (or a facsimile thereof).
In case any officer of the City whose signature or whose facsimile signature shaU
appear on the Auction Rate Securities shall cease to be such officer before the
delivery of such Auction Rate Securities, such signature or the facsimile signature
thereof shaU nevertheless be vafid and suffident for eiU purposes the same as if such
officer had remeiined i n office u n t i l defivery.
(c) Subject to the limitations contained i n this ordinance, authority is hereby
delegated to the Mayor or the Chief Financieil Officer to sell the Auction Rate
Securities to one (1) or more underwriters to be designated by the Chief Finandal
Officer, pursuemt to one (1) or more contracts of purchase with respect to the
Auction Rate Securities between the City emd such underwriters; provided that the
aggregate purchase price of any series of Auction Rate Securities shall not be less
them ninety-eight percent (98%) of the prindpal amount thereof to be issued (less
emy origined issue discount which may be used in the marketing thereof) plus any
accrued interest thereon from their date to the date of defivery thereof emd payment
therefor.
(d) The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, with the concurrence of the
Chairman o f t h e Committee on Finance o f t h e City Council, is hereby authorized
emd directed to execute and deliver one (1) or more contracts of purchase for

 83080

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Auction Rate Securities in substantiaUy the form ofthe contracts of purchase used
in connection with the previous sales of variable rate debt by the City, together with
such changes and revisions consistent with the purposes and intent of this
ordinance as shall be approved by the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, as the
case may be, subject to the limitations contained in this ordinance, the execution
and defivery thereof to constitute condusive evidence of this City Council's approval
of such changes and modifications.
(e) To evidence the exercise ofthe authority delegated to the Mayor or the Chief
Financial Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or the Chief Finemcied Officer, as the
case may be, is hereby directed to execute emd file with the City Clerk in connection
with the initial auction of Auction Rate Securities a certificate setting forth the
determinations made pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate
shall constitute condusive evidence of the. proper exercise by them of such
authority. Upon the filing-of such certificate, the Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer shall also file with the City Clerk one (1) copy of the Auction Rate Indenture.
The City Clerk shall direct a copy of such filing to this City Council.
SECTION 11. Form Of Auction Rate Indenture. The form of Auction Rate
Indenture presented to this meeting and attached hereto as Exhibit D is hereby
approved in edl respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and deUver one (1) or more Auction Rate Indentures in
substantiaUy the form ofthe Auction Rate Indenture presented to this meeting, -with
appropriate revisions in text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer shaU
determine are necessary or desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the
seune and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the
execution and delivery thereof to constitute condusive evidence of this City
CouncU's approval of any and aU such changes or revisions. The Chief Financial
Officer is hereby authorized to designate a bemk or trust company to serve as
Trustee under the Aucti'on Rate Indenture.
SECTION 12. Form Of Auction Agreement. The form of Auction Agreement
presented to this meeting emd attached hereto as Exhibit E is hereby approved in
edl respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to
execute emd defiver one (1) or more Auction Agreements in substantiaUy the form
of the Auction Agreement presented to this meeting, with appropriate revisions in
text as the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer sheiU determine are necessary or
desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the seime and affix thereto the
corporate seal ofthe City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and defivery thereof
to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Council's approved of any emd aU such
changes or revisions. The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized to designate
one ID or more bemks or investment banking firms to serve as "Auction Agent"
under em Auction Agreement.
SECTION 13. Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreements. The Mayor or the
Chief Financied Officer is hereby authorized to execute emd deUver one (I) or more

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83081

reimbursement agreements (each, an "Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement")
in substantiaUy the form of reimbursement agreements executed and defivered by
the City in connection with previous variable rate financings, with appropriate
revisions in text as the Mayor-or the Chief Finandal Officer shaU determine are
necesseuy or desirable, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix
thereto the corporate seed of the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and
defivery thereof to constitute condusive evidence of this City Council's approval of
any and aU such changes or revisions. Such revisions in text may include (a)
provisions permitting the stated amount of an Auction Rate Credit Facifity to be
increased and decreased from time to time to support the Auction Rate Securities
then outstanding; emd (b) such other provisions as may be necesseiry or desirable
to implement the Auction Rate Program as herein contemplated. The Mayor or the
Chief Finandal Officer is hereby further authorized to execute and defiver a
promissory note pursuemt to each Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement (an
"Auction Rate Reimbursement Note"), to the extent required thereby, in
substantiedly the form used to support reimbursement agreements in previous
variable rate financings for the City, with appropriate revisions to reflect the terms
and provisions ofthe related Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement, and the City
Clerk is hereby authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the corporate seal of
the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution emd defivery thereof to" constitute
condusive evidence of this City CouncU's approval of any changes or revisions
therein. The interest rate pa3rablc on any such Auction Rate Reimbursement Note
shaU not exceed eighteen percent (18%) per emnum (including the recovery by the
finandal institution providing the related Auction Rate Credit Facility of any
amounts otherwise not payable to such finanded institution solely as a result of the
interest rate limit set forth in the related Auction Rate Reimbursement Note, any
interest to be so recovered to be determined at an interest rate not to exceed twentyfive percent (25%) per aimum), and the maturity of any obfigation thereunder shedl
not be greater than ten (10) years from the date ofthe related advance (subject to
extension and renewal as therein provided). The maximum annual fee payable to
any finandal institution under an Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement shaU
not exceed two percent (2%) of the stated amount ofthe related Auction Rate Credit
Facifity (and any unused capadty thereunder).
The obUgations of the City under each Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement
and under each Auction Rate Reimbursement Note shall constitute direct and
general obfigations of the City emd may be payable from any funds legeiUy avaUable
for such purpose. The City hereby covenants and agrees to take eiU necesseuy
action to annuaUy appropriate funds in a timely manner so as to provide for the
making of all payments due under any Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement and
under each Auction Rate Reimbursement Note; provided however, that in no event

 83082

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

shaU the City be obfigated to levy emy separate ad vedorem or other tax in addition
to other City taxes or any special ad valorem tax or other tax unlimited as to rate
or eunount to pay any amount due under any Auction Rate Reimbursement
Agreement or the principal of, redemption premium, on, or interest on any Auction
Rate Reimbursement Note.
The Chief Finandal Officer is hereby authorized to designate one (1) or raorie
finandal institutions to provide an Auction Rates Credit Facifity with respect to each
series of Auction Rate Securities. Nothing contained herein shall limit or restrict
the Chief Finandal Officer's abifity (i) to appoint separate financied institutions to
issue separate Auction Rate Credit Facifities; (u) to appoint more than one (1)
finandal institution to issue a single Auction Rate Credit Facifity; or (iii) to replace
or extend any. Auction Rate Credit Facility.
SECTION 14. The Variable Rate Program, (a) The Variable Rate Securities are
hereby authorized to be issued from time to time. The Variable Rate Securities shaU
be designated "Variable Rate Bonds" or "Variable Rate Notes" may be issued in one
(1) or more series and may bear em additional designation to identify each series.
Each Variable Rate Securify shaU bear, interest from its date at a rate or rates not
in excess ofthe lesser of (i) eighteen percent (18%) per annum, computed in the
manner set forth in the Veiriable Rate Indenture, or (ii) during any period as such
Variable Rate Securify is secured by a Credit Facilify (a "Variable Rate Credit
Facifity"), the maximum interest rate provided for under such Variable Rate Credit
Facifify. At any time, the Chief Finandal Officer may determine that a Variable Rate
Security sbedl bear interest at a fixed rate to its maturify. The Variable Rate
Securities may be issued as bonds or notes the interest on which is not includable
in gross income for federal income teix purposes or, if so determined by the Chief
Finanded Officer at the time ofthe sale thereof, as bonds or notes the interest on
which is includable in gross income for federal income teix purposes.
(b) The Variable Rate Securities shaU be executed on behalf of the Cify -with the
manual or facsimUe signature of the Mayor of the Cify, and shall be attested with
the manueJ or facsimile signature of the Cify Clerk of the City, and shaU have
impressed or imprinted thereon the offidal seal of the City (or a facsimUe thereof).
In ceise any officer of the City whose signature or whose facsimile signature shaU
appear on the Variable Rate Securities shaU cease to be such officer before the
delivery of such Variable Rate Securities, such signature or the facsimUe signature
thereof shall nevertheless be vafid emd sufficient for all purposes the same as if such
officer had remained in office untU defivery.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

83083

(c) Subject to the fimitations contained in this ordinance, authorify is hereby
delegated to the Mayor or the Chief Finemcial Officer to sell the Variable Rate
Securities to one (1) or more underwriters to be designated by the Chief Financial
Officer, pursuant to one (1) or more contracts of purchase with respect to the
Variable Rate Securities between the City and such underwriters; provided that the
aggregate purchase price of any series of Variable Rate Securities shall not be less
than ninefy-eight percent (98%) of the prindpal amount thereof to be issued (less
any original issue discount which may be used in the meurketing thereof) plus emy
accrued interest thereon froni their date to the date of defivery thereof and payment
therefor.
(d) The Mayor or the Chief Finandal Officer, with the concurrence of the
Chairman ofthe Committee on Finance of this Cify CouncU, is hereby authorized
and directed to execute and deliver one (1)- or more contracts of pm-chase for
Variable Rate Securities in substantiaUy the form ofthe contracts of purchase used
in connection with the previous sales of Variable Rate Securities by the City,
together with such changes and revisions consistent with the purposes and intent
of this ordinance as shedl be approved by the Mayor or the Chief Finandal Officer,
as the case may be, subject to the fimitations contained in this ordinance, the
execution emd delivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this Cify
CouncU's approval of such changes and modifications.
(e) To evidence the exerdse of the authorify delegated to the Mayor or the Chief
Finandal Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer, as the
case may be, is hereby directed to execute and fUe with the Cify Clerk in connection
•with each sale of Variable Rate Securities a certificate setting forth the
determinations made pursuant to the authority gremted herein, which certificate
sheUI constitute condusive evidence of the proper exerdse by them of such
authorify. Upon the filing of such certificate, the Mayor or the Chief Finemcial
Officer shaU also.ffie with the Cify Clerk one (1) copy ofthe Variable Rate Indenture.
The City Clerk shaU direct a copy of such filing to this Cify Coundl.
SECTION 15. Forni Of Variable Rate Indenture. The form of Variable Rate
Indenture presented to this meeting emd attached hereto as Exhibit F is hereby
approved in all respects. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver one (1) or more Variable Rate Indentures in
substantiedly the form of the Variable Rate Indenture presented to this meeting,
with appropriate revisions in text as the Mayor or the Chief Finemcied Officer shedl
determine are necessary or desirable, emd the Cify Clerk is authorized to attest the
same emd aflix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimUe thereof, the

 83084

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 / 2 0 0 2

execution and defivery thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this Cify
CouncU's approval of any and.edl such changes or revisions. The Chief Finemcied
Officer is hereby authorized to designate a bank or trust company to serve as
Trustee under the Veiriable Rate Indenture.
SECTION 16. Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreements. The Mayor or the
Chief Finandal Officer is hereby authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more
reimbursement agreements (each, a "Veiriable Rate Reimbursement Agreement") in
substantiaUy the form of reimbursement agreements executed emd defivered by the
Cify in connection with previous variable rate financings, with appropriate revisions
in text as the Mayor or the Chief Finemcial Officer shaU determine are necessary or
desirable, and the Cify Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto the
corporate seal of the Cify or a facsimUe. thereof, the execution and defivery thereof
to constitute conclusive evidence of this City Coundl's approval of any emd aU such
changes or revisions. Such revisions in text.may include (a) provisions permitting
the stated amount of a Variable Rate Credit Facifify to be increased and decreased
from time to time to support the Variable Rate Securities then outstanding; emd (b)
such other provisions as may be necessary or desirable to implement the Variable
Rate Program as herein contemplated. The Mayor or the Chief Finandal Officer is
hereby further authorized to execute and deliver a promissory note pursuemt to
each Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement (a "Variable Rate Reimbursement
Note"), to the extent required thereby, in substantiaUy the form used to support
reimbursement agreements in previous variable rate financings for the City, with
appropriate revisions to reflect the terms and provisions ofthe related Veiriable Rate
Reimbursement Agreement, eind the Cify Clerk is hereby authorized to attest the
same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the Cify or a facsimile thereof, the
execution and defiveiy thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of this City
CouncU's approved of emy chemges or revisions therein. The interest rate payable on
any such Variable Rate Reimbursement Note shedl not exceed eighteen percent
(18%) per annum (including the recovery by the financial institution providing the
related Variable Rate Credit Facifity of any eunounts otherwise not payable to such
financial institution solely as a result of the interest rate limit set forth in the related
Variable Rate Reimbursement Note, any interest to be so recovered to be determined
at an interest rate not to exceed twenfy-five percent (25%) per armum. and the
maturity pf emy obfigation thereunder shaU not be greater them ten (10) years from
the date of the related advance (subject to extension and renewal as therein
provided). The meiximum annual fee payable to any financial institution under a
Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement shall not exceed two percent (2%) ofthe
stated eunount ofthe related Variable Rate Credit FacUity (emd any unused capadty
thereunder).

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83085

The obfigations o f t h e Cify under each Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement
emd under each Variable Rate Reimbursement Note shedl constitute direct emd
general obligations of the City and may be payable from any funds legaUy avaUable
emd aimuaUy appropriated for such purpose. The City hereby covenants emd agrees
to take aU necessary action to annuaUy appropriate funds i n a timely manner so as
to provide for the making of all payments due under any Variable Rate
Reimbursement Agreement and.under each Variable Rate Reimbursement Note;
provided however, that i n no event shaU the City be obligated to levy any separate
ad valorem or other tax i n addition to other Cify taxes or emy spedal ad valorem tax
or other tax unlimited as to rate or eimount to pay emy amount due under'any
Variable Rate Reimbursement Agreement or the principed of, redemption premium
on, or interest on any Variable Rate Reimbursement Note.
The Chief Finandal Officer is hereby authorized to designate one .(l) or more
financial institutions to provide a Variable Rate Credit Facifify with respect to each
series of Veiriable Rate Securities. Nothing contained herein shall limit or restrict
the Chief Financied Officer's abiUfy (i) to appoint separate financial institutions to
issue separate Variable Rate Credit Facifities; (u) to appoint more than one (1)
finandal institution to issue a single Variable Rate Credit Facffify; or (ui) to replace
or extend any Veiriable Rate Credit FadUfy,

SECTION 17. Remarketing Agreements. The Mayor or the Chief Financial Officer
is hereby authorized to execute and defiver one (1) or more remarketing agreements
(each a "Remarketing Agreement") relating to Auction Rate Securities and Variable
Rate Securities i n substeintially the form previously used for variable rate financings.
of the City with such appropriate revisions i n text as the Chief Finandal Officer
shaU determine as necessary emd desirable, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized
to attest the same and to affix thereto the corporate, seed of the City or a facsimUe
thereof The Mayor or the Chief Finandal Officer is hereby delegated the authorify
to appoint a Remarketing Agent with respect to each series of Auction Rate
Securities emd each series of Variable Rate Securities i n the manner provided i n the
related Indenture.
SECTION 18..The Line Of Credit Program, (a) The Mayor or the Chief Finanded
Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deUver one (1) or more fine of credit
agreements (each, a "Line of Credit Agreement") with commercial banks and other
financial institutions emd i n the form customarUy used to provide borrowers with
a revolving fine of credit to meet their need for working capited and with such terms
and provisions as the Chief Financial Officer shall determine to be in the best
interest ofthe City. The City Clerk is authorized to attest the same and affix thereto
the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution and delivery
thereof to constitute condusive evidence of this City CouncU's approval of each
such Line of Credit Agreement.

 83086

JOURNAl^-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

(b) To evidence borrowdngs under each Line of Credit Agreement, the Cify is
authorized to issue from time to time one (1) or more Line of Credit Notes, each to
be designated "Line of Credit Note". Each Line of Credit Note shedl bear interest
from its date at a rate or rates not in excess of eighteen percent (18%) per aimum.
The Line of Credit Notes may be issued as notes the interest on which" is not
includable in gross income for federal income tax purposes or, if so determined by
the Chief Finandal Officer at the time of issuance of the Line of Credit Notes, as
notes the interest on which is includable in gross income for federed income tax
purposes. •
(c) The Line of Credit Notes shall be executed on behalf of the Cify with the
manual or facsiiiule signature of the Mayor of the Cify, and shaU be attested with
the manual or facsimUe signature of the Cify Clerk, and shaU have impressed or
imprinted thereon the offidal seed of the Cify (or a facsimUe thereof). In case any
officer of the Cify whose signature or facsinule signature shaU appear on the Line
of Credit Notes shaU cease to be such officer before the defivery of such Line of
Credit Notes, such signature or facsimUe signatiire thereof shaU nevertheless be
vafid and suffident for aU purposes the same as if such officer had remeiined in
office untU deliveiy .
(d) To evidence the exerdse of the authorify ddegated to the Mayor or the Chief
Finemdal Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or the Chief Finandal Officer, as the
case may be, is hereby directed to execute and file with the Cify Clerk in connection
with the initial borrowing under any Line of Credit Agreement, a copy of such Line
of Credit Agreement emd a certificate setting forth the determinations made
pursuant to the authority gremted herein, which certificate shall constitute
conclusive evidence of the proper exerdse by them of such authority. Upon the
fifing of such Line of Credit Agreement and such certfficate, the City Clerk shaU
direct a copy of such filing to the City Coundl.
SECTION 19.
Continuing Appropriation. This ordinance constitutes a
continuing appropriation from legedly avaUable funds of the Cify of the monies that
may be required from time to time to provide for the punctual payment of (i) the
principal of, interest on emd any redemption premium on, the Authorized Debt, (ii)
the prindpal of, interest on and redemption premium on, any C P . Reimbursement
Note, any Auction Rate Reimbursement Note emd any Variable Rate Reimbursement
Note, and (iii) the program expenses of the Borrowing Plem. Such continuing
appropriation shaU be and remain in full force and effect without emy further action
by the City CouncU. Nothing contained in this ordinance shaU obfigate the City to
levy any separate ad valorem or other tax in addition to other City taxes or any
speded ad vedorem or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to fund the
continuing appropriation provided for in this section.

 5/ 1 / 2 0 0 2

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83087

SECTION 20. Offering Documents. The Chief Financial Officer is hereby
authorized to cause to be prepared one (1) or more offering documents, (each an
"Offering Document") describing each issue of C.P. Notes, Auction Rate Securities
or Variable Rate Securities. Each Offering Document shedl be i n customary form for
the appficable Program. The distribution of each such Offering Document to
prospective purchasers and the use thereof by the Dealer i n connection with the
offering o f t h e C.P. Notes and by the underwriters i n connection with the offering of
the Auction Rate Securities and the Veiriable Rate Securities is hereby authorized
and approved.
SECTION 2 1 . Tax Compfiance Agreement. The Mayor or the Chief Financial
Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deUver from time to time one (1) or more
Tax Compfiance Agreements i n such form as is customary for simUar transactions
as determined by bond counsel, and the City Clerk is authorized to attest the same
and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimUe thereof.
SECTION 22. Forward Supply Contracts. If the Chief Financial Officer
determines it to be i n the best finemcial interest of the City, the Chief Finemdal
Officer is authorized to execute and defiver from time to time i n the name and on
behalf of the City one (1) or more "forward supply contracts with one (1) or more
counterparties selected by the Chief Financied Officer under which contracts such
counterparties agree to seU to the City, and the City agrees to purchase from such
counterparties, spedfied securities on sp>edfied dates at purchase prices estabfished
at the time of the execution and defivery o f t h e appficable contract. The sources of
funds to purchase such securities shall be amounts on hand and avaUable in the
funds and accounts created and estabfished under an Indenture or a Line of Credit
Agreement. Under no circumstances shaU any eimounts payable by the City under,
or with respect to, any such contract constitute an indebtedness of the City for
which its ftiU feuth and credit is pledged, but such amounts shaU be payable solely
from legaUy available funds of the City.
SECTION 23. Interest Rate Swap And Cap Agreements. If determined by the
Chief Finemdal Officer to be i n the best financial interest of the City, the Chief
Financial Officer is authorized to execute and defiver from time to time i n the neime
and on behalf of the City one (l) or more agreements or options to enter into
agreements with counterparties selected by the Chief Financied Officer, the purpose
of which is to manage the City's interest rate exposure with respect to any
Authorized Debt or a peirticular series of Authorized Debt; provided, however, that
(a) the stated aggregate notional amount under edl such agreements (net of
offsetting tremsactions) at any one (1) time sheiU not exceed the aggregate principed
amount of such Authorized Debt at the time outstanding, (b) any such agreement
to the extent practicable shall be in substantially the form of either the Local
Currency — Single Jurisdiction version or the Multicurrency — Cross Border version
of the 1992 I.S.D.A. Master Agreement accompemied by the United States
Municipal Counterparty Schedule pubUshed by the Intemationed Swaps and

 83088

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Derivatives Association, Inc. ("I.S.D.A.") or any successor form to either pubfished
by the I.S.D.A., and in appropriate confirmations of tremsactions governed by that
agreement, with such insertions, completions and modffications thereof as shall be
approved by the Chief Finemdal Officer, his or her execution thereof to constitute
conclusive evidence of this City Council's approval of such insertions, completions
and modffications, and (c). under.no circumstances shaU any amounts payable by
the City under, or with respect to, any such agreement constitute an indebtedness
of the City for which its fuU faith and credit is pledged, but such amounts shaU be
payable solely from legally available funds of the City.
SECTION 24. Performance Provisions. The Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer
and the City Clerk for and on behalf of the City shaU be, and each of them hereby
is, authorized and directed to do any and all things necessary to effect the
performance of aU obUgations ofthe City, or to exercise any rights of the City, under
and pursuemt to this ordinance, any Indenture, any Line of Credit Agreement; any
C P , Dealer Agreement, any C.P. Paying Agent Agreement, any C.P. Reimbursement
Agreement, any Auction Rate Reimbursement Agreement, emy Veiriable Rate
Reimbursement Agreement and any Remarketing Agreement, and tiie performemce
of all other acts of whatever nature necesseiry to effect and carry out the authority
conferred by this ordinance and any Indenture, including, but not limited to, the
exerdse foUowing the defivery date of any Authorized Debt of any power or authority
delegated to such official of the City under this ordinance vrith respect to the
Authorized Debt upon the initial defivery or issuance thereof, but subject to any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth. The
Mayor, the Chief Financial Officer, the City-Clerk and other officers, agents emd
employees of the City are hereby further authorized, empowered and directed, for
and on behedf of the City, to execute and deUver edl papers, documents, certfficates
and other instruments that may be required to carry out the authority conferred by
this ordinance and any Indenture, or to evidence said authority.
SECTION 25. Proxies. The Mayor and the Chief Financial Officer may each
designate emother to act as their respective proxy and to affix their respective
signatures to, in the case ofthe Mayor, each Authorized Debt, whether in temporaty
or definitive form, and to any other instrument, certificate or document required to
be signed by.the Mayor or the Chief Finandal Officer pursuant to this ordinance,
any Line of Credit Agreement emd any Indenture. In each case, each shaU send to
the City Council written notice of the person so designated by each, such notice
stating the neime of the person so selected and identifying the instruments,
certificates emd documents which such person shedl be authorized to sign as proxy
for the Mayor and the Chief Financial Officer, respectively. A written signature of

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83089

the Mayor or the Chief Finemcial Officer, respectively, executed by the person so
designated underneath, shaU be attached to each notice. Each notice, with
signatures attached, shaU be recorded i n the Journal o f the Proceedings o f t h e City
Council and filed with the City Clerk. When the signature of the Mayor is placed on
an instrument, certfficate or document at the direction o f t h e Mayor i n the spedfied
manner, the same, i n edl respects, shedl be eis binding on the City as if signed by the
Mayor i n person. When the signature o f t h e Chief Financial Officer is so affixed to
an instrument, certfficate or document at the direction of the Chief Finemdal
Officer, the same, i n aU respects, shedl be as binding on the City as if signed by the
Chief Finandal Officer in person.
SECTION 26. SeverabUity. I t is the intention of this City CouncU that, i f any
section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shaU be ruled by any court
of competent jurisdiction to be invedid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph,
daUse or provision shaU not affect emy of the remaining provisions hereof.
SECTION 27. Inconsistent Provisions. AU ordinances, resolutions, motions or
orders i n conffict with this ordinance are hereby repeeded to the extent of such.
conffict. No provision of the Municipal Code of Chicago (the "Municiped Code") or
violation of any pro-vision of the Municiped Code shall be deemed to impair the
validity of this ordinance or the instruments authorized by this ordinemce, or. to
impair the security for or payment ofthe instruments authorized by this ordinance;
provided further, however, that the foregoing shaU not be deemed to affect the
avaUabffity of any other remedy or penalty for emy violation of any provision of the
Munidpal Code.
SECTION 28. Effective Date. This ordinance shaU teike effect immediately upon
its passage and approval.
SECTION 29. Reporting Requirement. The Chief Finemdal Officer shaU report
to the City Coundl with respect to the expenditure of the proceeds of emy
Authorized Debt issued hereunder. Such reports shall be made no later them
AprU 1 and October 1 of each year, commencing October 1, 2002, with respect to
expenditures made during the six (6) month period ending on September 1.
April 1 reports shall cover expenditures made during the six (6) month period
ending on March 1.

Exhibits "A", "B", "C", "D", "E" and "F" referred to in tiiis ordinance read as foUows:

 83090

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Exhibit 'A".
(To Ordinance)
Trust Indenture
Between
City Of Chicago
And
As Trustee
Dated As Of

J, 2002

Relating To
• City Of Chicago
Commercial Paper Notes
2002 Program
Series A (Tax Exempt) And Series B (Taxable).

THIS TRUST INDENTURE, dated as of
•
1, 2002 (this
"Indenture"), is by and between the City of Chicago (the "City"), a municipality and a home rule
unit of local government duly organized and validly existing under the Constitution and laws of
the State of Illinois, and
(the "Trustee"), a
duly organized, validly existing and. aulhorized to accept the duties and
obligations set out by virtue of the laws of the
and having a corporate trust
office located in the City of Chicago, Illinois, as trustee.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83091

.WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, the City is a home rule unit of local government, duly organized and
existing under the laws of the State of lUinois, and in accordance with the provisions of Section
6(a) of Article VU of the 1970 Consfitution of the State of Illinois; and
WHF.RF.AS, tbe Cify has previously authorized the issuance of an amount
outstanding at any one time of not to exceed $200,000,000 (the "Authorized Amount") of Cify
of Chicago Commercial Paper Notes pursuant to the "CP Note Ordinance" (as hereinafter
defined); and
WHEREAS, the City wishes to provide in this Indenture for the issuancefromtime
to time, in an aggregate amount outstanding at any one time not exceeding tbe Authorized
Amoimt. of its Commercial Paper Notes, as authorized by the CP Note Ordinance, designated as
"City of Chicago, Commercial P^>er Notes, 2002 Program Series A (Tax Exen:q)t)", and 'City
of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program Series B (Taxable)"; and
WHEREAS, the City wishes to provide in this Indenture that such Commercial
Paper Notes (as hereinafter defined) be issued as direct and geneial obligations ofthe City payable
from any funds of the City legaUy avaibble and annuaUy appropriated for such purpose and the
Trustee is willing to accept the trusts provided in this Indenture;
NOW, THEREFORE, the City and the Tmstee agree as folipws each for the
benefit of the other and/or the benefit of holders of the Commercied Paper Notes secured by this
Indenture:

ARTICLE I .
Deflniti'ons; General Authorization; Ratification.
Section 1.01. Definitions. The following definitions shaU, for all purposes of this
Indenture and supplemental hereto, have the meanings herein specified unless the context clearfy
requires otherwise:
"Advances" means payments made by the Bank as a result of draws made on the
Lener of Credit to pay principal of and/or interest on Commercial Paper Notes.

 83092

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

"Authenticating Apent" means, with respect to any Series, each person or entify,
if any, designated by the City herein or in any Supplemental Indenture to manually sign the
certificate of authentication on the Commercial Paper Notes, and its successors and assigns, and
any other person or entity which may at any time be substimted for it pursuemt hereto. InitiaUy,
tbe Authenticating Agent shall be the Issuing and Paying Agent. .
"Authorized Amount" means $200,000,000; provided that such amount may be
issued in one or more Series; and provided, fiirther, that the aggregate amount outstanding under
this Indenture ait any one time among aU Series may not exceed sucb amount reduced by the
outstanding principal amount of "Auction Rate Securities" and "Variable Rate Securities'* issued
puisuant to the CP Note Ordinance.
"Authorized Citv Representative" means the Chief Financial Officer of the Cify
or such other officer or employee of the Cify or other person, which other officer, employee or
person has been designated by .the City as an Audiorized City Representative by written notice
defivered by the Chief Financial Officer to the Tnistee and the Issuing and Paying Agent.
"Available Moneys" means moneys which are continuously on deposit with the
Trustee or the Issuing and Paying Agent in tnist for the benefit of the holders of the Commercial
Paper Notes in a separate and segregated account in which only Available Moneys are held, which
moneys constimte proceeds of (i) the Commercial Paper Notes received contemporaneously with
the initial issuance and sale of the Commercial Paper Notes, (ii) a drawmg under the Letter of
Credit or payments otherwise made under a substitute Letter of Credit, Ou) refunding obligations
or other funds for which the Trustee bas received a written opinion of nationaUy recognized
counsel experienced in bankmptcy matters and acceptable to an Audiorized City Representative
and the Rating Agencies to the effect that payment of such moneys to the holders of the
Commercial Paper Notes would not constimte an avoidable preference under Section 547 of the
United States Bankruptcy Code if the City were to become a debtor imder the United States
Bankrupuy Code, or (iv) the investment of funds qualifying as AvaUable Moneys under the
foregoing clauses.
"Bank" means the issuer of the Letter of Credit then outstanding and effective
hereunder. InitiaUy, the Bank shall be
.
"Bank Note" means a note or notes issued by the City pursuant to Section 5.01
hereof and evidencing all or any portion of any unreimbursed Advances made by the Bank and
designated as "Cify of Chicago Bank Notes (2002 Commercial Paper Program) (insert name of
Bank)."
"Bank Note Account" means the Bank Note Debt Service Account established
pursuant to Section 4.01(b)(3) hereof.
"Bank Note Payment Date" means a dale on which principal of or interest on a
Bank Note is due and payable, including both scheduled principal and interest and principal and
interest payable upon prepayment of a Bank Note.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83093

"Bank Oblieations" means obligations payable to' the Bank under the
Reimbursement Agreement.
"Bank Rate" shaU have the meaning assigned to such term in the Reimbursement
Agreement pursuant to which a Bank Note is delivered by the Cify to die Bank.
"Bond Counsel" means an attorney or firm orfirmsof attorneys of national
lecognitioQ selected or employed by the Cify with knowledge and experience" in thefieldof
municipal finance.
"Business Day" means any day other than (i) a Saturday, Sunday or other day on
which commercial banks in New York, New York, Chicago, Illinois, or the city in which is
located the office of the Bank at which demands for a draw on tbe Letter of Credit wOl be made,
are authorized or required by law to close, or (ii) a day on which the New York Stock Exchange
is closed.
"Cify" means the Cify of Chicago, a municipalify and a home rule unit of local
government duly organized and validly existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of
Dlinois.
"Closing Date" means the date on which the Letter of Credh is issued by the Bank.
"Code" means the Interna] Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the applicable
United States Treasuty Regulations proposed or in effect with respect thereto.
"Coinmercial Paper Bank Payment Account" or "Bank Payment Account" means
the account by that name established pursuant to Section 4.01(b)(2) hereof.
"Coinmercial Paper Debt Service Account" or "Debt Service Account" means the
account by that name estabfished pursuant to Section 4.01(b)(1) hereof.
"Commercial Paper Notes" or "Notes" means notes of the City with a maturity of
not more than 270 days from the date of issuance, and which are authorized to be issued and
reissued from time to time under Article U of this Indenture (in the case of the Series A Notes and
the Series B Notes).
"Costs oflssuance" means all reasonable costs incurred by the City in connection
with the issuance of a Series, includ'mg, but not limited to:
(a)
counsel fees related to the issuance of such Series (including, but not limited
to, bond counsel and the Trustee's counsel);
(b) financial advisor fees incurred in connection with the issuance of such
Series;

 83094

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(c)

rating agency fees;

(d)

the initial fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Issuing and Paying

(e)

accountant fees related to the issuance .pf such Series;

Agent;

(0
printing and pubfication costs; and
(g)
any other fee or cost incurred in coimection with the issuance of such Series
that constimtes an "issuance cost" within the meaning of Section 147(g) of the Code.
on
Notes.

"CP Note Ordinance" means the ordinance adopted by the Cify Coimdl of the City
, 2002 authorizing this Indenture and the issuance of the Commercial Paper

"Dealer" means
.
for as long as it is acting as
a dealer for the Cify with respect to the Notes, or any succeissor Dealer appointed pursuant to the
Dealer Agreement, as approved by the Cify.
"Dealer Agreement" means the Coinmercial Paper Dealer Agreement, dated as of
, 2(X)2, between the Cify and the Dealer, as amended and supplemented from
time to time, and any such agreement with any successor Dealer.
"Debt Service Fund" means the fund by that name established pursuant to Secdon
4.01(b) hereof.
"Designated Representative" means the Chief Financial Officer of the City and if
the Chief Financial Officer is not avaUable, Ihe Cify Comptroller ofthe Cify, and any additional
individuals designated to complete and deliver Issuance Requests and who liave been identffied
and whose signatures have been certified in a certificate of an Authorized City Representative
delivered to the Issuing and Paying Agent.
"DTC" means The Depositoty Tmst Company, as Note Depositoty for one or
more Series of Commercial Paper Notes, and its successors and assigns.
"Event of Default" means any one or more of those events set forth in Section 9.01
hereof, which Event of Default has not been.cured.
"Expiration Date" means the date of expiration of the Letter of Credit then in effect
(as such date may be extended from time to time).
"Fiscal Year" shall mean the period of time beginning on January 1 and ending on
December 31 of each year, or such other similar period as the City designates as the fiscal year
of the City.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

. 83095

"Fitch" means Fitch Ratings. Inc., a corporation organized and existing tmder the
laws of the State of Delaware, and its successois and assigns, and, if such coiporation shall no
longer perform the fimctions of a securities rating agency, any other rating agency designated by
the City.
"Government ObUgations" means (1) United States Obligations (including
obfigations issued or held in book-entty form), and (2) prerefimded municipal obligations meeting
the foUowing conditions: (a) the municipal obligations are not subject to redemption prior to
maturify. or the trustee therefor has been given irrevocable instmctions concerning then- calling
and redemption and the issuer thereof has covenanted not to redeem such obfigations other than
as set fortb in sucb instructions; (b) the muoicipa] obligations are secured by cash andlor United
States Obligafions, which United States Obfigations may be appfied only to interest, principal and
premium payments of sucb mumcipal obligations; (c) the principal of and interest on the United
States Obligations (phis any cash in the-escrow fund) are suffident to meet the liabilities of the
municipal obfigations; (d) the United States Obligations servmg as securify for the mimicipal
obUgations are held by an escrow agent or trustee; (e) the United States Obligations are not
available to satisfy any other claims, inchiding those against the tnistee or escrow agent; and (0
the municipal obUgations are rated in their highest rating categoty by Moody's and by S&P if
S&P then maintains a rating on such obligations.
"Indenture" means this Tmst Indenture, dated as of
between the City and the Trustee, as supplemented and amended from time to time.

1. 2002,

"Insolvent" shaU be used to describe the Trustee, the Issuing and Paying Agent or
any other agent, appointed hereunder or the Bank if (a) such person shaU have instituted
proceedings to be adjudicated a bankropt or insolvent, shaU have consented to the instimtion of
bankmptcy or insolvency proceedings against it, shaU have fUed a petition or answer or consent
seeking reorganization or relief under the United States Bankruptcy Code or any other similar
appficable Federal or state law, or shaU have consented to the fUuig of any such petition or to the
appointment of a receiver, liquidator, assignee, trustee or sequestrator or other similar official of
itself or of any substantial pan of its property, or shall faU to timely controvert an mvoluntaty
petitionfiledagainst it under the .United States Bankruptcy Code, or shaU consent to the entty of
an Older for relief under the United States Bankmptcy Code or shaU make an assignment for the
benefit of creditors or shaU admit in writing its inability to pay its debts generally as they become
due; or (b) a decree or order by a court having jurisdiction in the premises adjudging such person
as bankrupt or insolvent, or approving as properly filed a petition seeking reorganization,
arrangement, adjustment or composition of or in respect of such person under the United States
Bankmptcy Code or any other similar applicable Federal or state law or for refief under the
United States Bankruptcy Code after an involuntary petition has been fUed against such person,
or appointing a receiver, liquidator, assignee, tmstee or sequestrator or other simUar official of
such person or of any substantial part of its property, or ordering the winding up or liquidation
of its affairs, shall have been entered and shall have continued unabaied and in effect for a period
of 90 consecutive days.

 83096

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

" Invescment A greement" means an investment agreement or guaranteed investinent
contract with entities which maintain the foUowing credit and collateral requirements: (a) if a
corporation, they are initiaUyrated"Aaa" by Moody's and "AAA" by S&P, if a domestic bank,
they are initiaUyratedThomson "B/C" or better, and if a foreign bank, they are initiaUy rated
Thomson "B" or better, (b) if credit qualify reaches Moody's "Aa3" or S&P "AA" for
corporations, Thomson "B/C" for domestic banks, and .Thomson "B" for foreign banks, the
provider thereof (1) wiU respond with adequate coUateralization within ten (10) business days, (2)
wUl value assets weekly, and (3) wUl present coUateral at 102% on Government ObUgations and
105% on obligations described in item (2) of the definition of Pennitted Investments; (c) the
provider thereof must maintain minimum credit quality of Moody's "A2" or S&P "A" for
corporations, Thomson "C" for domestic banks, or Thomson "B/C" for foreign banks; and (d)'
the investinent agreement wiU be terminated if creditratingsreach Moody's "A3" or S&P "A-"
for corporations, Thomson "C/D" for domestic banks and Thomson "C" for foreign banks.
"Issuance Request" means a request made by the Cify, acting through a Designated
Representative, to the Issuing and Paying Agent for the delivety of a Commercial Paper Note or
Commercial Paper Notes.
"Issuing and Paving Agent" means
, Chicago,
Ulinois, or any successor or assigns pennitted under the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement or
any other Issuing and Paying Agent which is appointed by the Cify and has entered into an Issuing
and Paying Agent Agreement.
"Issuing- and Paving Agent Aereement" means the Issuing and Paying Agent
Agreement, dated as of
1,2002, between the Cify and the Issumg and Paying
Agent, and any and aU modifications, alterations, amendments and supplements thereto, or any
other Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement entered into by the Cify and the Issuing and Paying
Agent with respect to the Commercial Paper Notes.
"Letter of Credit" means the irrevocable, transferrable, direct-pay letter of credit
issued by the Bank for the benefit of the Issuing and Paying Agent on or prior to the date of
issuance of the first Commercial Paper Note, together with any substimte irrevocable,
transferrable, direct-pay letter of credit accepted by the Issuing and Paying Agent as provided in
Section 10.01 hereof; provided that at no time shall more than one letter of credh secure the
Outstanding Commercial Paper Notes.
"Maximum Rate" means

percent (

%) per annum.

"Moodv's" means Moody's Investors Service, a corporation existing under the laws
of the State of Delaware, its successors and assigns, and. if such corporadon shall no longer
perform the functions of a securitiesratingagency, any other nationally recognizedratingagency
designated by the City.
"No-Issuance Notice" shall have the meaning assigned thereto in a Reimbursement
Agreement.

 5/1/2002

REPOF?rS OF COMMITTEES

83097

"Nominee" means the nominee of the Note Depositoty as determinedfi-omtime
to time in accordance with this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture for any one or more
Series of Commercial Paper Notes. j
I

"Note Depository" means the securities depositoty for a Series of Commercial
Paper Notes appomted as such pursuant to Section 2.05 hereof, and its successors and assigns.
I
"Noteholder." "holder. 1 "owner" or "registered owner" means the person in
whose name any Note or Notes are registered on the books maintained by the Registrar- or
Trustee.
 
"Note Proceeds" means proceeds of the sale of the Commercial Paper Notes or any
moneys, securities or other obligations; that may be deemed to be proceeds of the Commercial
Paper Notes within the meaning of the Code.
i
"Outstanding" when used with respect to Notes shaU mean aU Notes which have
been authenticated and ddivered under jthis Indenture, except:
(a)
Notes canceUed jor purchased by the Issiung and Paying Agent for
cancellation or delivered to or acquired by the Issuing and Paying Agent for cancellation
and, in aU cases, with tbe intent-to extinguish the debt represented thereby;
(b)
Notes in lieu of which other Notes have been authenticated under Section
2.07, 2.08 or 2.09 hereof;

i
(c)
Notes dial have become due (at maturity or on redemption, acceleration or
otherwise) and for the payment of which sufficient moneys, including interest accmed to
the due date, are held by the Issuing and Paying Agent or Tmstee;

i
(d)
Notes which, under the terms of this Indenture, are deemed to be no longer
Outstanding; and
(e)
for puiposes of any consent or other action to be taken by the holders of a
specified percentage of Notes under this Indenture, Notes held by or for the accoimt of the
City or by any person controlling, controlled by or under common control with the City.

I

"Permined Investments" shaU mean any of the foUowing:

i
Cl)
Government Obligations;
(2)
obligations, debentures, notes or other evidences of indebtedness issued or
gimanieed by any of the following instnimentalities or agencies of the United States of America:
Federal Home Loan Bank System; Export-Import Bank of ihe United States; Federal Financing
Bank; Government National Mortgage Association; Fannie Mae, Student Loan Marketing

 83098

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Association; Federal Farm Credit Bureau; Farmers Home Administration; Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation; and Federal Housing Administration;
(3)
dhcct and general long-term obligations of any state, which obligations are
rated in either of the two highestraringcategories by Moody's and by S&P, if S&P then mnintains
a rating on such obligations;
(4)
direct and general short-tenn obfigations of any state which obUgations are
rated in tbe highest ratiog categoty by Moody's and by S&P, if S&P then maintains aratingon
such obfigations;
(5)
interest-bearing demand or time deposits (including certificates of deposit)
or interests in money market portfolios issued by state banks or tmst companies or national
banking associations that are members of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"),
which deposits or interests must either be (a) continuously andfiiUyinsured by FDIC and with
banks thai areratedat least " P-1" or "Aa" by Moody's and at least "A-l" or "AA" by S&P, if
such hmks are thenratedby S&P, or (b) fiiUy secured by United States Obligations (i) which are
valued not lessfiequentiythan monthly and have a fair market value, exclusive of accmed
interest, at least equal to the principal amotmt of the deposits or interests, (ii) held by the Trustee
(who shaU not be the provider of the collateral) or by any Federal Reserve Bank or depositaty
acceptable to the Tmstee. (in) subject to a perfectedfirstlien in the Trustee, and (iv)freeand
clearfi-omaU third-party liens;
(6)
long-term or medium-term corporate debt guaranteed by any coiporation
that isratedby bodi Moody's and S&P in either of their two highest rating categories;
(7)
repurchase agreements which arc (a) entered into with banks or trust
companies organized under state law, national banking associations, insurance companies or
government bond dealers reporting to. trading with and recognized as a primaty dealer by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and which either are members of the Security Investors
Protection Corporation or with a dealer or parent holding coinpany that has an investment grade
rating from Moody's and S&P. if S&P then TnainraiTK aratingof such instimtion, and (b) fuUy
secured by investments specified in Section (1) or (2) of this definition of Permined Investments
(i) which are valued not lessfrequendythan monthly and have a fair market value, exclusive of
accmed interest, at least equal to the amount invested in the repurchase agreements, (ii) held by
the Tmstee (who shall not be the provider of the collateral) or by any Federal Reserve Bank or
a depository acceptable to the Tmstee, (iu) subject to a perfectedfirstlien in the Trustee, and (iv)
free and clearfromall third-party liens;
(8)
prime commercial paper of a United States corporation, finance company
or banking instimtion rated at least "P-1" by Moody's and at least "A-l" by S&P, if S&P Uien
maintains aratingon such paper;
(9)
shares of a diversified open-end management investinent company (as
defined in the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended) or sliares in a regulated investment

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

' 83099

company (as defined in Section 851(a) of the Code) that is (a) a money market fond that has been
rated in one of the two highestratingcategories by Moody's or S&P, or (b) a money market hind
or account of the Tnistee or any state or Federal bank that isratedat least "P-1" or "Aa" by
Moody's, if Moody's then malntaias aratingon such bank, and at least "A-l" or "AA" by S&P,
if S&P then maihlains aratingon such bank, or whose one bank holding company parent is rated
at least "P-l" or "Aa" by Moody's, if Moody's then maintains aratingon sucb holding company,
and "A-l" or " AA" by S&P, if S&P then maintains aratiogon such holding coinpany, or that has
a combined capital and surplus of not less than $50,(XX),000;
(10)

Investment Agreements; and

(11) any other type of investinent in which the City directs the Tmstee to-invest,
provided that there is delivered to the Tmstee a certificate of an Authorized City Representative
stating that each ofthe Rating Agencies then maintaining aratingon the Series has been infoimed
of the proposal to invest in such investment and each of such Rating Agencies has confirmed that
such investinent wiU not adversely affect theratingthen assigned by such Rating Agency to any
Series.
"Person" means an individual, a corporation (including a limited liabiUty
coinpany), a partnership (including a limit>vt parmership), an association, a tiust or any other
entity or organization, including a government or political subdivision or an agency or
instnimentafity thereof.
"Prindpal Office" means the principal office of the Issuing and Paymg Agent for
purposes of performing its duties under this Indenture, which principal office has been designated
in writing by the Issuing and Paying Agent to an Authorized City Representative.
"Proceeds Fund" means the hind by that name established pursuant to Section
4.01(a) hereof
"Project or Purpose" means any undertaking or purpose listed or otherwise
described in a Tax Certificate of the City, as from time to time amended, as being financed or
refinanced in whole or in part with the proceeds of the Notes, including working capital and
capital projects.
"Radnp Agency" means, as long as it isratinga Series, (i) Standard & Poor's, (ii)
Fitch, (iii) Moody's, or (iv) any other nationallyrecognizedcreditratingagency specified in a
Supplemental Indenture.
"Rebate Fund" means any fund required to be maintained by the City pursuant to
a Tax Certificate in connection with the issuance of the Notes or any Series of Notes for the
purpose of complying with the Code, and providing for the collection and holding for and
paymem of amounts to the United States of America.

 83100

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

"Registrar" means, "with respect to any Series, each person or entify, if any,
designated by the Cify herein or in a Supplemental Indenture to keep a register of any Series and
of the transfer and exchange of the Notes comprising such Series, and its successors and assigns,
and any other person or entity which may at any time be substituted for it puisuant hereto.
"Reimbursement Agreement" means the Reunbursement Agreement, dated as of
1, 2002, pursuant to which the Letter of Credit is issued and any and aU
modifications, alterations, amendments and supplements thereto, and any sinular document
entered into with respect to the delivety of a substitute Letter of Credit.
"Representation Letter" means the Blanket Issuer Letter of Representations from
tbe Cify to DTC with respect to a Series.
"Responsible Officer" means an officer or assistant officer of the Tmstee assigned
by tbe Trustee to administer this Indenture.
"Series" means a series of Commercial Paper Notes issued pursuant to this
Indenture (e.g.. Series A Notes or Series B Notes); each series of Commercial Paper Notes, when
aggregated with aU Outstanding Commercial Paper Notes of other series, may be in an aggregate
amount up to the fiiU Authorized Amountregardlessof when or whether issued.
"Series A Notes" means the City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes. 2002
Program Series A (Tax Exen^t), issued under this Indenture.
"Series A Project or Purpose" means any undertaking or purpose listed or
otherwise described in a Tax Certificate of the City as beingfinancedor refinanced in whole or
in pan with the proceeds of Series A Notes, including working capital and capital projects.
"Series B Notes" means the City of Chicago, Coinmercial Paper Notes, 2002
Program Series B (Taxable), issued under and secured by this Indenture.
"Scries B Project or Purpose" means any undertaking or puipose listed or
otherwise described in a certificate of the City, being financed or refinanced in whole or in part
with the proceeds ofthe Series B Notes, including working capital and capital projects.
"Standard & Poor's" or "S & P" means Standard & Poor's, A Division of The
McGraw-HiU Companies, Inc., a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State
of New York, and its successors and assigns, and, if such corporation shaU no longer perform the
functions of a securitiesratingagency, any other nationally recognized securitiesratingagency
designated by the City.
"State" means the State of DUnois.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83101

"Stated Amount" means, with respect to a Letter of Credit, the amount available
to be drawn under the Letter of Credit for payment of principal of and interest on Coinmercial
Paper Notes issued hereunder.
"Supplemental Indenture" means any document supplementing or amending this
Indenture and entered into as provided in Article XI of this Indenture.
"Tax Certificate" means a certificate, as amended firom time to time, executed and
defivered on behalf of the Cify by a Designated Representative on the date upon which Series A
Notes are initiaUy issued and delivered, or anyfimctionaUyequivalent certificate subsequentiy
executed and deUvered on behalf ofthe Cify by a Designated Representative with respect to the
requirements of Section 148 (or any successor section) ofthe Code relating to the Series A Notes.
"Temunation Date" means the sucteenth (16*)'day prior to the Expiration Date.
"Tnistee" shall mean the entify named as such in the heading of this Indenture untU
a successor replaces it and, thereafter, means such successor.
"United States Obligations" means direct and general obligations of the United
States of America, or obfigations that are unconditionaUy guaranteed as to prindpal and interest
by the United States of America, including, with respect only to direct and general obligations and
not to guaranteed obligations, evidences of ownership of proportionate interests in fiiture interest
and/or principal payments of such obligations, provided that investments in such pioportionate
interests must be limited to circumstances wherein (1) a bank or trust con^any acts as custodian
and holds the underlying United States Obligations;-(2) the owner of the investment is the real
party in interest and has tberightto proceed directiy and individually against the obligor of the
underlying United States Obligations; and (3) the underlying United States Obligations are held
in a special account separate from the custodian's general assets and are not avaUable to satisfy
any claim ofthe custodian, any person claiming through the custodian or any person to whom the
custodian may be obligated.
Section 1.02. General Authorization. The appropriate officers, agents and
employees of the City are each hereby authorized and directed, for and in the name and on behalf
of the City, to take all acfions and to make and execute any and aU certificates, requisitions;
agreements, notices, consents, warrants and other documents, which they, or any of them, deem
necessary or appropriate in order to consummate the lawfid issuance, sale and delivery of one or
more Scries of Commercial Paper Notes or Bank Notes in accordance with the provisions hereof.
Section 1.03. Interpretation. AU references herein to "Articles," "Sections" and
other subdivisions are to the corresponding Articles, Sections or subdivisions of this Indenmre,
and the words "herein," "hereof," "hereunder" and other words of similar import refer to diis
Indenture as a whole and not to any particular Article, Section or subdivision hereof.

 83102

JOURNAI^-CITY

COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5 / 1 /2002

ARTICLE n .
Tbe Commercial Paper Notes.
Section 2.01. Authorized Amotmt of Commercial Paper Notes; Terms and
Description of Commerdal Paper Notes. No Commercial Paper Notes may be issued under the
provisions of this Indenture except in accordance with this Article.
(a)
The Cify hereby authorizes the issuance of its Notes to be designated (i)
"Cify of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program Series A (Tax Exempt)", and
(ii) "Cify of Chicago, Commercial Paper Notes. 2002 Program Series B (Taxable)",
subject to the provisions of this Section and as hereinafter provided.. The. Series A Notes
sbaU be issued fiom time to time as provided herein to finance and refinance the cost of
Series A Projects or Purposes; and the Series B Notes shall be issued from time to time
as provided herein tofinanceand refinance the cost of Series B Projects or Purposes.
Proceeds of Coinmercial Paper Notes issued torefinanceother Coinmercial Paper Notes
may be used to pay or to reimburse the Bank for Advances used to pay principal or
interest due on such maturing Coinmercial Paper Notes; provided, however, that proceeds
of Series A Notes may only be used to pay or to reimburse the Bank for Advances used
to pay principal or interest due on Series A Notes, and proceeds of Series B Notes may
only be used to pay or toreimbursethe Bank for Advances used to pay principal or
interest due on Series B Notes. Such authorization specifically includes the authorization
to issue andreissueCommercial Paper Notes for such purposes. The aggregate principal
amount of Commercial Paper Notes that may be Outstanding at any one time hereunder
shaU not exceed the Authorized Amount. The aggregate amount of principal and interest
payable on the Outstanding Commercial Paper Notes shall not exceed the amount available
to be drawn under the Letter of Credit.
(b)
The Commercial Paper Notes shaU be dated the date of their respective
authentication and issuance; shaU be issued in bearer or registered form, as shall be
determined by the Designated Representative, shaU be issued in denominations of
$100,000 and integral mtUtiples of $1,000 in excess thereof. Commercial Paper Notes
shall bear interest from their respective dated dates, payable on their respective maturity
dates.
(c)
Series A Notes (i) shall bear interest payable at maturity at an annual rate
(calculated on the basis of a year consisting of 365/366 days and actual number of days
elapsed), which shall not in any event exceed die Maximum Rate, (ii) shall mature on a
Business Day not more than 270 days after their respective dated dates, but in no event
later dian the related Termination Date, and (iii) shall be sold by the Dealer pursuant to
a Dealer Agreement at a price of not less tlian 100% of the principal amounl thereof.
Series B Notes (i) shall bear interest payable at maturify at an annual rate (calculated on
the basis of a year consisting of 360 days and actual number of days elapsed), which shall
not in any event exceed the Maximum Rate, (ii) shall mature on a Business Day not more
than 270 days after their dated dates, but in no event later than the related Termination

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83103

Date, and (iii) shall be sold by the Dealer pursuant to a Dealer-Agreonent at a price of not
less than 100% of the principal amount thereof. The staled inicrest rate or yield, maturity
date and other teims of the Commercial Paper Notes, as long as not inconsistent with the
terms of this Indenture, shall be as set forth in the Issuance Requestrequiredby Section
2.06 hereof directing the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes.
(d)
maturity.

The Commercial Paper Notes shaU not be subject to redemption prior to

(e)
The Series A Notes and the Series B Notes shall be numbered in such
manner as the Issuing and Paying Agent may deem appropriate.
(f)
Commercial Paper Notes which are issued tofinanceorrefinanceSeries A
Projects or Purposes shaU be designated as Series A Notes. Commercial Paper Notes
which are issued tofinanceor refinance Series B Projects or Puiposes shall be designated
as Series B Notes.
Section 2.02. Payment. The Cify covenants to duly and punctually pay or cause
to be paid, the principal of and interest on each and evefy Commercial P^ier Note when due. To
the extent Advances made by the Bank for the purpose of paying principal of and interest on
maturing Commercial Paper Notes, together with Note Proceeds from Coinmercial Paper Notes
issued on such date, are insufficient to pay principal of and interest on maturing Coinmercial
Paper Notes, the City wiU make aU payments of principal and interest directiy to the Issuing and
Paying Agent in immediately avaUable funds on or prior to 1:15 p.m., Chicago, Ulinois time, on
the date payinent is due on any Commercial Paper Note. To the extent principal of and/or interest
on Commercial Paper Notes is paid with an Advance, the Issuing and Paying Agent is authorized
and directed to use amoimts paid by the City to reimburse the Bank. The principal of and the
interest on tbe Coinmercial F^per Notes shall be paid in Federal or.other immediately available
funds in such coin or currency of the United States of America as, at the respective limes of
payment, is legal tender for the payment of public and private debts.
The principal of and the interest on the Commercial Paper Notes shall be payable
at the Principal Office of the Issuing and Paying Agent on or before the close of business on any
Business Day upon wtiich such Commercial Paper Notes have become due and payable, provided
that such Commercial Paper Notes are presented and surrendered on a timely basis. Upon
presentation of such a Commercial Paper Note to the Issuing and Paying Agent no later than 2:00
p.m. (Chicago, lUinois time) on a Business Day, payment for such Commercial Paper Note shall
be made by the Issuing and Paying Agent in immediately available funds on such Business Day.
If a Commercial Paper Note is presented for payment after 2:00 p.m. (Chicago, Illinois time) on
a Business Day, payment therefor may be made by the Issuing and Paying Agent on the next
succeeding Business Day without the accrual of additional interest thereon.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the previous paragraph, in the event die Notes
are issued as a master note or master notes in lx)ok-entry form, they shall be payable at maturity

 83104

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

without physical presentation or smrender in accordance with the procedures of the Note
Depository.
Section 2.03. Execution and Authentication of Coinmercial Paper Notes;
Liinited Obfigation. The Notes, in certificated form. wUl be signed for the City as provided in
tbe CP Note Ordinance. In case any officer whose signature or whose facsinule signature shall
appear on any Notes shaU cease to be such officer before tbe authentication of such Notes, such
signature or the facsinule signature thereof shaU, nevertheless, be. vafid and sufficient for aU
puiposes the same as if he or she had remained in office imtU authentication. Also, if a person
signing a Note is the proper officer on the actual date of execution, the Note wiU be vafid even
if that person is not the proper officer on the nominal date of action and even though, at the date
of this Indenture, such person was not such officer.
The Issuing and Paying Agent is, by this Indenture, designated by the Cify as the
Authenticating Agent and Registrar for the Coinmercial Paper Notes in accordance with the terms
of Section 7.01 hereof. Norwiihstanding anything herein to the contraty, the Issuing and Paying
Agent shaU not authenticate Commercial Paper Notes which mature later than the Terinination
Date, and the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU not authenticate Commercial Paper Notes if an"£vent
of Default then exists of which it has actual knowledge or the Issuing and Paying Agent has
received a No-Issuance Noticefromthe Bank.
If any Commercial Paper Notes are to be issued in bearer form, the City shaU from
time to time fiimish the Issuing and Paying Agent with an adequate supply of Commercial Paper
Notes, each of which shaU have attached such number of copies as the Issuing and Paying Agent
shaU reasonably specify. When any Commercial Paper Notes are delivered to the Issuing and
Paying Agent by the City, the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU execute and deUver to the Cify a
receipt thercfor and shall hold such Commercial Paper Notes for the account of the City in
safekeeping in accordance with its customaty practice.
Section 2.04. Forms of Commercial Paper. Notes and Authentication
Certificate. The definitive Series A Notes and Series B Notes and the Certificate of
Authentication endorsed thereon shaU be substantiaUy in the form set forth ir'Exhibit A attached
hereto and made a part hereof, with such appropriate variations, omissions and insertions as shaU
be required or appropriate in order to accomplish the purposes of the transactions authorized by
this Indenture.
Section 2.05. Book-Entry System. Unless an Authorized City Representative or
his designee determines that a Series of Commercial Paper Notes shall be issued in bearer form
orregisteredform other than in book-entry form, the Commercial Paper Notes shall initially be
issued in book-entry form as further provided in this Section.
(a)
The Notes issued pursuant to this Indenture shall initially be issued in the
fomi of a separate single fully-registered Note for each Series of the Commercial Paper
Notes. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this Section, all of the Commercial Paper
NoKs shall be registered in the name of the Nominee. Notwithstanding any provision to

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83105

the contraty in Section 2.06, as long as the Notesremainin the form of one or more
master notes in book-entry form, the issuance of Notes pursuant to an Issuance Request
against payment therefor shaU not require the physical delivery of note certificates.
The Trustee, the Issuing and Paying Agent and tbe Cify may treat the registered
owner of each Note as the sole and exclusive owner thereof for the purposes of payment
of the principal of or interest on the Series of Notes to which such Note belongs, giving
any-notice permitted or required to be given to Noteholders hereimder, registering the
transfer of Notes, obtaining any consent or other action to be taken by Noteholders, and
for all odier purposes whatsoever, and neidier the Trustee, the Issumg and Paying Agent
nor the Cify shaU be affected by any notice to the contrary.
Neither the Tmstee, the Issuing and Paying Agent nor the Cify shaU have any
responsibUify or obligation to any partidpant in the Note Depositoty (a "Participant"), any
person claiming a beneficial ownership interest in the Coinmercial Paper Notes under or
through the Note Depositoty or any Participant, or any other person who is not shown on
the registration books as being a Noteholder, with respect to (i) the accuracy of any
records maintained by the Note Depositoty or any Paitic^jant; (u) the payment by the Note
Depository or any Participant of any amount in respect of the principal of or . interest on
the Commercial Paper Notes; (iu) the delivety of any notice which is permitted or required
to be given to Noteholders hereunder;,(iv) any consent given or other action taken by the
Note Depository as Noteholder; or (v) any other purpose.
The Issuing and Paying Agent shall pay all principal of and interest on the
Commercial Paper Notes only to or upon the order of the Note Depositoty, and all such
payments shaU be valid and effective to liiUy satisfy and discharge the City's obligations
with respect to the payinent of the principal of and interest on the Coinmercial Paper Notes
to the extent of the sum or sums so paid! Upon delivety by the Note Depositoty to the
Issumg and Paying Agent of written notice to the effect Oiat the Note Depositoty has
determined to substimte a new Nominee in place of the current Nominee, and subject to
the provisions herein with respect lo record dates, the word Nominee in this Article shaU
refer to such new Nominee.
(b)
In order to qualify each Scries of Commercial Paper Notes for the Note
Depository's book-entry system, an Authorized City Representative is hereby authorized
to execute, seal, countersign and defiver on behalf of the City to the Note Depository for
each Series of Commercial Paper Notes, a Representadon Letter from an Authorized City
Representative representing such matters as shaU be necessary to so qualify the
Commercial Tapcv Notes. The execution and delivery of the Representation Letter shaU
not in any way limit ihe provisions of this Section or in any other way impose upon the
City any obligation whatsoever with respect to persons having beneficial ownership
interests in the Commercial Paper Notes other than the Noteholders.
(c)
(1) The Note Depository may determine to discontinue providing its
services widirespectto a Series of Commercial Paper Notes at any time by giving

 83106

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

reasonable written notice to an Authorized Cify Representative, the Trustee and the Issuing
and Paying Agent, and by discharging its responsibifities wilh respect thereto under
applicable law.
(2)
An Authorized Cify Representative, exercising the sole discretion
of the Cify and without the consent of any. other person, may terminate, upon
provision of notice to the Note Depositoty, the Tnistee and the Issuing and Paying
Agent, tbe services of the Note Depositoty with respect to a Series of Commercial
Paper Notes if the Authorized Cify Representative detennines, on behalf of the
Cify, that the continuation of thetystemof book-entty only transfers through the
Note Depositoty (or a successor securities depositoty) is not in the best interests
of the owners of a Sen"es of Coinmercial Paper Notes or is burdensome to the City,
and shaU terminate tbe services of the Note Depositoty with respect to a Series of
Commercial Paper Notes upon receipt by the Cify, the Tmstee and the Issuing and
Paying Agent of written noticefiromthe Note Depositoty to the effect that the Note
Depository has received written noticefromDirect Participants (as defined in the
Representation Letter) ha-ving interests, as shown in the records of the Note
Depositoty, in an aggregate principal amoimt of not less than fifty percem (50%)
of tbe aggregate prindpal amount of tbe then outstanding Commercial Paper Notes
to the effect that: 0) the Note Depositoty is unable to. discharge its responsibilities
withrespectto such Series of Commercial Paper Notes, or (ii) a continuation of
the requirement that all of the outstanding Notes beregisteredin the registration
books kept by the Issuing and Paying Agent in the name of the Nominee of the
Note Depository, is not in the best interest of the Noteholders of such Series of
Coinmercial Paper Notes.
(3)
Upon the termination of the services of the Note Depository with
respect to a Series of Commercial Paper Notes pursuant to subsection (c)(1) or
(c) (2) hereof, after which no substimte Note Depository willing to undertake the
fimctions of the Note Depositoty hereunder can be found or which, in the opinion
of the Cify. is wiUing and able to undertake such functions upon reasonable and
customary terms, a Series of Commercial Paper Notes shall no longer be restricted
to being registered in theregistrationbooks kept by the Note Registrar in the name
of the Nominee ofthe Note Depositoty. In such event, tbe Cify shall issue and the
Issuing and Paying Agent shall transfer and exchange Note certificates as requested
by the Note Depositoty or Direct Participants of like principal amount. Series and
mamrity, in denominations of $100,000 and integral multiples of $1,000 in excess
thereof, to the identifiable Noteholder in replacement of such Noteholder's
beneficial interests in a Series of Commercial Paper Notes.
(d)
Norwiihstanding any provision hereof to the conuaty, as long as the
Commercial Paper Notes of any Series areregisteredin die name of the Nominee, all
paymenls with respect to principal of and interest on the Commercial Paper Notes of such
Series and all notices with respect to the Coinmercial Paper Notes of such Series shall be

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83107

made and given,respectively,as provided in the Representation Letter for the related
Series of Notes or as otherwise instructed by the Note Depositoty.
(e)
The initial Note Depository withrespectto each Series of Commercial
Paper Notes shall be DTC. The initial Nominee with respect to each Series of
Commercial Paper Notes shall be CEDE & CO., as nominee of DTC.
Section 2.06. Conditions Precedent to Delivery of Commerdal Paper Notes.
(a)
Prior to the issuance of the first Commercial Paper Notes hereunder.
Commercial Paper Notes of each iiutial Series shaU be executed on behalf of the City and
delivered to the Issuing and Paying Agent, who shaU hold such Commercial Paper Notes
unaudienticated in safekeeping for the Cify. Subject to the provisions of Sections 2.01 and 2.05
hereof, and paragraplis (0 and (g) of this Section, at any time and fiom time to time prior to the
Temunation Date, Commercial Paper Notes shaU be manuidly authenticated and delivered by the
Issuing and Paying Agent for the consideration and in the manner hereinafter provided, but onfy
upon receipt by the Issuing aiid Paying Agent of an Issuance Request, no later than 11:30 a.m.
(Clucago, Illinois time) on the Business Day on which Commercial Paper Notes are to be
delivered, directing the Issuing and Paying Agent to authenticate the Commercial Paper Notes
refeired to therein and to defiver the same to or upon the order of the Dealer. Each Issuance
Request shaU include: (i) the prindpal amount and date of each Coinmercial Paper Note then to
be defivered; (ii) therateand amount of interest thereon; (iu) the maturity date thereof; and (iv)
the Series designation thereof. No later than 1:30 p.m.. (Chicago, Illinois tiine)'on each Business
Day on which the Cify proposes to issue Coinmercial Paper Notes, the Dealer shall report to the
City each transaction made with or arranged by it or shall notify the Cify and the Issumg and
Paying Agent of the difference, if any, between the amount of maturing Notes of a Series and the
amount of Notes of a Series which the Dealer has arranged to seU or bas agreed to purchase.
(b)
Upon receipt of such Issuance Request (which may be transmitted by maU,
telecopy or other electronic communications method, or by telephone, promptiy confirmed in
writing by 1:00 p.m. Chicago. Ulinois time), the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU, by 2:00 p.m.
(Chicago, Ilfinois time) on such day, complete each Scries A Note and each Series B Note then
to be deUvered as to amount, date, maturity date, interestrateand interest amount specified in
such Issuance Request, and deliver each such Commeicial Paper Note to or upon the order of the
Dealer upon receipt of payment therefor; provided, however, that no such Commeicial Paper
Notes shall be defivered by the Issuing and Paying Agent if such delivety would cause (a) the sum
of the aggregate principal amount of Commercial Paper Notes Outstanding to exceed the
Authorized Amount, or (b) the aggregate principal amounl of Coinmercial Paper Notes described
in each Issuance Request (together with the interest thereon), plus the aggregate principal amount
of all Commercial Paper Notes then Outstanding (together with the interest thereon), less the
agg'^^g^'e principal amount of any of the then Outstanding Commercial Paper Notes to be retired
concurrentiy with the issuance ofthe Commercial Paper Notes described in the Issuance Request
(including interest thereon), to exceed the amount available to be drawn under the Lener of
Credit. Notwithsunding any provision herein to the conirary, no such Commercial Paper Notes
of any Series shall be delivered by the Issuing and Paying Agent if (A) it shall have received

 83108

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

noticefroman Authorized City Representative directing the Issuing and Paying Agent to cease
authenticating and delivering Coinmercial Paper Notes until such time as such direction is
withdrawn by simUar notice, (B) it shaU liave actual knowledge that an Event of Default shaU have
occurred and be continuing, (C) it shaU have received notice from Bond Counseltiiatits opinion
regarding the exclusion of interest on the Notes of such issue or Series (issued as tax-exempt
Notes) from gross income for Federal income tax purposes of tbe holders thereof is being
withdrawn, (D) the maturity date of such Commercial Paper Notes woidd extend beyond tbe
related Termination Date, or (E) tbe Tmstee and the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU have received
a No-Issuance Notice from the Bank. If an Issuance Request is received after 11:30 a.m.
(Chicago, Ilfinois time) on a given day, the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU not be obUgated to
deliver tbe requested Commercial. Paper Notes imtU the next succeeding Business Day.
(c)
The City shaU, upon-a change in the identify of any Designated
Representative, provide a Certificate for each new Designated Representative to the Issuing and
Paying Agent.
(d)
A copy of each Commercial Paper Note authenticated in bearer form by the
Issuing and Paying Agent shall be prompdy transmitted by facsimile and thereafter maUed by first
class United States maU, postage prepaid, to the Cify and the Tmstee by the Issuing and Paying
Agent. The Issuing and Ikying Agem shaU furnish the City with such additional infoimation with
respect to the carrying out of its duties hereunder as the Cityfromtime to time shaU reasonably
request.
(e)
In addition to the Issuance Request described above in this Section, and as
a further condition to the issuance of any Commercial Paper Notes, the Designated Representative
shaU certify to or instmct. for and on behalf of the City, the Issuing and Paying Agent that, as of
the date of delivery of such Coinmercial Paper Notes, (i) the Letter of Credit is in fiiU force and
effect; (u) after the issuance of such Commercial Paper Notes and the application of the proceeds
thereof, tbe sum ofthe aggregate principal amount of Coinmercial Paper Notes Outstanding wUl
not exceed the Audiorized Amount; (in) the sum of the aggregate principal amount of Commercial
Paper Notes then Outstanding (together widi the interest thereon) does not exceed the amoimt
avaUable to be drawn under tbe Letter of Credit; (iv) unless imerest on the Commercial Paper
Notes to be issued is to be taxable, to the City's knowledge there has been no change in the facts,
estimates, cucumstances and representations of the Cify set forth or made (as the case may be)
.in die Tax Certificate (applicable to such Coinmercial Paper Notes); (v) the terms of the
Commeicial Paper Notes do not exceed 270 days and the maturity dates of such Commercial
Paper Notes set forth in the Issuance Request do not extend l)eyond therelatedTermination Dale;
(vi) the City has not been notified by Bond Counsel that its opinion with respect to tbe validify
of the Coinmercial Paper Notes and, unless interest on the Notes is to be taxable, the tax treatment
of the interest thereon has been revised or withdrawn or, if any such revision or withdrawal has
occurted, the revised opinion or a substimte opinion acceptable to the Dealer has been delivered;
(vii) to the actual knowledge ofthe City, no Event of Default has occuned and is then continuing;
(viii) Ihe Note Proceeds shall be deposited into the Commercial Paper Bank Payment Account or
into the Constmction Fund pursuant to Section 4.02 hereof in the amounts specified by the

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

-

83109

Designated Representative; and (ix) all of the concfitions precedem to the issuance of such
Commercial Paper Notes set forth in this Section of this Indenture have been satisfied.
The delivety of any Issuance Request to the Issuing and Paymg Agent by a
Designated Representative in the manner provided in this Section shall constimte the certification
and representation of the City as of die date of such Issuance Request as to the matters set forth
in the immediately preceding paragraph.
(f)
Any Issuance Request made by telephone puisuant to this Section may be
recorded by the Issuing and Paying Agem and shall be confiimed promptiy id writing by a
Designated Representative; provided, however, that any conflict between any recoided oral
Issuance Request and the written confirmation thereof, shall not affect the validity of any recorded
oral Issuance Request received by the Issuing and Paying Agem as provided herein. If the Issuing
and Paying Agent does not record an oral Issuance Request, and a conffict exists between sucb
oral Issuance Request and the written confirmation thereof, the terms of the wrinen confirmation
shall control.
(g)
Prior to the initial defivety of Commercial Paper Notes imder this Indenture
and as a condition to such initial issuance, the Tmstee and the C i ^ shaU be notified by the Issumg
and Paying Agent that the Issuing and Paying Agent has received:
(1)

a fully executed counterpart of the Reimbursement Agreemem;

(2)

the executed Letter of Credit;

(3)
the opinions of the Umted States counsel and foreign counsel to the Bank,
addressed to the City, the Issuing and Paying Agent and the Tmstee, to the effect that the
Letter of Credit and the Reimbursement Agreement are valid and legally binding
obligations of the Bank, enforceable in acconlance with their terms; and
(4)

a fuUy executed counterpart of the Dealer Agreemem.

Secti'on2.07. Ownership of Commerdal Paper Notes. The Cify and the Issuing
and Paying Agent may deem and treat the bearer of Notes in bearer form or the registered"owner
of Notes in registered form as the absolute owner thereof (whether or not such Coinmercial Paper
Note shaU be overdue and notwithstanding any notation of ownership or other writing thereon
made by anyone other than the Issuing and Paying Agent) for the purpose of receiving payment
thereof or on account thereof and for all other purposes, and neither the Cify nor the Issuing and
Paying Agem shall be affected by any nouce to the contraty.
Section 2.08. MutUated, Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Notes. In the event any
Coinmercial Paper Note is mutUated or defaced but identifiable by number and description, the
City shall execute and the Authenticating Agent shall authenticate and deliver a new Nbie of like
Series, date, rnaturity and denomination as such Note, upon surrender thereof to the Issuing and
Paying Agent; provided that there shall first be fumishod to the Issuing and Paying Agent clear

 83110

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

and unequivocal proof satisfactory to the Issuing and Paying Agem that the Note is mutUated or
defaced to such an extent as to impair its vahie to the Noteholder. The Noteholder shaU
accompany the above with a deposit of moneyrequiredby the Issuing and Paying Agem for the
cost of preparing the substimte Note and aU other expenses connected with the issuance of such
substitute. The Issuing and Paymg Agent shaU then cause proper record to be made of the
cancellation of the original," and thereafter the substimte shaU have the validify of the original.
(a)
In the event any Note is lost, stolen or destroyed, the Cify may execute and
the Authenticating Agent may authenticate and deUver a new Note of like Series, date,
maturify and denomination as.that Note lost, stolen or destroyed, provided that there shaU
first be fiimished to the Issuing and Paying Agent evidence of such loss, theft or
destmction satisfactoty to the Issuing and Paying Agent, together "with indemnify
satisfactoty to it and the Cify.
(b)
Except as liinited by any Supplemental Indenture, the Issuing and Paying
Agem may charge the holder of any sucb Note aU governmental charges and transfer
taxes, if any, and its reasonable fees and expenses in this connection. AU substitute Notes
issued and authenticated pursuant to this Section shaU be. issued as a substimte and
numbered, as determined by the Issuing and Paying Agem. In the event any such Note
has matured or been called for redemption, instead of issiiing a substimte Note, the Issuing
and Paying Agent may pay die same at its maturify or redemption without surrender
thereof upon receipt of indemnity satisfactory to it and the City.
Section 2.09. Transfer or Exchange of Notes. Upon surrender for transfer of
any Note at the designated coiporate tmst office of the Registrar, the Registrar shaU deliver in the
name of the transferee or transferees a new fiilly authenticated andregisteredNote or Notes of
authorized denominations of the same Series, and maturity for the same aggregate principal
amount.
Noteholdeis may present Notes at the designated corporate trust office of the
Registrar for exchange for Notes of differem authorized denominations and, upon such
presentation, the Registrar shall deliver to the Noteholder a newfiiUyauthenticated and registered
Note or Notes of the same Series and maturity for the same aggregate principal amoum.
All Notes presented for transfer or exchange shall be accompanied by a written
instrument or instruments of transfer or authorization for exchange, in form and with guaranty of
signaoire satisfactory to the Registrar, duly executed by the Noteholder or by his duly authorized
attorney.
Except as limiicd by any Supplemental Indenture, the Registrar also may require
payment from the Noteholder of a sum sufficient to cover any tax, or other governmental fee or
charge that may be imposed m relation thereto. Such taxes, fees and charges shall be paid before
any such new Note shall be delivered.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83111

Supplemental Indentures may designate certain limited periods during which Notes
wiU not be exchanged or transferred.
Notes delivered upon any exchange or transfer as provided herein, or as provided
in Section 2.08 hereof, shaU be vafid limited obligations of the City, evidencing the same debt as
the Note or Notes surrendered, shaU be secured by this Indenture and shall be entitied to aU of
the securify and benefits hereof to the same extem as the Note or Notes surrendered.
Section 2.10. Destruction of Notes. Whenever any Notes shaU be delivered to
the Issuing and Paying Agent for canceUation pursuant to this Indenture, upon payment of the
prindpal amoum and interest represented thereby or forreplaccmempursuam to Section 2.08 or
exchange or transfer pursuant to Section 2.09, such Note shaU be cancelled and destroyed by the
Issumg and Paying Agent or the Registrar and counterparts of a certificate of destmction
evidencing such destmction shall befiimishedby the Issuing and Paying Agent to the City.
. . -. Section 2.11. T^porary Notes. Pending preparation of definitive Notes of any
Series, the Cify may execute and the T<t«aiing and Paying Agem shall authenticate and deUver, in
lieu of definitive Notes and subject to the same limitations and conditions, interim receipts,
certificates or tempomy Notes which shaU be exchanged for the Notes.
If temporaty Notes shaU be issued, the City shaU cause the definitive Notes to be
prepared and to be executed, authenticated and delivered to the Issuing and Paying Agem, and the
Issumg and Paying Agent, upon presentation to it of any temporaty Note, shaU cancel the same
and defiver in exchange therefor at the place designated by the holder, without charge to the
holder thereof, definitive Notes of an equal aggregate principal aimoum of the same Series issue
date, maturity and bearing interest the same as the temporaty Notes surrendered. UntU so
exchanged-, the temporaty Notes shaU in all respects be entitied to the same benefit and security
of this Indenture as the definitive Notes to be issued and authenticated hereunder.
Section 2.12. Nonpresentment of Notes. In the event any Note shall not be
presented for payment when the principal thereof l>ecomes due. if moneys suffidem to pay such
Note shall have been deposited widi the Trustee for the benefit of the owner thereof, aU liabUity
of the City to the owner thereof for the paymem of such Note shall forthwith cease, tenninate and
be completely discharged, and thereupon it shaU be the duty of the Tnistee to hold such moneys,
without liability to the City, any owner of any Note or any other person for imerest thereon, for
the benefit of the owner of such Note, who shaU thereafter be restricted exclusively to such
moneys, for any claim of whatever nature on his or her part under this Indenture or on, or with
respect to, said Note.
Any moneys so deposited with and held by the Tmstee and not so applied to the
paymem of Notes widiin two (2) years after the date on which the same shall have become due
shall be paid by the Trustee to the City,freefromthe tmsts created by this Indenture. Thereafter,
the owners ofthe Notes shall be entitled to look only to the City for payment, and then only to
the extent of the amount so repaid by the Trustee. The City shall apply the sums paid to it
pursuam to this Section in accordance with applicable law, but shall not be liable for any interest

 83112

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

on sucb sums paid to it pursuant to tbis Section and shall not be regarded as a trustee of such
money.
ARTICLE i n /
Security.
Section 3.01. Limited Tax General Obligations. The Commeicial Paper Notes
and the Bank Notes shaU be direct and general obUgations of the City, and shall be secured by a
pledge of, fien on and securify imerest in aU amounts in the fiinds and accounts created or °
maintained purstiant to this Indenture, the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreemem or any Tax
Certificate (except the Rebate Fund), including earnings on such amounts, subject onfy to the
provisions of this Indenture and the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement permitting the
appfication thereof for the puiposes and on the teims and conditions set forth herein and therein.
The obligation of the City to make payments of the principal of, [the redenq)tion
premium of,] and the interest on the Coinmercial Paper Notes and the Bank Notes shaU be payable
from any funds legally avaUable for such puipose. The City covenants and agrees to take aU
necessaty action to annuaUy appropriate funds in a timely manner so as to provide for the making
of all such payments with respect to the Commercial Paper Notes and the Bank Notes; provided
however, that in no event shall the City be obligated to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax
in addition to other City taxes or any special ad valorem or other tax unlimited as to rate or
amount to pay such principal, [redemption premium] or imerest.
Section 3.02. Punctual Payment. The Cify covenants diat it wiU provide for the
punctual paymem of the principal of and imerest on each Coinmercial Paper Note and each Bank
Note as the same shall become due and payable in accordance with its teims.
ARTICLE IV'
Appfication of Commerdal Paper Note Proceeds Section 4.01. Creation of Funds and Accounts, (a) The Proceeds Fund is
hereby created as a separate fund and shaU be held, maintained and accounted for by the Tmstee,
and the moneys in the Proceeds Fund shall be used for the purposes for which the Notes of any
Series are audiorized to be issued, including, bm not limited to, the payment of principal of and
interest on the Notes, Costs of Issuance and administrative costs of the coinmercial paper
program. If so specified in a Tax Certificate, the City shall establish one or more accounts and
subaccounts within the Proceeds Fund. The Proceeds Fund is designated as the "Commercial
Paper Proceeds Fund" and herein called the "Proceeds Fund."

(b)

The Debt Service Fund is hereby created as a separate tmst fund and shall

be held by the Issuing and Paying Agent. The City may direct the Issuing and Paying Agent to

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83113

establish and maintain a separate accoimt or accoimts in the Debt Service Fund with respect to any
or aU of the Notes of one or more Series. Moneys in the Debt Service Fund and the accounts
therein shaU be held in trust separate and apartfromall other moneys, fimds and accounts held
by the Issuing and Paying Agem, and shall be applied to pay the principal of and interest oh
Outstanding Notes in the amounts, at the times and in the manner set forth herein and in any
Supplemental Indenture... Moneys in the accounts in the Debt Service Fund may also be applied
to pay or reimburse the Bank for unreimbursed Advances to the extent provided herein or in any
Supplemental Indenture. The following accounts are hereby established within the Debt Service
Fund, and the Issuing and Paying Agem shaU hold such accounts in tmst in accordance.herewith
and with the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreemem:
(1)
"Commercial Paper Debt Service Account," and herein caUed the fDebt
Service Account;"
(2)
three "Coinmercial Paper Bank Payment Accounts," and herein called the
"Bank Payment Accoimts" designated as

(3)
Accoum."

(i)

the "Series A Bank Payment Accoum," and

(u)

the "Series B Bank Paymem Account," and

"Bank Note Debt Service Account," and herein called- the "Bank Note

Section 4.02. Deposit of Proceeds of Conunercial Paper Notes. Immediately
upon receipt thereof, the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU, if instmcted by an Authorized City
Representative, first deposit the proceeds of the sale of Commercial Paper Notes imo the
applicable Commercial Paper Bank Payment Account in ari amoum equal to the unreimbursed
Advances made by the Bank to pay principal of or imerest on Commercial Paper Notes of such
Series. Proceeds so deposited shaU be held separate and apanfiomaU otherfimdsand accounts
and shaU not commingled with any other moneys. Tbe remaining proceeds shaU be transfi:ired
to die Tnistee for deposit in the Proceeds Fund.
Section 4.03. AppUcation of Moneys in the Proceeds Fund, (a) Moneys in the
Proceeds Fund attributable to each Series shall be appfied to the payment of the costs of the
Project or Purpose for such Series, Costs of Issuance of such Series and administrative costs of
the commercial paper program. An Authorized City Represenurive mayfromtime to time amend
the list of Projects or Purposes in a Tax Certificate; provided, however, that the Authorized City
Representative shall not amend the list of Projects or Puiposes in such a way as to change the tax
stanis ofthe related Series of Commercial Paper Notes. An Authorized City Represetiiative is
hereby authorized to execute one or more supplemental Tax Certificates in connection with any
Series of Notes.
(b)
The Trustee shall make payments or disbursementsfromthe Proceeds Fund
upon receipt from the City of a written requisition, in substantially the form attached aslExhibit

 83114

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

C to this Indenture, executed by an Authorized Cify Representative, which requisition shaU state,
with respect to each amount requested thereby, (i) the account, if any, within the Proceeds Fund
from which such amoimt is to be paid, (u) the number of the requisitionfromsuch accoum, (iii)
the aihoum to be paid, the name of the Person (which may include paymem to the City) to which
the payment is to be made and the manner in which.the payment is to made, (iv) that the amoimt
to be paid represents a cost of a qualifying Projea or Puipose as described in a Tax Certificate
of the City, or is.related to a Series B Project, as appficable, and (v) unless related to a Series B
Project, that tlie amounts requisitioned wiU be expended only in accordance with and subject to
the limitations set fortb in the applicable Tax Certificate.
(c)
Moneys held in the Proceeds Fund shaU be invested andreinvestedby the
Tmstee in Permitted Investments as directed by an Authorized Cify Representative.
(d)
Any amounts remaining in the Proceeds Account for a Series of Notes at
the completion of the Project or Purpose for such Series shaU be transfeired to the related Bank
Payment Accoum and used torepayAdvances to the extent that a portion of such Advances is
aUocable to the imerest on the Notes of such Series.
Section 4.04. Deposits Into and Uses of .the Commercial Paper Debt Serrice
Account and the Bank Payment Account, (a) At or before 3:15 p.m., Clucago. Dlinois time,
on the maturify date of each Note, the Cify may deposit or cause to be deposited,frommoneys
of the Cify legally avaUable therefor, including, bm not limited to. Note Proceeds, an amoum
sufficient, together with other avaUable moneys, if any. with the Issuing and Paying Agem for
deposit imo therelatedSeries Bank Paymem Account, toreimbursethe Bank in an amount equal
to the principal of and interest due on aU Notes maturing on such maturify date; provided that the
City shaU be required to deposit into a segregated account (hereinafter designated the "ShortfaU
Accoum") such amountsfromsuch source, at such time, to the extent Advances are not made
under the Letter of Credit to pay the principal of and imerest on the Notes maturing on such date.
The "ShortfaU Accoimt" is hereby created as a separate trust fund and shaU be held.by the Trustee
separate and apartfromall other moneys, fimds and accounts held by the. Issuing and Paying
Agem. Amounts deposited ia.the Shortfall Account, if any, shaU be applied to pay any deficiency
in Advances to pay the fiiU amount of the principal of and interest on all Notes maturing on such
maturity date. The Issuing and Paying .Agent .shall notify the City on or before 4:00 p.m..
Chicago, Ulinois time, on the Business Day prior to such maturity date, of the total amoum due
on such maturity date. Not later than 3:00 p.m., Chicago, niinois time, on the maturity date of
each Note, either the Issuing and Paying Agent or a Designated Representative shaU notify the
Bank if the City has not deposited or caused to be deposited, with the Issuing and Paying Agent
for deposit into dierelatedSeries Bank Payment Accoum, an amount equal to the Advance drawn
on such date.
(b)
Each Advance received by the Issuing and Paying Agent as a result of a
drawing under the Letter of Credit to pay the principal of and interest on maturing Notes shall be
deposited into the Debt Service Account, and shall be used to pay the principal of and interest on
such maturing Notes upon the proper presentment thereof. Each Advance so deposited shall be
held separate and apart from aU other funds, accounts and subaccounts, and shall not commingled

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83115

with any other moneys. At or before 2:00 pjn., Chicago, Illinois time, on each maturify date,
tbe Issuing and Paying Agent shaU notify the Cify whether or not the Issuing and Paying Agent
has received a sufficient Advance or Advances to pay aU such mamring principal and interest.
(c)
Amounts depositedfaitothe Series A Bank Paymem Accoum shaU be used,
on each day that an Advance withrespectto Series A Notes is received by the Issuing and Paying
Agent and deposited into the Series A Debt Service Accoum, by tbe Issuing and Paying Agem to
reimburse the Bank for the amount of such Advance; provided, however, that, if, on any maturify
date oftiicSeries A Notes, the Advances paid under the Letter of Credit with respect to Series
A Notes are not suffidem to pay the ftiU amount of the principal of and interest due on such Series
A Notes on such date, amounts in the Series A Bank Paymem Accoum sbaU be used to make the
balance of such paymem.
(d)
Amounts deposited into the Series B Bank Payment Accoum shaU be used,
on each day that an Advance with respect to Series B Notes is received by the Issiung and Paying
^em and deposited imo the Series B Debt Service Accoum, by the Issuing and Paying Agent to
reimburse the Bank for tbe amount of such Advance; provided, however, that, if, on any maturify
date of the Series B Notes, the Advances paid under the Letter of Credit withrespertto Series B
Notes are not suffjciem to pay the full amoum of the principal of and imerest due on such Series
B Notes on such date, amounts in the Series B Bank Paymem Accoum shall be used to make the
balance of such paymem.
(e)
Moneys in the Debt Service Accoum shaU not be invested. Moneys in any
Bank Paymem Account shaU be invested andreinvestedby the Issuing and Paying Agent in
Permitted Investmenis as directed by an Authorized City Representative, or,- m the absence of
such direction, m Permitted Investments described m subparagraph (9) of the definition thereof.
Section 4.05. Drawings Under the Letter of Credit. On or before each maturify
date for any Commercial Paper Note, the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU present all required
drawing certificates and accompanying documentation, if required, to the Bank and demand
payment be made undei the Letter of Credit on such maturity date at such time and in such
amount not in excess of the Stated Amount so as to be timely and sufficient to pay tbe entire
amount of principal and inicrest becoming due on aU Commercial Paper Notes on such date. No
drawings undei the Letter of Credit shall be used to pay principal of and interest due on Bank
Notes or any Notes which are owned or held by or for the account of the City. Without limiting
any other liability of the Issuing and Paying Agem for this or any other action, faUure of the
Issuing and Paying Agent to perform the duties and obligations set forth in this covenant shaU
constimte negligence on its pan.

 83116

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

ARTICLE V,
Tbe Bank Notes ^
Sedion 5.01. -Authorization and Terms of Bank Notes, (a) The Cify hereby
authorizes the issuance of one or more of its Bank Notes, subject to the provisions of this Artide.
Each Bank Note shaU be issued to the Bank and designated the "Cify of Chicago Bank Note (2002
Commercial Paper Program) (insert name of Bank)." The iiutial Bank Note shall be issued by
the Qfy on tbe Closing Date in order to evidence the obligations of the Cify toreimbursethe Bank
for drawings under the Letter of Credit, including unreimbursed Advances, together with interest
thereon at the Bank Rate. Subsequent Bank Notes, substantiaUy in the form of Exhibit B, may
be issued upon defivety of a substimte Letter of Credit as provided in Article X hereol.
(b)
The Bank Notes shaU be dated the date of issuance thereof; shaU be issued
inregisteredform only; shaU be issued in any denomination; and sbaU bear imerest at the Bank
Rate (calculated ontiiebasis of a year consisting of 365/366 days and actual number of days
elapsed); provided, howeyer. that the imerestrateon the Bank Notes shaU never exceed eighteen
percent (18%) per annum, subject to the appUcable provisions of the Reimbursemem Agreemem.
Bank Notes shaU bear interest from theirrespectivedates, payable in accordance with the
Reimbursemem Agreemem. Principal of Bank Notes shaU be payable in accordance with the
Reimbursement Agreemem. The final manirify of the Bank Notes shaU be no later than such date
as may be provided for in the Reimbursement Agreement.
(c)
The maturify date and other terms of each Bank Note, as long as not
inconsistent with the terms of this Indenture. sbaU be as set forth in the certificate of an
Authorized City Representative directing the issuance of such Bank Note.
(d)
Each Bank Note shaU be subject to optional prepaymem prior to maturify
in accordance with, and upon notice as provided by, the Reimbursement Agreement.
Section 5.02. Nature of Obligations. The Bank Notes are direct and general
obligations of the City as described in Section 3.01 hereof.
Section 5.03. Form of Bank Notes. The definitive Bank Notes shall be
substantially in the form set forth in Exhibit B attached hereto and made a part hereof, with such
appropriate variations, omissions and insertions as sbaU be necessary or appropriate in order to
accomplish the puipose of this Indenture. The Bank Notes may have endorsed thereon such
legends or text as may be necessary or appropriate to conform to any applicable mles and
regulations of any governmental authority or any usage or requirement of law or regulation with
respect thereto.
Section 5.04. No Transfer of Bauk Notes. To the extent permined by applicable
law, the Bank Notes shall be non-negotiable and non-transferable.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83117

Section 5.05. Deposits in Bank Note Account. On the Busmess Day before each
Bank Note Payinent Date, an Authoiized City Representative shaU allocate and transfer to the
Issuing and Paying Agent for deposit in the Bank Note Account amountsfiomavaUable moneys,
as follows:
. (a) . . .an amount equal to the aggregate amoum of interest due and payable on
such Bank Note Paymem Date on aU Bank Notes outstanding; and
(b)
an amoum equal to the aggregate principal amount due and payable on such
Bank Note Paymem Date on the outstanding Bank Notes;
Amounts in the Bank Note Account shall be invested by the Issuing and Paying
Agent in Pennitted Investments as directed in writing by an Authorized City Representative, or,
in the absence of directionfroman Authorized Cify Representative, the Issuing and Paying Agem
shall selert Permitted Investments described in subparagraph (9) of the definition thereof. The
Bank Notes shall not be payablefiomthe proceeds of the Letter of Credit drawing.
ARTICLE VICovenants •
Section 6.01. Tax Covenants. In order to inaintnin the exclusionfromgross
income ofthe interest on the Series A Notes for Federal income tax purposes, the Cify covenants
to comply with each appUcable requirement of Section 103 and Sections 141 through 150 of the
Code, and further agrees to comply with the covenants contained in, and the instmctions given
pursuant to, each Tax Certificate, which by thisreferenceis mcorporated herein, as a source of
guidance for compliance with such provisions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Indenture or any Supplemental
Indenmre to the contrary, upon the City's faUure to observe, or refiisal to comply with the
foregoing covenant, no peison other than tbe holders of any Series A Notes shall be entitied to
exercise anyrightor remedy provided to the holders of any Series A Notes under this Indenture
or any Supplemental Indenture on the basis of the City's failure to observe, or refiisal to comply,
with such covenant.
Section 6.02. Taxable Notes. Notwithstanding anything in this Indenture to the
contraty, in the event an Authorized City Representative designates a Scries as obligations not
described in Section 103(a) of the Code, including the Series B Notes issued hereunder, the
provisions of Section 6.01 shall not apply to such Series.
Section 6.03. Letter of Credit. The City hereby covenants to maintain in effea
a Letter of Credit meeting the requirements hereof at all times that Commercial Paper Notes arc
Outstanding heieunder.

 83118

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

ARTICLE v n .
Issuing and Paying Agent; Dcalerr
Section 7.01. Appointment of Ts.stiing and Paying Agent. The Cify hereby
appoints
, as Issuing and Paykig Agem, Authenticating Agem
and Registrar, and agrees that, at or prior to the time of issuance of the initial Commercial Paper
Notes, the Cify wiU enter into the Issuing and Paying Agent Agieemem and will at aU times, prior
to the Termination Date, maintain in effect an Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement, pursuam to
which the Issuing and Paying Agem wiU agree to hold funds and fiUfiU the duties" and obUgations
of the Issuing and Paying Agem. as provided for in this Indenture.
The Issuing and Paymg Agent. Autbenticatihg Agem, and Registrar shaU (i)
designate to the Tmstee its principal office, and (ii) signify its acceptance of the duties and
obligations imposed upon it hereunder and under any Supplemental Indenture by written
instniment of acceptance delivered to the Cify and the Tnistee.
Section 7.02. Reports and Records. The Issuing and Paying Agem sbaU at aU times keep or cause to be kept proper records in which coiiq>lete and accurate entries shall be
made of aU transactions made by itrelatingto the proceeds of the Notes and any funds and
accounts established and maimained by the Issuing and Paying Agent pursuant to this Indenture
and any Supplemental Indenhire. Sucb records shaU be avaUable for inspection by tbe Cify on
each Business Day upon reasonable notice dming reasonable business hours, and by any Owner
or its agent or representative duly authorized in writing at reasonable hours and under reasonable
circumstances. The Issuing and Paying Agent shall not be required to maintain records with
respect to transactions made by the Trustee or an Authorized City Representative, or with respect
to funds established and maintained by the Trustee.
(a)
The Issuing and Paying Agent shall provide to the Authorized City
Representative each month a report of tbe amounts deposited in each fund and accoum held
by it under this Indenture, and the amount disbursedfromsuch fimds and accounts, the
earnings thereon, the ending balance in each of such funds and accounts, the investments
in each such fund and account, and the yield on each investment calculated in accordance
with the directions of an Authorized City Representative. Such report shall also include
such informationregardingthe issuance of Commercial Paper Notes during the subject
month as the Cify shall request.
(b)
The Issuing and Paying Agent shall maintain such books, records and
accounts as may be necessary to evidence the obligations of the City resultingfromthe
Commercial Paper Notes, the principal amounts owing thereunder, the maturity schedule
therefor, the resfiecuveratesof interest thereon, and the principal and interest paid from
time to time thereunder. As long as the Commercial Paper Notes are in book-entry form,
in any legal action or proceeding with respect to a master note, the entries made in such
books, records or accounts shall be, absent manifest error, conclusive evidence of the
existence and the amounts of the obligations of the City therein recorded.

 5/ 1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83119

Section 7.03. Resignation and Replacement of Issuing and Paying Agent. The
Issuing and Paying Agem may at any time resign and be discharged of tbe duties and obfigations
created by this Indenture by giving at least 60 days' written notice to the Bank, the Tmstee and
the Cify. The Issuing and Paying Agent noay be removed, with the written consent of the Bank,
which consent shaU not be unreasonably withheld, at any time by an instrumem signed by an
Authoiized Cify Representative and fUed with the Issuing and Paying Agent, the Bank and the
Tmstee. No such resignation or removal shaU become effective, however, until a successor
Issuing and Paying Agem has been selected and assumed the duties of the Issuing and Paying
Agem hereunder and the Letter of Credit has been transferred to the successor Issuing and Paying
Agem in accordance with its teims.
In the event of the resignation orremovalof the Issuing and Paying Agem, the
Issuing and Paying Agem shaU pay over, assign and deliver any moneys held by it in such
capacify to its successor. The Issuing and Paying Agem shaU make anyrepresentationsand
warranties to the City as may be reasonablyrequestedby the City in connection with any such
assignment.
The Issuing and Paying Agem shaU, at aU times, be a bank or tmst company having
an office in Chicago. Illinois, and shaU at aU times be a coiporation or a national banking
association organized and doing business under the laws of the United States of America or of any
state widi a combined capital and surplus of at least $50,000,000 and authorized under such laws
to exercise coiporate tmst powers and be subjert to supervision or examination by Federal of state
authorify. If such corporation or national banking association publishes reports of condition at
least anmialfy puisuam to law or the requirements of such autborify, then for the puiposes of this
Section, the combined capital and suiplus of such corporation or national banking association shaU
be deemed to be its combined capital and suiplus as set forth in its most recent report of condition
so published.
Any corporation or national banking association imo which any Issuing and Paying
Agent may be.merged or convened or with which it may be.consolidated, or any coiporation or
national banking assodation resultingfromany merger, consolidation or conversion to which any
Issuing and Paying Agent shaU be a party, or any corporation or national banking association
succeeding to the.coiporate trust business of any Issuing and Paying Agent shaU be the successor
of the Issuing and Paying Agent if such successor coiporation or national banking association is
otherwise eligible under this Section, without the execution or fUing of any document or further
act on the part ofthe Issuing and Paying Agent or such successor corporation or national banking
association.
Section 7.04. Dealer. The City hereby appoints
.
as Dealer, and agrees that, at or prior to the time of issuance of the initial Commercial Paper
Notes, the City will enter into a Dealer Agreement with Dealer. The City covenants that at all
times prior to the Termination Date, it will maintain in effect one or more Dealer Agreements,
pursuant to which each Dealer will agree to fulfill the duties and obfigations of the Dealer as set
forth in this Indenture and its Dealer Agreement.

 83120

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

ARTICLE v m *
Trustee.
Section 8.01 i Acceptance of Trusts. The Tnistee hereby accepts and agrees to
execute tbe trusts specificaUy imposed upon it by this Indenmre, but only upon the additional
terms set fonh in this Article, to aU of which the City agrees and the respective holders agree by
their acceptance of deliveiy of any of the Notes.
Section 8.02. Duties of Trustee, (a) If an Evem of De&ult has occurred and is
continuing, the Tmstee shall exercise itsrightsand powers and use the same degree of care and
skiU in their exercise as a pmdem peison would exercise or use under the circumstances in tbe
condurt of such person's own affairs.
(b)
The Tmstee shaU perfoim the diities set forth in this Indenture; no implied
duties or obligations sbaU be read into this Indenture against the Trustee.
(c)
Except during the continuance of an Event of Default, in the absence of any
negligence on its pan or any knowledge to the contrary, the Trustee may conclusivelyrely,as to
the truth of the statements and the correcmess of the opinions expressed, upon certificates or
opinions furnished to the Tmstec and conforming to the requirements of this Indenmre. The
Trustee shaU examine the certificates and opinions, however, to deteimine whether they conform
to therequirementsof this Indenture.
(d)
The Tmstee may not be relieved fmm liabUity for its own negligent action,
its own negfigent faUure to act or its own wUlfiil misconduct, except that: (1) the Tnistee sbaU
not be liable for any error of judgment made in good faith by a Responsible Officer unless the
Tnistee was negUgem in ascertaining the pertinent facts; and (2) the Trustee shall not be liable
widi respect to any action it takes or omits to take in good faidi in accordance with a direction
received by itfromholders or the City in the manner provided in this Indenture.(e)
The Trustee shaU not, by any provision of thi<: Indenture, be required to
expend or risk its own fimds or otherwise incur any financial liabUity in the performance of any
of its duties hereunder, or in the exercise of any of itsrightsor powers, if it shaU have reasonable
grounds for believing that repayment of such funds or adequate indemnity against such risk or
liabUity is not reasonably assured to it. The Trustee shall be under no obligation to exercise any
of the rights or powers vested in it by this Indenture at the request or direction of any of the
holders of die Notes, unless such holders shall have offered to the Trustee reasonable security or
indemnity against the costs, expenses and liabUities which might be incurred by it to comply with
suchrequestor direction.
(0
Evety provision of this Indenture that in any way relates to the Tnistee is
subject to this Secrion.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83121

(g)
The Trustee shaU not be deemed to have knowledge of an Event of Default
unless it has received actual knowledge at the corporate tmst office of the Tmstee located in
Chicago, Ulinois.
Section 8.03. Rights of Trustee. Subjert to the foregoing Section, the Trustee
sbaU be protected and shaU incur no liabUify in acting or proceeding in good faith upon any
resolution, notice, telegram, request, consem, waiver, certificate, statement, affidavit, voucher,
bond, requisition or other paper or document which it shall in good faith beUeve to be genuine
and to have been passed or signed by the proper person or to have been prepared and fiimished
pursuant to any of the provisions of this Indenture, and the Trustee shaU be under no dufy to make
investigation or .inquiiy as to any statements contained or mattersreferredto in any such
instrumem, but may accept andrelyupon the same as conclusive evidence of the tmtb and
accuracy of such statements.
The Tmstee may consult with counsel withregardto legal questions, and the
opinion of such counsel shaU be Ml and complete authorization and protection in respect of any
action taken or suffered by the Tnistee heieunder in good faith in accordance therewith.
Section 8.04. Individual Rights of Trustee. The Tnistee in its individual or any
other capacify may become the owner or pledgee of Notes, and may otherwise deal with the City
with the samerightsit would have if it were not Trustee. The Issuing and Paying Agent or any
other agem may do the same with like rights.
Section 8.05. Trustee's Disclaimer. The Trustee shall not be accountable for the
City's use of the proceedsfromthe Notes paid to the City and it shaU not beresponsiblefor any
statement in the Notes.
Secti'oD8.06. Notice of Defaults. If (i) an Event of Default has occurred, or (ii)
an event has occurred which with the giving of notice and/or the lapse oftimewould be an Event
of Default, and. with respect to such events for which notice to the Cify is required before such
events will become Events of Default, such notice has been given, then the Tnistee shall
prompdy, afrer obtaining actual notice of such Event of Default or event described in clause (u)
above, give notice thereof to each holder and to the Issuing and Paying Agent. Except in the case
of a default m payment on any Notes, the Trustee may withhold the notice if and as long as a
committee of its Responsible Officers in good faith detennines that withholding the notice is in
the interests of the holders.
Section 8.07. Compensation of Trustee. Foi acting imder this Indenmre, the
Tnistee shall be entitled to payment of fees for its services andreimbursememof advances,
counsel fees and other expensesreasonablyand necessarily made or incurred by the Tmstee in
connection with its services under this Indenture and the City agrees to pay such amounts to the
Tmstee. The Cify agrees to indemnify and hold the Tmstee harmless against costs, claims,
expenses and liabilities not arising fiom the Trustee's own negligence, misconduct or breach of
duty, which the Tnistee may incur in the exercise and performance of its rights and obligations

 83122

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL -CHICAGO

^/1/2001

hereunder. Such obfigation shaU survive the discharge of this Indenture or the resignation or
removal of the Tmstee.
Section 8.08. EligibiUfy ofTrustee. This Indenture shaU always have a Trustee
that is a trust company or a bank having the powers of a tmst company and is organized and doing
business under the laws of the United States or any state or the District of Columbia, is authorized
to condurt trust business under the laws of the State, is subject to supervision or examination by
United States, state or District of Columbia authorify, maintains a corporate trust office in
Chicago, Illinois, and has a combined capital and surplus of at least $50,(X)0,000 as'set forth in
its most recent published annualreportof condition.
Section 8.09. Replacement of Trustee. The Tmstee may resign by notifying the
Cify in writing at least 60 days prior to the proposed effective date of the resignation. The holders
of a majorify in Outstanding prindpal amoum of the Notes mayremovetbe Tmstee by notifying
the removed Tmstee and may appoim a successor Trustee with the Cify's consem. The City may
remove the Trustee, by notice in writing delivered to tbe Tmstee 60 days prior to the proposed
removal date; provided, however, that the City shaU have norighttoremovethe Trustee during
any time when an Event of Default has occuned and is continuing, or when an evem has occurred
and is continuing, or condition exists, which with the giving of notice or the passage of time or
both would be an Evem of Default.
Noresignationor removal of the Tmstee under this Section shaU be effective untU
a new Trustee has taken office and defivered a written acceptance of its appointmem to the retiring
Trustee and to the Cify. Immediately thereafter, theretiringTmstee shall transfer aU property
held by it as Trustee to the successor Trustee, the resignation or removal of the retiring Trustee
shaU then (but only then) become effective and the successor Tmstee shaU have all the rights,
powers and duties of the Tnistee under this Indenture.
If tbe Tmstee resigns or is removed, or for any reason is unable or unwilling to
perform its duties under this Indenture, the Cify sbaU promptiy appoint a successor Trustee.
If a Tnistee is not performing its duties hereunder and a successor Trustee does not
take office within 60 days after theretiringTrustee delivers notice of resignation or the Cify
delivers notice ofremoval,theretiringTmstee, the City or the holders of a majorify in aggregate
principal amount of the outstanding Notes may petition any court of competem jurisdiction for the
appointment of a successor Tnistee.
ScrtionS.lO. Successor Trustee or Agent by Merger. If the Tmstee consofidates
with, merges or converts into, or transfers all or substantially aU its assets (or, in the case of a
bank or tmst company, its corporate trust assets) to another corporation which meets the
quaUficaiions set forth in this Indenture, theresulting,surviving or transferee corporation, without
any hmher art, shall be the successor Tnistee.
Section 8.11. Other Agents. The City, or the Tmstee with the consent of the
City, mayfromtime to time appoint other agents as may be appropriate al the time to perform

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83123

duties and obligations under this Indenture or under a Supplemental Indenture all as provided by
Supplemental Indenture or resolution or ordinance of the City.
Section 8.12. Several Capacities. Anything in this Indenture to the contraty
notwithstanding, with the written consent of the City, the same entity may serve hereunder as the
Tmstee and any other agent as appointed to perform duties or obligations under this Indenture,
under a Supplemental Indenhire or an escrow agreement, or in any combination of such capadties,
to the extem permitted by law.
,
•
. ..
Section 8.13. Accounting Records and Reports of tbe Trustee. Tbe Tnistee
sbaU at aUtimeskeep, or cause tp be kept, proper records in which coiiq>lete and accurate entries
shaU be made of aU transactions made by it relating to the Note- Proceeds and aUfimdsand
accounts estabfished pursuant to this Indenture. Such records shall be avaUable for inspection by
the Cify on each Business Day during reasonable business houis and by any holder, or his agem
or representative duly authorized ia writing, at reasonable hours and under reasonable
circumstances.
(a)
The Trastee shaU provide to the City each month a report of any Note
Proceeds received during that month, if any, and the amounts deposited imo eachfimdand
accoum held by it under this Indenture and the amoum disbursed from such funds and
accounts, the earnings thereon^ the ending balance in each of such fiinds and accounts and
the investments of each such fund and account.
(b)
The Trustee shaU annually, within a reasonable period after the end of the
Fiscal Year, fiimish to the City a statement (which need not be audited) covering receq>ts,
disbursements, allocation and application of Note Proceeds, and any other moneys in any
of the fimds and accounts held by it established puisuant to this Indenmre or any
Supplemental Indenture for the preceding year.
ARTICLE I X .
Events of Default and Remedies of Noteholders Section 9.01. Events of Default. Each of the following events shall constimte and
is referted to in this Indenture as an "Event of Default":
(a)
a failure to pay the principal of any Commercial Paper Note when the same
shall become due and payable;
(b)
a faUure to pay any installment of interest on any Commercial Paper Note
when such interest shall become due and payable;
(c)
a failure by the City to observe and perform any covenant, condition,
agreement or provision (other than as specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Section)

 83124

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

contained in the Coinmercial Paper Notes or in this Indenture on die part'of the Cify to be
observed or performed, which failure shall continue for a period of 60 days after written
notice, specifying such faUure and lequesting that it beremedied,shall have been given
to the City by the Tmstee. which notice may be given at tbe discretion of the Tmstee and
shall be given at the written request of holders of 25% or more in aggregate principal
amoum of the Commercial Paper Notes then Outstanding (provided that in the case of a
default with respect to "the tax covenants in Section 6:01, the Series B Notes shaU be
deemed to be not Outstanding), unless the Tmstee, or the Tmstee and holders of
Commercial Paper Notes in an amoum not less than the Outstanding principal amount of
Commercial Paper Notes the holders of which requested such notice, shaU agree in writing
to an extension of such period prior to its expiration; provided, however, that the Trustee,
or the Tmstee and the holders of such principal amount of Commercial Paper Notes, shaU
be deemed to have agreed to an extension of such period if such failure can be remedied,
and collective action is initiated by the City within such period and is being dUigenUy
pursued;
(d)
bankmptcy. reorganization, arrangement, insolvency or Uquidation
proceedings, including, without limitation, proceedings under Chapter 9 or 11 of the
United States Bankmptcy Code (as the same mayfromtimeto time be hereafter amended),
or other proceedings forrefiefunder any Federal or state bankmptcy law or simUar law
for therefiefof debtors are instimted by or against the City, and. if instituted against the
City, said proceedings are consenied to or are not dismissed within 60 days after such
instimtion; or
(e)
the occiurence of any other Event of Default as is provided in a
Supplementallndenture.
If any Event of Default has occurred, but is subsequentiy cured or waived, then
such Event of Default shall no longer constimte an Event of Default hereunder.
Section 9.02. Remedies, (a) Upon the occurrence and cominuance of any Event
of Default, the Trustee in its discretion may, and upon the written direction of the holders of 25 %
or more in aggregate principal amoum of the Commercial Paper Notes then Outstanding (provided
that in the case of a default with respect to the tax covenants in Section 6.01, the Series B Notes
shall be deemed not to be Outstanding) and receipt of indemnity to its satisfaction, shall, in its
own name and as the Trustee of an express trust: (i) by mandamus, or other'suit, action or
proceedfaig at law or in equity, enforce allrightsof the Commercial Paper Noteholders, and
require the City to canry out any agreements with or for the benefit of the Coinmercial Paper
Noteholders and to perform its or their duties under any law to which il is subject and this
Indenmre, provided that any such remedy may be taken only to the extent permitted under the
applicable provisions of this Indenmre; (ii) bring suit upon the Commercial Paper Notes; (iii)
commence an action or suit in equity to require the City to account as if it were the tmstee of an
express trust for the Commercial Paper Noteholders; or (iv) by action or suit in equity enjoin any
acts or things which may be unlawful or in violation of the rights of the Commercial Paper
Noteholders.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83125

(b)
The Trustee shaU be under no obfigation to take any action with respect to
any Evem of Default unless the..Tiustee has actual knowledge of the occurrence of such Event of
Default.
Section 9.03. Restoration to Former Position. In the event that any proceeding
taken by tbe Tnistee to enforce anyrightunder this Indenture shaU have been discontinued or
abandoned for any reason, or shall have been deteimined adveisely to the Tmstee, then the City,
the Tmstee, and the Commercial Paper Noteholders shaU be restored to their former positions and
n'ghts hereunder,respectively,and aUrights,remedies and powers of the Tmstee shaU continue
as though no such proceeding had been taken.
Section 9.04. Commercial Paper. Noteholders'Right To Dirert Proceedings.
Subjert to Section 9.05 heieof. anything else in tbis Indenture to the contraty notwithstandmg, the
Bank and the holdeis of a majority in aggregate principal amoum ofthe Commercial Paper Notes
then Outstanding shaU have therigm,at any tune, by an instrumem in writing executed and
delivered to the Tmstee. to dirert the time, method and place of conducting aU remedial
proceedings available to tbe Trustee under this Indenture to be taken in connection with the
enforcement of the terms of this Indenture or exercising any tmst or power conferred- on the
Tnistee by this Indenture; provided that such direction shaU not be otherwise than in accordance
with the provisions of the law and this Indenture; and provided, fiirther, that with respect to any
such direction by the holders of Commercial Paper Notes there shaU have been provided to the
Tnistee security and indemnity satisfactoty to the Trustee against the costs, expenses and liabilities
to be incurred as a result thereof by the Tmstee. In the event of any conflict in the directions of
the Bank and the holders of Coinmercial Paper Notes, the dircttion of the Bank shaU control.
Section 9.05. Limitation on Right To Institute Proceedings. No Commercial
Paper Noteholder shaU have anyrightto instimte any suit, action or proceeding in equity or at law
for the execution of any tnist or power hereunder, or any odierremedyhereunder or on such
Commercial Paper Note, unless such Commercial Paper Noteholder or Commercial Paper
Noteholders previously shall have given to the Tmstee written notice of an Event of Default as
hereinabove provided, and unless also holders of 25% or more in aggregate principal amoum of
the Coinmercial Paper Notes dien Outstanding shall have made written request of the Trustee so
to do, after therightto instimte such suit, action or proceeding under Section 9.02 hereof shall
have accmed, and shaU have afforded the Tmstee a reasonable opportunity to proceed to instimte
the same in either its or their name, and unless there also shaU have been offered to the Tmstee
security and indemnity saiisfanbry to it against the costs, expenses and liabUities to be incurred
therein or diereby, and the Trustee shall not have complied with such request within a reasonable
time; and such notification, request and offer of indemnify are hereby declared in evety such case,
at the option of the Trustee, to be conditions precedent to the instimtion of such suit, action or
proceeding; it being understood and intended that no one or more of the Commercial Paper
Noteholders shall have anyrightin any manner whatever by his, her or their action to affect,
disturb or prejudice the security of this Indenture, or to enforce anyrighthereunder or under the
Commercial Paper Notes, except in the manner herein provided, and that all suits, actions and
proceedings at law or in equity shall be instituted, had and maintained in the manner herein
provided and for the equal benefit of all Commercial Paper Noteholders.

 83126

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 9.06. No Impairment of Right To Enforce Payment. Notwithstanding
any other provision in this Indenture, therightof any Commercial Paper Noteholder to receive
payment of the principal of and interest on such Noteholder's Commercial Paper Notes, on or
after the respective due dates expressed therein, or to instimte suit for the enforcemem of any such
paymem on or after such respective date, shall not be in^aired or affected without the consent of
such Commercial Paper Noteholder.
Section 9.07. Proceedings by Trustee Without Possession of Commercial Paper
Notes. AUrightsof action under this Indenture or under any of the Commercial Paper Notes
secured hereby which are enforceable by the Tmstee may be enforced by it without the possession
of any of the Commercial Paper Notes, or the prcxiuction thereof at the trial or other prcx^eedlngs
relative thereto, and any such suit, action or proceeding instimted by the Trustee sbaU be brought
in its name for the equal andratablebenefit ofthe Commercial Paper Noteholders, subject to the
provisions of this Indenture.
Section 9.08. No Remedy Exdusive. Noremedy, herein confi^rted upon or
reserved to the Trustee or to Commercial Paper Noteholders is intended to be exclusive of any
other remedy or remedies, and each and evety such remedy shaU be cumulative, and shaU be in
addition to evety other remedy given hereunder, or now or hereafter existing at law or in equity
or by stamte; provided, however, that any conditions set forth herein to tbe taking of any remedy
to enforce the provisions of this Indenture or the Coinmercial Paper Notes shaU also be conditions
to seeking any remedies under any of the foregoing pursuant to this Section.
Section 9.09. No Waiver of Remedies. No delay or omission of the Trustee or
of any Commercial Paper Noteholder to exercise any right or power accming upon any default
shall inpalr any such right or power, or shall be constmed to be a waiver of any such default, or
an acquiescence therein; and evety power and remedy given by this Article to the Tmstee and to
the Commercial Paper Noteholders, respectively, may be exercisedfromtime to time and as often
as may be deemed expediem.
Section 9.10. AppUcation of Moneys. Any moneysreceivedby the Trustee, by
any receiver or by any Commerdal Paper Noteholder pursuant to anyrightgiven or action taken
under the provisions of this Article (which shaU not include moneys provided through the Letters
of Credit, which moneys shaU be restricted to the specific use for which such moneys were
provided), after paymem of the costs and expenses of the proceedings resulting in the coUection
of such moneys and of the expenses, liabifities and advances incurred or made by the Tmstee
(including attorneys' fees), shall be applied as follows:
(a)
first, to the payment to the Persons entided thereto of aU installments of
interest then due on the Commercial Paper Notes and Bank Notes, with interest on overdue
installments, if lawful, at therateper annum home by the Coinmercial Paper Notes or
Bank Notes, as the case may be, in the order of mamrify of the installments of such
interest, and, if the amounl available shaU not be sufficient to pay in ftiU any particular
installment of interest, then to the payment raubly, according to the amounts due on such
installment.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83127

(b)
second, to the paymem to the Persons entitied thereto of the unpaid
principal amount of any of the Coinmercial Paper Notes and Bank Notes which shaU have
become due with imerest on such Commercial Paper Notes or Bank Notes, as appUcable,
at their respective ratefromdie respective dates upon which they became due, and, if Ihe
amount available shall not be sufficiem to pay in fail Commercial Paper Notes due oh any
particular date, together with such imerest, then to the paymentratably,according to tbe
amoum of principal and interest due on sucb date, in each case to the Persons entitled
thereto, without any discrimination or privUege.
(c)
third, to the payment to the Bank of any unpaid Bank Obligations (other
than Bank Notes).
Whenever moneys are to be applied pursuant to the provisions of this Section, such
moneys shaU be appfied at such times, andfromtimeto time, as the Tnistee shaU determine,
having dueregardfor the amoimt of such moneys avaUable for appfication and the likelihood of
additional moneys becoming avaUable for such application m the future. Whenever the Tmstee
shaU apply such fiinds, it shaU fix the date upon which such application is to be made and upon
such date interest on the amounts of principal and interest to be paid on such date shaU cease to
accme. The Tmstee shaU give notice ofthe deposit with it of any such moneys and ofthe fixing
of any such date byfirst-classUnited States maU, postage prepaid, to aU Commercial Paper
Noteholders, and shaU not berequiredto make payment to any Commercial Paper Noteholder
until such Commercial Paper Notes shaU be presented to the Tmstee for appropriate endorsemem,
or for canceUation if fiilly paid.
Section 9.11. SeverabiUfy of Remedies. It is the purpose and intention of this
Article to providerightsandremediesto the Trustee and tbe Commercial Paper Noteholders,
which may be lawfiiUy gramed under the provisions of applicable law, but should anyrightor
remedy herein granted be held to be unlawfid, the Trustee and the Noteholders shaU be entided,
as above set forth, to eveiy otherrightandremedyprovided in this Indenture or by applicable
law.
Section 9.12. Additional Events of Default and Remedies. As long as any
particular Series of Commercial Paper Notes is Outstanding, the remedies as set forth in this
Article may be supplemented with additional remedies as set forth in a Supplemental Indenture.

ARTICLE X.
Miscellaneous '
Section 10.01. Substitute Letter of Credit. Notwithstanding anything herein to
the contrary, the City may obtaLn a substimte Lener of Credii to replace the Lener of Credit then
in effect hereunder as long as said substimte Lener of Credit shall go into effect at least one
Business Day prior to the terminauon of the Lener of Credit then in effect being substituted for;
at notimemay more than one Letter of Credit or substimte Letter of Credii secure the Notes.

 83128

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCII^-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

The Expiration Date with respect to each substimte Letter of Credit shaU be no earlier than the
earlier of (i) six (6) months after its date, or (ii) the Expiration Date set forth in the Letter of
Credit then in effert being substimted for. Each substitute Letter of Credit shaU be in an amount
suffidem to pay all principal and imerest scheduled to be paid on aU Commercial Paper Notes
Outstanding hereunder as of the effective date of such substitute Letter of Credit The foUowing
are fiirther conditions-to the Issuing and Paying Agent's abiUfy toreleasean existing Letter of
Credit and accept a substimte Letter of Credit therefor:
(a)
The Cify shaU defiver written notice of the proposed substimtion to the
Tnistee, the Issuing and Paying Agem, the Bank and the Dealer not less than 45 days prior
to the proposed substimtion date.
(b)
There shaU be deUvered to the City, the Tnistee and the Issuing and Paying
Agent "Written evidence from each Rating Agency then maintaining aratingon the
Commercial Paper Notes secured by the Letter of Credit then in effect being substimted
for that the substimtion of such Letter of Credit wiU not, in and of itself,resultin any
rating then assigned to the Commercial Paper Notes secured thereby being suspended,
reduced or withdrawn.
(c)
The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU deliver written notice to the registered
Owners of the Commercial Paper Notes secured thereby at. least 30 days prior to the
proposed substitution date. If any Outstanding Note secured thereby is in bearer form, the
Tmstee shaU publish notice of the proposed substimtion of such Letter of Credit in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Cify at least 30 days prior to the proposed
substitution date.
(d)
An opinion or opinions of counsel to the successor Bank, satisfactoty in
fonn and substance to each Rating Agency then maintaining aratingon the Commercial
Paper Notes to be secured thereby, shaU be delivered to the effect that the substimte Letter
of Credit is a legal, valid and binding obligation of the issuing Bank and is enforceable
against the Bank in accordance with its terms.
(e)
An opinion of Bond Counsel shaU be defivered to the effect that the
substimtion of the Letter of Credit is authorized hereunder and ("withrespectto Notes other
than taxable Notes) wiU not, in and of itself, adversely affect the exclusionfromgross
income for Federal tax puiposes of interest on the Notes.
Section 10.02. Timeliness of Deposits. Funds shall be deenied transferred for
puiposes of timeliness of leceipt under this Indenture when transfer instmctions for transfer by
Federal reserve wire have been given and a Federal wire number confirmation has been received;
provided that the party to receive such funds shall not be required to take any action required to
be taken hereunder widi respert to such funds until it has conTmnation of actual receipt of such
fimds.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

• 83129

Section 10.03. Waiver of Events of Default. No Event of Default with respect
to the Commercial Paper Notes or the Bank Notes shaU be waived unless after such waiver the
reinstatement piovisions of the affected Lettcis of Credit, if any, shaU be in hiU force and effect.
Section 10.04. Defeasance of Commercial Paper Notes. Commercial Paper
Notes shall not be deemed to have been paid in fiiU unless payment of the principal of and interest
on the Commercial Paper Notes either (a) shaU have been made or caus»i to be made in
accordance with the terms of the Commercial Paper Notes and this Indenture, or (b) shall have
been provided for by irrevocably depositing with the Trustee in trust and irrevocably setting aside
exclusively for such paymem (i) Available Moneys sufficient to make such payment, and/or (u)
noncallable Govermnent Obligations purchased with AvaUable Moneys, maturing as to principal
and imeiest in such amounts and at such times as wiU insure the availabUity of suffidem moneys
to make such paymem."
Section 10.05. Bank to Control Remedies. WhUe the Letter ofCredit is in effect °
notwithstanding anything else herein to the contraty, as long as the Bank is not Insolvem and is
not in default under the Letter of Credit or the Reimbursement Agreemem, noright,power or
remedy withrespectto the Coinmercial Paper Notes secured by such Letter of Credit may be
pursued without the prior written consem of the Bank, and such Bank shaU have therightto direct
the Tnistee to pursue anyright,power or remedy avaUable hereunder with respect to any assets
avaUable hereunder which secure only the Notes secured by such Letter of Credit
Section 10.06. Payments or Actions Occurring on Non-Business Days. If a
payinent date is not a Business Day at the place of paymem, or if any action required hereimder
is required on a date that is not a Business Day. then paymem may be made at that place on the
next Business Day. or such action may be taken on the next Business Day. with the same effert
as if paymem were made, or the action taken, on the stated date, and no interest shall accme for
the intervening period.
Secti'on 10.07. Noti'ces to Rating Agendes. The Au±orized City Representative
shaU provide the Rating Agencies with written notice-of the occiurence of the following events:
(i) changes in the Dealer or the Tmstee, (ii) the appointment of a successor Issuing and Paying
Agent, (iii) amendments to the Indenture, the Issuing and Paying Agem Agreement or the
Reimbursement Agreement, (iv) the expiration, termination, substimtion, extension or
amendment of the Letter of Credit, and (v) Uie defeasance of all Outstanding Coinmercial Papeir
Notes.
Section 10.08. Parties in Interest. Except as herein otherwise specifically
provided, nothing in this Indenture expressed or impfied is intended or shall be consimed to
confer upon any Person other than the City, the Trustee, the Paying Agent, other agentsfromtime
to lime hereunder, the holders of the Notes, and. to the limited extent provided by Section 10.05
of this Indenture, the Bank, anyright,remedyor claim under or by reason of this Indenture, this
Indenture betog intended to be for the sole and exclusive benefit of the City, the Tmstee, the
Paying Agent, such other agents, the holders of the Notes and, to the limiied extent provided in
Section 10.05 of this Indenture, the Bank.

 83130

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

ARTICLE X I ,
Supplemental Indentures,
Section 11.01. Limitations. This Indenture sbaU not be modified .or amended in
any respect subsequent to the first delivety of fiiUy executed and authenticated Notes except as
provided in, and in accordance with and subject to the provisions of, this Article.
Section 11.02.
Supplemental Indentures Not Requiring Consent of
Noteholders. The Cify may, and whUe tbe Letter of Credit is in effect and as long as the Bank
is not Insolvem and has not faUcd to honor a properly presented and confoiming drawing under
the Letter of Credit, with the prior written consem of the Bank,fromtime to tune and at any time,
without the consem of or notice to the Noteholders, execute and deUver Supplemental Indentures
supplementing and/or amending this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture as follows:
(a)
to cure any formal defert, omission, incoiisistency or ambiguify in, or
answer any questions arising under, this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture,
provided that such supplement or amendmem is not materiaUy adverse to the Noteholders;
(b)
to add to the covenants and agreements of the Cify in this Indenture or any
Supplemental Indenture other covenants and agreements, or to surrender anyrightor
powerreservedor conferred upon the Cify, provided that such supplemem or amendment
is not materiaUy adverse to the Noteholders;
(c)
to confirm, asfiirtherassurance, any interest of the Issuing and Paying
Agem in and to thefimdsand accounts held by tbe Tmstee or the Issuuig and Paying
Agent, or in and to any other moneys, securities or fimds of the City provided pursuant
to this Indenture, or to otherwise add additional securify for the Noteholders;
. (d)
to evidence any change made in the terms of any Series of Notes if such
changes are authorized by die Supplemental Indenture at the time the Series of Notes is
issued and such change is made in accordance with the teims of such Supplemental
Indenture;
(e)
to comply with the requirements of the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as
from lime to time amended;
(f)
to modify, alter, amend or supplement this Indenture or any Supplemental
Indenture in any odier respect which is not materially adverse to the Noteholders;
(g)
to qualify the Notes or a Series of Notes for aratingorratingsby Moody's,
S&P and/or Fitch;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83131

(h)
to accommodate the techmcal, operational and stmctural features of Notes
which are issued or are proposed to be issued, including, but not limited to, changes
needed to accommodate other forms of commercial paper, or other forms of indebtedness
which the Cityfromtime to time deems appropriate to incur;
(i)
to comply with the requirements of the Code as are necessaty. in the
opinion of Bond Counsel, to preserve tbe exclusionfitimgross income for Federal income
taxation of the interest on Notes issued as tax-exempt Notes; or
(j)
to take effect omy with respect to Notes issued on or after the effective date
of the Supplemental Indenture accompanied by appropriate disclosure of the amendment
or supplement
Before tbe Cify shaU, puisuant to tlus Section, execute ahy Supplemental Indentuie,
there shaU have been deUvered to the Cify an opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that such
Supplemental Indenture is authoiized or pennitted by this Indenmre and applicable law, complies
with tbeir respective terms, wiU, upon the execution and defivety thereof, be valid and bimfing
upon the Cify in accordance with its teims, and wiU not cause interest on any of the Notes which
is then excludedfromgross income of the recipiem thereof for Federal income tax puiposes to
be included in gross income for Federal income tax puiposes.
Section 11.03. Supplemental Indentures Requiring Consent of Noteholders.
Except for any Supplemental Indenmre entered imo puisuam to Section 11.02 hereof and any
Supplemental Indenture entered imo pursuam to subsection (b) below, subject to the terms and
provisions contained in this Section and not otherwise, the holders of not less than a majorify in
aggregate principal amount of the Notes then Outstanding shall have therightfrom time to time,
and whUe the Letter of Credit is in effert. and. as long as the Bank is not Insolvent and has not
faUed 10 honor a property presented and confoiming drawing under the Letter of Credit, with tbe
prior written consem of the Bank, to consent to and approve the execution by the City of any
Supplemcnial Indenture deemed necessaty or desirable by the City for the puiposes of modifying,
altering, amending, supplementing orrescinding,in any particular, any of the teims or provisions
contained in this Indenmre or in any Supplemental Indenture; provided, however, that, unless
approved in writing by the holders of aU the Notes then Outstanding, or unless such change affects
less than all Series of Notes and subsection (b) below is applicable, nothing herem contained shaU
permit, or be constmed as permitting, (i) an extension in the stated maturity of any Outstanding
Notes, or a change in the amounts or currency of paymem of the principal of or interest on any
Outstanding Notes, or (ii) a reduction in the principal amoum or redemption price of any
Outstanding Notes, or therateof interest thereon; and provided thai nothing herein contained,,
including the provisions of subsection (b) below, shaU, unless approved in writing by the holders
of all the Notes then Outstanding, permit or be constmed as peimitting (iii) except with respect
to additional security which may be provided for a particular Series of Notes, a preference or
priority of any Note oi- Notes over any other Note or Notes withrespectto the security granted
therefor under this Indenture, or (iv) a reduction m the aggregate principal amount of Notes the
consent ofthe Noteholders of which is required for any such Supplemental Indenture. Nothing

 83132

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

herein contained, however, shall be constmed as making necessaty the approval by Noteholders
of the execution of any Supplemental Indenture as authorized in Section 11.02 hereoL
(a)
Subject to the pro-visions of Section 11.02 and 11.03(a) hereof, the City
may,fromtime to time and at any time, execute a Suppleinemal Indenture which amends
the provisions of an earlier Supplemental Indenture. If such Supplemental Indenture is
executed for one of the purposes set forth in Section 11.02 hereof, no notice to or consem
of the Noteholders shall be required. If such Supplemental Indenture contains provisions
which affert therightsand inteiests of less than all Series of Notes Outstanding and
Section 11.02 hereof is not appUcable. then this subsection (b) rather than subsection (a)
above sbaU control, and, subjert to the terms and provisions contained in this Section and
not otherwise, the holders of not less than a majority in aggregate principal amoum of the
Notes of aU Series which are affierted by such changes «:ha11 have therightfromtime to
time to consem to any Supplemental Indenture deemed necessaty or desirable by the City
for the purposes of modifying, altering, amending, supplementing orrescinding,in any
particular, any of the terms or provisions contained in such Supplemental Indenture and
affl-rfing omy the Notes of such Series; provided, however, that, unless approved in
writing by the holders of aU the Notes of all tbe affected Series then Outstanding, nothing
herein contained shaU permit, or be constmed as peimitting, (i) a change ia the scheduled
times, amounts or currency of payinent of the principal of or imerest on any Outstanding
Notes of such Series, or (u) a reduction in the principal amoum or redemption price of any
Outstanding Notes of such Series or therateof imerest thereon. Nothing herein contained,
however, sbaU be constmed as mairing necessaty the approval by Noteholders of tbe
adoption of any Supplemental Indenture as authorized in Section 11.02 hereof.
(b)
If at any time the Cify shaU desire to enter into any Supplemental Indenture
for any of the puiposes of this Section, the City shaU cause notice of the proposed
execution of the Supplemental Indenture to be given by first-class United States maU to the
Bank and aU Noteholders or, under subsection (b) above, the Bank and all Noteholders of
the Series. Such notice shaU briefly set forth the nature of the proposed Supplememal
Indenture and shaU state that a copy thereof is on fUe at the office of the City for
inspection by aU Noteholders, and it shall not be required that the Noteholders approve tlie
final form of such Supplemental Indenture but it shall be sufficient if such Noteholders
approve the substance thereof.
(c)
The City may execute and deliver such Supplemental Indenture in
substantially the form described in such notice, but only if there shall have first been
delivered to the City (i) any required consents, in writing, of the Bank and the
Noteholders, and (ii) the opinion of Bond Counsel required by the last paragraph of
Section 11.02 hereoL
(d)
If Noteholders of not less than the percentage of Notes required by this
Section shaU have consented to and approved the execution and delivery thereof as herein
provided, DO Noteholders shall have any right to object to ihe adoption of such
Supplemental Indenmre, or to object to any of the terms and provisions contained therein

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83133

or the operation thereof, or in any manner to question the propriety of the execution and
defivety thereof, or to enjoin or restrain the City from executing the same or from taking
any action pursuant to the provisions thereof.
Section 11.04. Effert of Supplemental Indenture. Upon execution and delivety
of any Supplememal Indenture pursuam to the provisions of this Article, this Indenture or the
Supplemental Indenture shaU be, and shaU be deemed to be, modified and amended in accordance
therewith, and the respective rights, duties and obligations under this Indenture and the
Supplemental Indenture of the City, the Tmstee, the Issuing and Paying Agem, the Bank and aU
Noteholdeis shaU thereafter be determined, exercised and enforced under this Indenture and the
Supplememal Indenture, i f applicable, subjert in aU respects to sucb modifications and
amendments.
Section 11.05. Supplemental Indentures To Be Part of This Indenture. Any
Supplememal Indenture adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall thereafter
form a part of this Indenmre or the Supplemental Indenture which they supplement or amend, and
aU of the terms and-conditions contained in any such Supplemental Indenture-as to any provision
authorized to be contained thereia shaU be and shaU be deemed to be pan of the' terms and
conditions of this Indenture or the Supplememal Indenture which they supplemem or amend for
any and aU puiposes.
I N WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Indenmre to be
duly executed, aU as of the date first above written.

(SEAL]
CITY OF CHICAGO
ATTEST:
By:

:

By:

City Clerk

Chief Financial Officer

[SEAL]

as Tmstee

ATTEST:

By:
Its:

By:
Its:

(Sub)Exhibits "A", "B" and " C referred to in this Trust Indenture read as foUows:

 83134

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

(Sub)Exhibit "A"..
(To Trust Indenture)

(Form Of Master

Note)

City Of Chicago
Commercial Paper Notes
2002 Program Series
Registered Owner: Cede fit Co.
Principal Sum:

Not to Exceed the Authorized Amount set forth below

The City of Chicago (the "Cify'^, a municipedify and a home, rule unit of local
government duly organized and vaUdly existing under the Constitution and laws o f t h e
State of Illinois, for value received, hereby promises to pay to the registered owner
hereinabove named or registered assigns, the p r i n d p a l amount, together with unpaid
accrued interest thereon, if any, on the maturity date of each obfigation identified on
the records of the City (the "Underlying Records") as being evidenced by this Master
Note, which Underlying Records are maintained by
, as issuing and
paying agent (the "Issuing and Paying Agent") under that certain Issuing and Paying
Agent Agreement, dated as of
1, 2002, between the City and the Issuing
and Paying Agent (the "Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement"). Interest on Series A
Notes shaU be calculated on the basis of actual days elapsed i n a three hundred sixtyfive (365) or three hundred sixty-six (366) day year, as the case may be, at the rate
specified on the Underlying Records. Interest on Series B Notes shaU be calculated on
the basis of a three hundred sixty (360) day year and actual number of days elapsed,
at the rate or yield specified on the Underlying Records. Payments shaU be made from
monies provided by the City and pajnments of drawings under an irrevocable,
transferrable, direct-pay letter of credit of
, by wire transfer to the
registered owner stated hereinabove from the Issuing and Paying Agent without the
necessity of presentation and surrender of this Master Note.
This Master Note is one of a duly authorized issue of Commercial Paper Notes of the
City (hereinafter called the "Notes") of the series and designation indicated on the face
hereof
Said authorized issue of Notes consists of multiple series of varying
denominations, dates, maturities, interest rates and other provisions, as i n the
Indenture hereinafter mentioned provided, aU issued and to be issued pursuant to the
provisions of Section 6(a) of Article VII o f t h e 1970 Constitution o f t h e State of Illinois
and an ordinance (the "C.P. Note Ordinance") duly adopted by the City Council of the
City on
. 2002. This Master Note evidences a series of Notes

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83135

designated as the "City of Chicago, Commercial Paper Note, 2002 Program Series
"
(hereinafter called the "Series Notes"). This Note is issued pursuant to the C.P. Note
Ordinance arid a Trust Indenture, dated as of
1, 2002 (the "Indenture"),
between the Cify and
as trustee (the 'Trustee"), providing
for the issuance ofthe Series A Notes and the Series B Notes i n the aggregate prindpal
amount outstanding at any time not to exceed Two Hundred MiUion DoUars
($200,000,000). The authorized issue of this Series Note is limited to the prindpal
amount of Two Hundred MUfion DoUars ($200,000,000) reduced by the aggregate
prindpal amount of Notes ofthe other series then outstanding under the Indenture and
by the outstanding principal eimount of "Auction Rate Securities" and "Variable Rate
Securities' issued and outstanding under the C.P. Note Ordinance.
Reference is hereby made to the Indenture and the C.P. Note Ordinance for a
description ofthe terms on which the Notes are issued and to be issued, and the rights
o f t h e registered owners of the Notes; and all the terms o f t h e Indenture and the C.P.
Note Ordinance are hereby incorporated herein and made a contract between the Cify
and the registered owner from time to time of this Master Note, Eind to aU the provisions
thereof the registered owner of this Note, by its acceptance hereof, consents and agrees.
Additional series of Notes may be issued on a parity with the Notes of this authorized
series.
This Master Note, together with all other Notes, issued under the Indenture, are direct
and general obUgations ofthe City payable from any funds of the City legaUy avaUable
and annuaUy appropriated for such purpose, including securities and monies held by
the Trustee under the provisions ofthe Indenture. Pursuant to the Indenture, the City
has covenanted and agreed to take aU necessary action to annuaUy appropriate funds
i n a timely manner so as to provide for the punctual payment of the prindpal of,
redemption premium of and interest on aU Notes issued under the Indenture; provided,
however, that i n no event wiU the City be obfigated to levy any separate ad valorem or
other tax in addition to other City taxes or any special ad valorem or other tax
unlimited as to rate or amount to pay such principal, redemption premium or interest.
At the request of the registered owner, the City shaU promptly issue and defiver one
(1) or more separate note certificates evidencing each obligation evidenced by this
Master Note. As of the date any such note certificate or certificates are issued, the
obUgations which are evidenced thereby shaU no longer be evidenced by this Master
Note. This Master Note is transferable by the registered owner hereof, in person or by
attorney duly authorized in writing, at the principal office of the Issuing and Paying
Agent in Chicago, but only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payinent
of the charges provided i n the Indenture, and upon surrender and cauicellation of this
Note. Upon such transfer a new fully registered Note or Notes of the same series
designation, without coupons, of authorized denomination or denominations, for the
same aggregate principal amount wiU be issued to the transferee in exchainge herefor.

 83136

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

The City, the Trustee and the Issuing and Paying Agent may deem and treat the
registered owner hereof as the absolute owner hereof for all purposes, and the City, the
Trustee and the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU not be affected by any notice to the
contraty.
•
The rights and obfigations of the Cify and of the registered owners of the Notes may
be modified or amended at ciny time in the manner, to the extent, and upon the terms
provided in the Indenture and, under certain circumstances as described in the
Indenture, without the consent of the holders ofthe Notes.
It is hereby certified and recited that any and aU acts, conditions and things required
to exist, to happen and to be performed, precedent to and in the incurring of the
indebtedness evidenced by this Master Note, and in the issuing of this Master Note, do
exist, have happened and have been performed in due time, form and manner, and that
this Master Note is not in excess of the amount of Notes permitted to be issued under,
the C.P. Note Ordinance.
This Master Note shaU not be entitied to any benefit under the Indenture, or become
vafid or obfigatory for any purpose, untU the certificate of authentication hereon
endorsed shaU have been signed by the Issuing and Paying Agent. This Master Note
is a vaUd eind binding obfigation of Cify.
In Witness Whereof, The Cify of Chicago, has caused this Master Note to be executed
in its name aind on its behalf by the manued or facsimUe signature ofthe Mayor ofthe
Issuer and the seal ofthe Issuer to be impressed or imprinted hereon and attested by the
manual or facsinule signature ofthe City Clerk ofthe Issuer, aU as of the
day of
.
,2002.

City of Chicago
By:
Mayor
(Seal)
Attest:
By:
City Clerk

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83137

Certificate Of Authentication.
This Master Note is the Master Note described in the within Master Note and the
within-mentioned Indenture.
Date of Authentication:

as Issuing and Paying Agent

Authorized Signature:

(Form Of Assignment)
Assignment.
For Value Received, The undersigned hereby sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Please Print or Typewrite Name and Address) (Please
Insert Social Security or other Taxpayer Identification Number of Assignee:
) the within Master Note and aU rights and title therein, and hereby
irrevocably constitutes and appoints
, attorney, to transfer the
within Master Note on the books kept for registration thereof, w i t h fuU power of
substitution i n the premises.
Dated:
(Registered Owner)
Notice;

The signature(s) to this assignment must correspond with the name as it
appears upon the face of the within Master Note in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

Signature Guaranteed:

 83138

Notice:

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Unless this certificate is presented by an authorized representative of The"
Depository Triist Company, a New York corporation ("D.T.C"), to the City or
its agent for registration of transfer, exchange or payment, and any certificate
.issued is registered i n the name of Cede & Co. or m such other name as is
requested by an authorized representative of D.T.C. (and any payment is
made to Cede & Co. or to such other entity as is requested by an authorized
representative of D.T.C, Any Transfer, Pledge Or Other Use Hereof For Value
Or Otherwise By Or To Any Person Is Wrongful inasmuch as the registered
owner Hereof, Cede & Co., has an interest herein.

(Sub)Exhibit ' B ' .
(To Trust Indenture)

(Form Of Bank

Note)

City Of Chicago
Bank Note
(2002 Commercial Paper Program),
[Name Of Bank).

For Value Received, the Undersigned, City of Chicago (the "Borrower"), hereby
promises to pay to the order of
(the "Bank"), at
, i n the manner and on the dates provided i n thie
hereinafter defined Agreement i n lawful money of the United States of America and i n
immediately available funds, the prindpal amount of
Dollars
($
), or, if less, the aggregate unreimbursed amount o f t h e Advances made
by the Bank pursuant to the Agreement. Terms used herein and not otherwise defined
herein shedl have the meanings assigned to them i n the Reimbursement Agreement
dated as of
.
1, 2002 (the "Agreement") between the Borrower and the
Bank, as from lime to time in effect.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83139

The Borrower further promises to pay interest from the date hereof on the
outstanding principal amount hereof and unpaid interest hereon from time to time at
the rates and times and i n all cases i n accordance with the terms of the Agreement.
The Bemk may endorse its records relating to this Bank Note with appropriate notations
evidencing the Advances and payments of prindpal hereunder as contemplated by the
Agreement.
This Bank Note is issued pursuant to, is entitied to the benefits of, and is subject to,
the provisions of the Agreement and that certain Trust Indenture dated as of
1, 2002 between the Borrower and
, as Trustee. The
prindpal of this Bank Note is subject to prepayment i n whole or i n part i n accordance
with the terms of the Agreement.
The parties hereto, including the undersigned maker and aU guarantors, endorsers
and pledgors that may exist at any time with respect hereto, hereby waive presentment,
demand, notice, protest and all other demands and notices i n connection with the
defiveiy, acceptance, performance and enforcement of this Bank Note and assent to the
extensions o f t h e time of payment or forbearance or other indulgence without notice.
This Bank Note And The ObUgations Of The Borrower Hereunder ShaU For AU
Purposes Be Governed By And Interpreted And Determined In Accordance With The
Laws Of The State Of Ilfinois (Excluding The Laws AppUcable To Conflicts Or Choice Of
Law).
In Witness Whereof, The Borrower has caused this Bank Note to be signed in its
corporate name as an instrument under seal by its duly authorized officer on the date
and i n the yeax first above written.
City of Chicago
ISeal]

By:

Attest:

Name:
Chief Financial Officer

By:
City Clerk

 83140

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(Sub)Exhibit ' C .
(To Trust Indenture)

Fomi Of 2002 Program Series
Proceeds Fund Requisition.
Requisition Number
To:

Re: Requisition of Funds from City of Chicago
Commerdal Paper Notes, 2002 Programs
Scries
Proceeds Funds
The amount requisitioned: $_
Payment to be made to:
Manner i n which payment is to be made:
. The undersigned, an Authorized City Representative within the meaning of the Trust
Indenture, dated as of
1,2002 (the "Indenture"), by and between the City
of Chicago (the "City") and
, as trustee (the "Trustee"), hereby
requisitions the amount set forth above and directs that such amount be paid to the
party set forth above from fiinds held i n the Series
Proceeds F\ind held under the
Indenture, and directs that payment be made i n the manner described above.
For Series A Projects or I*urposes only: The amount to be paid represents a cost of
the Series A Project or Purpose as described i n a Tax Certificate of the City, and the
amounts requisitioned hereby wiU be expended only in accordemce with and subject to
the fimitations set forth in the Tax Certificate, dated
, 2002, emd relating
to the Series A Notes issued under the Indenture.
For Series B Projects or Purposes only: The amount to be paid represents a cost of
a Series B Project or Purpose.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

Dated:

83141

City of Chicago
By:
Authorized City Representative

Exhibit 'B".
(To Ordinance)
Commerdal

Paper Dealer

Agreement

Between
City Of Chicago
And

Dated

, 2002

Relating

To

City Of Chicago
Commercial Paper Notes
2002 Program
Series A (Tax Exempt) And Series B

(Taxable).

This Commerdal Paper Dealer Agreement, dated
"Agreement"), by and between the City of Chicago (the "Issuer") and
(the "C.P. Dealer").

, 2002

(the

For and in consideration of the mutued covenants made herein and other valuable
consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, the parties
hereto agree as follows:

 83142

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/ I /2002

Section 1. Background And Definitions.
(a) The Issuer has authorized the issuance and reissuance from time-to-time of its
Commercial Paper Notes, 2002 Program. Series A (Tax Exempt) and Series B (Taxable)
(the "Notes") in the aggregate principal amount not to exceed Two Hundred MiUion
DoUars ($200,000,000) outstanding at any time.
(b) The Issuer has authorized the issuance ofthe Notes pursuant an ordinance duly
adopted by the Cify CouncU of the Issuer on
, 2002 (the "Ordinance") and
the Trust Indenture dated as of
1, 2002 (the "C.P. Indenture") by and
between the Issuer and
, as Trustee, relating to the Notes; and
the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement, dated as of
1, 2002 (the
"C.P. Paying Agent Agreement") by and between
the Issuer
and
, (the "C.P. Paying Agent"). The Ordinance, the C P . Indenture
and the C P . Paying Agent Agreement being herein sometimes referred to collectively
in this Agreement as the "Authorizing Documents" (the "Authorizing Documents").
(c)
:
(the "FaciUty Issuing Party") has defivered a letter of
credit (the "FacUity^ with respect to the Notes to
(the
"Account Party") i n accortlance with the terms o f t h e Authorizing Document and the
Reimbursement Agreement dated as of
, 2002 between the Issuer and
the FacUify Issuing Party (the "FaciUty Agreement") among the Issuer eind the Facifity
Issuing Party.
(d) The Authorizing Documents provide for the appointment of a commercial paper
dealer to perform certeun duties, including the offering and sale f r o m time-to-time of
the Notes on behalf of the Issuer.
(e)
has agreed to accept the duties and responsibifities of the C.P.
Dealer with respect to the Notes under the Authorizing Documents, and this
Agreement.
(f) Unless otherwise defined herein, aU capitalized terms shaU have the meanings
ascribed to them i n the Authorizing Documents.
Section 2. Appointment Of C.P. Dealer.
(a) Subject to the terms and conditions contained herein, the Issuer hereby appoints
. as the C.P. Dealer for the Notes, and
hereby accepts
such appointment.
(b) The C.P. Deeder shaU act as non-exclusive dealer with respect to the Notes. The
C.P. Dealer acknowledges that the Issuer may enter into agreements with other
dealers in connection with the offering and seUe of the Notes on behalf of the Issuer.

 5/ 1 / 2 0 0 2

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83143

Section 3. Responsibifities Of C.P. Deeder.
(a) Subject to the terms and conditions set forth i n this Agreement, Merrill Lynch
agrees to perform the duties of C.P. Dealer set forth in this Agreement. It is
understood that i n undertaking to perform such duties, and in.the performance
thereof, it is the intention o f t h e parties that the C.P. Dealer wUl act solely as an agent
and not as a principal, except as expressly provided i n this Agreement. The C.P.
Dealer shaU use its best efforts to solicit and eurange sales of the Notes on behalf of
the Issuer at such, rates and maturities as may prevaU from time to time i n the
market. The C.P. Dealer and the Issuer agree that any Notes which the CP. Dealer
may arrange the sale of or which, i n the C.P. Dealer's sole discretion, it may elect to
purchase, wiU be purchased or sold on the terms and conditions and i n the manner
provided i n the Authorizing Documents and this Agreement. Anything herein to the
contraty notwithstanding, to the extent of einy conffict between the provisions hereof
and ofthe Authorizing Documents, the provisions ofthe Authorizing Documents shall
be controlling.
(b) Notwithstanding emything to the contrary, contained herein, the C.P. Dealer:
(i) wiU suspend its efforts "with respect to the offer or sale o f t h e Notes on behalf
of the Issuer upon the receipt of notice of the occurrence of an event of default
under the terms ofthe Notes, the Authorizing Documents, the Facifity or the Fadfity
Agreement; and
(u) may, i n its sole discretion, suspend its efforts with respect to the offer or sale
o f t h e Notes on behalf of the Issuer immediately upon the occurrence of any o f t h e
foUowing events, which suspension wiU continue so long as, i n the C P . Dealer's
reasonable judgment, such event continues to exist as to the Notes;
(1) suspension or material fimitation i n trading i n securities generedly on the
New York Stock Exchange;
(2) a genered moratorium on coinmercial banking activities i n New York is
declared by either federal or New York State authorities;
(3) the engagement by the United States i n hostifities if the effect of such
engagement, in the C.P. Deeder's judgment, meikes it impracticed or inadvisable to
proceed with the sofidtation of offers to purchase the Notes;
(4) legislation shedl be introduced by conunittee, by amendment or otherwise,
Ln, or be enacted by, the House of Representatives or the Senate of the Congress
of the United States or within a legislative body within the State of lUinois having
jurisdicrion over the issuance o f t h e Notes, or a dedsion by a court o f t h e United
States or the State of Illinois shaU be rendered, or a stop order, ruling, regulation
or officied statement by, or on behalf of, the United States Securities and Exchange
Commission or other governmental agency having jurisdiction of the subject

 83144

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

matter shall be made or proposed, to the effect that the offering or sale of
obfigations of the general character of the Notes, as contemplated hereby, is or
would be in violation of any provision of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended
(the "Securities Art") as then i n effect, or the Securities Ebcchange Act of 1934, as
amended (the "Exchange Act") as then in effect, or with the purpose or effect of
otherwise prohibiting the offeririg or sale of obUgations o f t h e general character of
the Notes, or the Notes themselves, as contemplated hereby;
. (5) any event shaU occur or information shedl become known, which, i n the C.P.
Dealer's reasonable opinion, makes untrue, incorrect or misleading i n any
material respect any statement or information contained i n any disclosure
documents provided to the. C.P. Dealer i n connection with the performance of its
duties hereunder, whether pro-vided pursuant to Section 8 hereof or otherwise, or
causes such documents to contain an untrue, incorrect or misleeiding statement
of a materied fact or to omit to state a material fact required to be stated therein
or necessary to make the statements made therein, i n fight of the circumstances
under which they were made, not misleading;
(6) any governmental authority shaU impose, as to the Notes, or obfigations of
the general character o f t h e Notes, any material restrictions'not'now i n force, or
increase materiaUy those now i n force;
(7) ciny of the representations and warranties of the Issuer made hereunder
shaU not have been true and correct on the date made;
(8) the Issuer faUs to observe any of the covenants or agreements made herein;
(9) any ofthe rating agencies then rating the Notes or the Facifity Issuing Party
shaU either (i) downgrade the ratings assigned to either the Notes or the FaciUty
Issuing Party so that such Notes are not "EUgible Notes" as defined under Rule 2a7 o f t h e Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended or (ii) suspend or withdraw
the then current ratings assigned to either the Notes or the Facility Issuing Party;
or
(10) an acmal or imminent default or a moratorium i n respect of payment of einy
United States Treasuty bUls, bonds or notes the effect of which i n the C.P.
Dealer's judgment makes it impractical to market the Notes or to enforce contracts
for the sale of the Notes.

Section 4. Transactions In Notes.
AU tremsactions in Notes between the C.P. Dealer and the Issuer shall be in
accordance with the Authorizing Documents, this Agreement, the Facifity Agreement
and with the customs and practices in the commercial paper market regarding
settlement and delivery formedly adopted in writing from time to time by the New York

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83145

Clearinghouse, to the extent not inconsistent with the Authorizing Documents. As
early as possible, but not later than 11:30 A.M. (Chicago time) on the day on which
any Notes are to be issued, the C.P. Dealer shall notify the Issuer of the proposed final
maturities, prices and interest rates (which interest rates shedl not exceed
%
per annum) at which the C.P. Deeder wiU purchase or cause the purchase of the
Notes, and provide the Issuer with any other information as required for defivety. of
such Notes. Except as described below, the C.P. Dealer shall not be obligated to
purchase or cause the purchase of any Notes unless and u n t i l agreement has been
reached i n each case on the foregoing points and the C.P. Deeder has agreed to such
purchase. Not later than 11:30 A.M. (Chicago time) on the date of each transacti'on,
the C.P. Dealer shaU either (a) confirm each treinsaction made vrith or eirranged by i t
or (b) notify the Issuer and the C.P. Paying Agent of the difference, if emy, between the
amount of maturing Notes and the eimount of Notes which the C.P. Dealer has
arranged to seU or has agreed to purchase. Such confirmation or notification shaU
be given by telephone (or by other telecommunications medium acceptable to the
Issuer) and in writing to the Issuer and the C.P. Paying Agent.

Section 5. Payment For Notes.
The C.P. Dealer shaU pay for the Notes sold by the CP. Deeder (or purchased by the
C.P. Deeiler for its own account) i n immediately aveulable funds by 1:15 P.M. (Chicago
time) on the Business Day such Notes are delivered to the C.P. Dealer (provided that
such Notes are so defivered to the C P . Dealer by 1:15 P.M. (Chicago time) on such
Business Day). AU Notes wiU be sold at par, and wiU be evidenced either by (i) a
global note immobilized with The Depository Trust Compemy of New York or (u) i f not,
wUl be executed i n the memner provided for i n the C.P. Indenture."
Section 6. Designated Representative.
Note transactions with the Issuer, pursuant to Section 4 hereof, sheiU be with any
one of the ofBcers or employees of the Issuer who are designated as a Designated
Representative by certificate signed by the Chief Financial Officer of the Issuer. The
initial written designation of the Designated Representatives is appended hereto as
Appendix A. The Issuer agrees to provide the C.P. Dealer with revised written
designations i n the form of Appendix A when and as required by changes i n the
Designated Representatives. The C.P. Dealer may rely upon such designation unless
and untU otherwise notified in writing by the Issuer.
-Section 7. Resignation And Removal Of C.P. Dealer.
The C.P. Dealer may at any time resign and be discharged of its dudes and
obligations hereunder upon providing the Issuer, the C.P. Trustee and the C.P. Paying
Agent with thirty (30) days prior written notice. The C.P. Dealer rnay be removed at

 83146

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

emy time, at the direction ofthe Issuer upon seven (7) days prior written notice to the
C.P. Dealer and the CP. Trustee and the C.P. Paying Agent. Upon removal or
resignation ofthe C.P. Deeder, the Issuer shaU promptiy cause the C.P. Trustee and
the C.P. Paying Agent to give notice thereof by maU to aU owners of the Notes emd to
any rating agency which has assigned a rating to the Notes. The C.P. Deeder shaU
assign and defiver this Agreement to its successor if requested by the Issuer.

Section 8. Furnishing Of Disclosure Materials.
(a) The Issuer agrees to furnish the C.P. Dealer with as many copies as the C.P.
Dealer may reasonably request of the Offering Memorandum dated
_ ,
2002 ofthe Issuer relating to the Notes (the "Offering Memorandum"), and such other
information with respect to the Issuer and the Notes as the C P . Dealer shedl
reasonably request firom time to time.
(b) The Issuer agrees to cooperate with the C.P. Dealer i n the preparation from
time-to-time of anew Offering Memorandum for the Notes in the eVent the C.P. Dealer
determines that the preparation and distribution of such Offering Memorandum is
necessary or desirable in connection with offering and sede on behalf of the Issuer of
the Notes, and to furnish or to cause to be furnished to the C P . Dealer as many
copies of such new Offering Memorandum as the C.P. Dealer shall request.
(c) If, at any time during the term of this Agreement, any event shaU occur or facts
become known to either party that might affect the correctness or completeness
(under standards applicable to letter of credit backed commercial paper) of-emy
statement of a material fact contained i n the then current Offering Memorandum,
such party shedl promptiy notify the other in writing ofthe circumstemces and deteiUs
of such event.
(d) If emy material adverse changes that may eiffect the offering and sale on behalf
of the Issuer of the Notes or emy fact or drcumstance which may constitute, or with
the passage of time ivUl constitute, an event of default under the Notes, any
Authorizing Document, the Facifity or the FaciUty Agreement, the Issuer wiU promptly
notify the C.P. Deeiler by electronic meems (telephone, facsinule communication or emeul).

Section 9. Fees And Expenses.
For the C.P. Dealer's services under this Agreement, the Issuer will pay the C.P.
Deeiler a fee of
of one percent (
%) per annum of the weighted
average of the principal eimount of Notes outstanding during each three (3) month
period. The Issuer wih pay the fee quarterly in eurears commencing
1, 2002, and each March 1, June 1, September 1 and December 1 thereeifter.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83147

Section 10. Representations, Warranties, Covenants And Agreements Of The
Issuer.
The Issuer, by its acceptance hereof, represents, warrants, covenants, and agrees
vrith the C.P. Dealer that:
(a) i t is a municipality and a home rule unit of local government duly organized
and validly existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois;
(b) i t has fuU power.emd authority to take aU actions required or permitted to be
taken by Uie Issuer by or under, and to perform and observe the covenants and
agreements on its part contained i n , this Agreement and any other instrument or
agreement relating hereto to which the Issuer is a party;
(c) it has, on or before the date hereof, duly taken edl action necessary to be taken
by it prior to such date to authorize (i) the execution, delivery emd performance of
. this Agreement, the Authorizing Documents, the FaciUty Agreement and any other
instrument or agreement to which the Issuer is a party and which has been or "wiU
be executed in connection with the transactions contemplated by the foregoing
documents; and (fi) the carrying out, giving effect to, consummation and
performance of the transactions and obligations contemplated by the foregoing
agreements emd by the current Offering Memorandum;
(d) Offering Memoranda and supplements, amendments and updates to any
thereof, furnished by the Issuer and used by the C.P. Deeder (including
amendments, supplements and replacements thereof), until such time as they shaU
have been subsequentiy amended, updated or replaced, shaU not, to the personed
knowledge and befief of the Chief Finemcial Officer o f t h e Issuer (or the officer who
executes this Agreement on behedf-of the Issuer, if other than the Chief Financial
Officer) or the City. ComptroUer,- contain any untrue, incorrect or misleading
statement of a material fact or omit to state a materied fact required to be stated
therein or necessary to meike the statements made therein, under common industry
standards of disclosure appficable, as of the date of this Agreement, to letter of
credit backed coirimercied paper, i n light of the circumstances under which they
were made, not misleading.
Section 11. Term Of Agreement.
This Agreement shedl become effective on the date hereof and shall continue i n fuU
force and effect until the cessation of the Notes program, subject to the right of
suspension emd termination as provided herein.

 83148

J O U R N A L - C I T Y COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 12. Governing Law.
This Agreement shedl be governed by and construed i n accordemce -with the laws of
the State of lUinois.
Section 13. Deeding. In Notes By The C.P. Dealer; No Obfigation To Purchase
Notes.
Notwithstemding anything to the contrary contained herein or elsewhere:
(a) The C.P. Deeder,. i n its individual capadty, may in good faith buy, seU, own,
hold and deal i n any o f t h e Notes, including, without fimitation, etny Notes offered
and sold by the C.P. Deeder pursuant to this Agreement, and may join i n any action
which any. owner o f t h e Notes may be entitied to take with like effect as if i t did not
act i n any capacity hereunder. The C.P. Dealer, in its individual capacity,-either as
prindpal or agent, may also engage i n or be interested i n any finemcial or other
transaction with the Issuer and may act as depositary, account party, or agent for
any committee or body of owners of the Notes or other obfigations of the Issuer as
freely as if it did not act i n any capacity hereunder.
(b) Nothing i n this Agreement shaU be deemed to constitute the C.P. Dealer an
underwriter ofthe Notes or to obfigate the C.P. Dealer to purchase any Notes for its
own account at emy time.
Section 14. MisceUaneous.
(a) Except as otherwise specificedly provided in this Agreement, all notices, demands
emd formal actions under this Agreement shaU be i n writing emd either (i) handdefivered, (u) sent by electronic means, or (iu) maUed by registered or certified meiU,
r e m m receipt requested, postage prepaid, to

The C.P. Dealer:

Attention;
Telephone:
Telecopy: _

 5/1/2002

The Issuer:

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83149

City of Chicago
Chief Financial Officer
33 North LaSaUe Street, Sixth Floor
Chicago, minois 60602
Attention: Walter K. Knorr
Telephone: (Omitted for printing
purposes)
Telecopy: (Omitted for printing
purposes)
E-mail: (Omitted for printing purposes)

The Issuing and
Paying Agent:

Attention:
Telephone:
Telecopy: .
E-meiU:
Each party hereto may, by notice given under this Agreement to the other parties
described above, designate other addresses to which subsequent notices, requests,
reports or other communications shedl be directed.
(b) This Agreement shedl inure to the benefit of and be binding only upon the parties
hereto and their respective successors emd assigns. The terms "successors" and
"assigns' shaU not include any purchaser of any o f t h e Notes merely because of such
purchase. Neither the Facifity Issuing Party nor emy owner of the Notes or other third
party shedl have any rights or privUeges hereunder.
(c) All of the representations and warranties of the Issuer emd the C.P. Dealer i n this
Agreement shaU remain operative and in fuU force and effect, regeirdless of (i) any
investigation made by or on behaff of the C.P. Dealer or the Issuer, (ii) the offering and
sede of and any payment for any Notes hereunder, or (ui) suspension, termination or
cemceUation of this Agreement.
(d) This Agreement and each provision hereof may be amended, changed, waived;
discharged or terminated only by an instrument Ln writing signed by the parties hereto.
(e) Nothing herein shedl be construed to make any peirty em employee o f t h e other or
to estabfish any fiduciary relationship between the peuUes except as expressly provided
herein.

 83150

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(0 U" einy provision of this Agreement shaU be held or deemed to be or shaU, i n fact,
be invafid, inoperative or unenforceable for any reason, such circumstemces shaU not
have the effect of rendering emy other provision or provisions of this Agreement invalid,
inoperative or unenforceable to any extent whatsoever.
(g) This Agreement may be executed i n severed counterparts, each of which shaU be
regarded as an original and edl of which shall constitute one (1) and the same
document.
In Witness Whereof, The parties hereto have executed this Agreement as of the date
first above written. •
City of Chicago
By:
Name: Walter K. Knorr
Title:

Chief Finanded Officer

By:
Neune:
TiUe:
Appendix "A" referred to in this Commerdal Paper Dealer Agreement reads as follows:

Appendix "A"".
(To Coinmercial Paper Dealer Agreement)

Certificate Of Designated

Representative.

I am the Chief Finemcieil Officer o f t h e City of Chicago (the "Issuer") duly authorized
pursuant to an ordinance adopted by the City Coundl ofthe Issuer on

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83151

2002, as supplemented (the "Authorizing Document") to appoint Designated
Representatives of the Issuer in connection with the issuance, from time to time, by the
Issuer of commerdal paper notes (the "Notes") i n accordance with the Authorizing
Document. I hereby designate the foUowing persons to act on my behalf i n accordance
with the Authorizing Document and specimen signatures of such persons are set forth
beside their names.

Designated Persons

Executed this

•

Spedmen Signature

day o f .

Name: Walter K. Knorr
Titie:

Chief Financial

Exhibit ' C .
(To Ordinance)
Issuing And Paying Agent

Agreement.

This Issuing and Peiying Agent Agreement (this "Agreement") is entered into as of
1, 2002, by and between the City of Chicago (the "City"), a municipal
corporation and home rule unit of local government duly organized and existing under
the laws ofthe State of Illinois, and
(the "Issuing emd
Paying Agent"), a
orgemized emd existing under the laws of the
. All capitalized terms used but not otherwise defmed herein shaU have
the meanings specified in the Commercial Paper Indenture (as hereineifter defined).

 83152

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 1. Appointment.
The City has appointed
and
hereby accepts such
appointment, as the Issuing emd Paying Agent i n connecti'on with the issuance and
payment of up to Two Hundred Milfion DoUar ($200,000,000) aggregate prindped
amount of City of Chicago, Commerdal Paper Notes, 2002 Program, Scries A (Tax
Exempt) and Series B (Taxable) (the "Commercial Paper Notes"), pursuemt to that
certain Trust Indenture, dated as of
1, 2002 (the "Commercial Paper
Indenture"), providing for the issuemce o f t h e Commercial Paper Notes i n such Series.
Such Commerdal Paper Notes are to be initiaUy issued i n book-entry form only and are
to be initiaUy evidenced by Master Note Certificates (the "Master Note Certificates") i n
the form attached to the Commercial Paper Indenture as (Sub)Exhibit A.
The Issuing and Paying Agent agrees to observe and perform its duties and obfigations
hereunder and under the Commercial Paper Indenture. Without limiting the generaUty
of the foregoing, the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU estabfish and maintain the
Commercied Paper Bank Payment Account, the Commerdal Paper Debt Service Account
emd the Bank Note Debt Service Account, and aU required subaccounts therein. The
Issuing and Paying Agent agrees to provide to the City and the Trustee a monthly report
on the first (1") business day of each month, which report shaU set forth such
infonnation regeirding the authentication and issuemce of Commercial Paper Notes
during the prior month, as the City and the Issuing and Paying Agent shall have agreed
upon.
The Issuing and Paying Agent agrees to keep such books emd records, including,
without limitation, a complete record of aU Issuance Requests, as shedl be consistent
with industry practice and as may reasonably be requested by the City, emd to make
such books and records avaUable for inspection by the City, the Trustee emd the Bank,
such books emd records to be avaUable on each business day during reasonable
business hours, and, if so requested, to send copies of such books emd records to the
City, the Trustee or the Bank (at their expense), as applicable.

Section 2. Certificate Agreement.
The Cify acknowledges that (i) the Issuing and Paying Agent has previously entered
into a commercial paper certificate agreement (the "Certificate Agreement") with The
Depository Trust Coinpany, New York, New York ("D.T.C"), and (ii) the continuation i n
effect ofthe Certificate Agreement is a necesseuy prerequisite to the Issuingand Paying
Agent's providing services related to the issuemce emd payment of the Commercial
Paper Notes while the Commercial Paper Notes are in book-entiy only form and D.T.C.
is the Note Depository.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83153

Section 3. Letter Of Representations; Commercial Paper Indenmre; Designated
Representatives.
Prior to the issuance of any Commercial Paper Notes, the City shall defiver to Issuing
and Paying Agent an executed Letter of Representations (the "Letter of
Representations"), a copy of which is attached hereto a (Sub)Exhibit A. The Letter of
Representations, when executed by the City, the Issuing emd Paying Agent and D.T.C,
shall supplement the provisions of this Agreement, and the Cify emd the Issuing and
Paying Agent shall be bound by the provisions of the Letter of Representations, to the
extent not inconsistent -with the provisions o f t h e Commerdal Paper Indenture.
The Cify has deUvered to the Issuing and Paying Agent (a) a certified copy of the
Commercied Paper Indenture, which copy is attached hereto a (Sub)Exhibit B , (b) a
certified original Certificate ofthe Chief Finandal Officer setting forth the Authorized
Cify Representatives (the "Certificate of Chief Finandal Officer"), containing the name,
titie and tme signature of those officers emd employees of the City designated by the
City as an Authorized City Representative, and (c) a certified original of a Certificate of
an Authorized City Representative setting forth the Designated Representatives (the
"Certificate of Authorized City Representative" and, together with the Certificate of Chief
Finanded Officer, the "Certificates"), containing the name, title and true signature of
those officers and employees ofthe City authorized, pursuant to the Commerdal Paper
Indenture, to take acti'on with respect to the Commercial Paper Notes, which
Certificates are attached hereto as (SubjExhibit C. The City agrees to provide the
Issuing and Paying Agent with revised Certificates when there are changes i n the
Authorized City Representatives or Designated Representatives. UntU the Issuing and
Paying Agent receives any subsequent Certificate, the Issuing emd Paying Agent shaU
be entitled to rely on the last Certificate defivered to i t for the purpose of determining
the Authorized City Representatives or Designated Representatives.
Section 4. Master Note Certificate.
Prior to the issuance of any Commercial Piaper Notes, the City shaU defiver to the
Issuingand Paying Agent the Master Note Certificates evidencing the.Commerdeil Paper
Notes. Such Master Note Certificates shedl be duly executed, specify the date of
issuemce, the series of Commercied Paper Notes, emd be registered i n the name of Cede
8s Co., as nominee of D.T.C, all as provided i n the Commercial Paper Indenture.

Section 5. Issuance Requests.
Issuemce Requests shaU be in the form attached hereto as (Sub)Exhibit D. Issuance
Requests may be delivered by a Designated Representative through a electronic
instruction and reporting communication service offered by either the Deeder or the
Issuing and Paying Agent pursuemt to Section 10 hereof, in each case received by the
Issuing and Paying Agent at the address specified in Section 17 hereof prior to 11:30

 83154

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

A.M. (Chicago, lUinois time) on the day on which such Issuance Request is to be
operative.
If the Issuing emd Paying Agent, at its option, acts upon em Issuemce Request received
after 11:30 A.M. (Chicago, Ilfinois time) on the day on which the Issuemce Request is
to be operative, the City understands and agrees that (a) such Issuance Request shaU
be acted upon a best efforts, basis, and (b) the Issuing emd Paying Agent makes no
repr.esentati'on or warranty that the issuance and deUvery of any Commercial Paper
Note pursuant to such Issuance Request shedl be completed prior to the close of
business on such date.
Any Issuance Request given by telephone shaU be confiimed to the Issuing and
Paying Agent i n writing, cither by regular maU (upon receipt), electronic transmission
or facsimUe, by a Designated Representative prior to 1:00 P.M. (Chicago, lUinois time)
i n the form of (Sub)Exhibit D hereto on the day on which such Issuemce Request is to
be operative.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, upon receipt of a notice from the
Bank under the Reimbursement Agreement i n the form described i n Section f9.02) of
the Reimbursement Agreement (a "No-Issuance Notice"), the Issuing and Paying Agent
shaU cease issuing Commercial Paper Notes untU such time as the Bank sheiil have
retracted (by defivery of a "written notice to the Issuing and Paying Agent) such NoIssuemce Notice.

Section 6. Issuance.
The Issuing and Paying Agent's duti'es emd responsibifities i n connection with the
issuance of the Commercial Paper Notes shaU include:
(a) holding the Master Note Certificates i n seifekeeping emd completing or causing
to be completed, each Master Note as to eunount. date, maturity date, interest rate
and interest amount upon receipt of Issuance Requests in accordance vrith the
Commerdal Paper Indenture;
(b) (1) verifying that the aggregate prindpal amount of Commercial Paper Notes
described in each Issuemce Request (together with the interest thereon), plus the
aggregate principal eunount of aU Commercial Paper Notes then outstanding (together
with tlie interest thereon), less the aggregate principal amount of any of the then
Outstanding Commerdal Paper Notes to be retired concurrentiy with the issuance of
the Commerdal Paper Notes described i n the Issuemce Request (including interest
thereon), does not exceed the amount avaUable to be drawn under the Letter ofCredit
securing such Commercied Paper Notes, and (2) assigning to each Issuance Request
received from the City a C.U.S.I.P. Number;

 5/1/2002

. REPORTS OF COMMITTEES •

83155

(c) causing to be delivered a Commerdal Paper Note on behaff of the City upon
receipt of instructions from a Designated Representative of the City, as to the series,
principal amount, registered owner, date of issue, maturity date (which shaU be no
more than two hundred seventy (270) days from the date of issuance thereof) emd
interest rate, (if appficable) byway of data entry tremsfer to the D.T.C. M.M.I. Same
Day Funds Settiement System ("S.D.F.S."), emd to receive from S.D.F.S aconfirmation
receipt that such delivery was effected;
(d) i f instructed by an Authorized City Representative, crediting the proceeds of
sales o f t h e Commerdal Paper Notes to the appropriate subaccount within the Bank
Payment Account estabfished with the Issuing and Paying Agent pursuant to the
Commercial Paper Indenture in an amount equal to the unreimbursed Advances
made by the Bank to pay principal of or interest on the Coinmercial Paper Notes of
such Series;
(e) transferring to the Trustee for deposit iri the Proceeds Fund any remeuning
proceeds of the sale of the Commerdal Paper Notes after the credits pursuant to
subsection (d) above; and
.. ..
(f) holding the eimounts on deposit in the appropriate subaccount of the Bank
Payment Account separate from aU other funds, accounts and subaccounts of the
Issuing and Paying Agent, and applying such amounts i n accordance with the terms
hereof and of the Commerdal Paper Indenture.
The Issuing and Paying Agent shaU have no duty or responsibiUty to make emy
transfer of the proceeds of the sale of the Commercial- Paper Notes, or to advance any
monies or effect any credit with respect to such proceeds or transfers unless and until
the Issuing and Paying Agent has actuaUy received the proceeds of the sale of the
Coinmercial Paper Notes.

Section 7.

Payment.

Tlie Issuing and Paying Agent's duties and responsibifities in connection with the
payment of the Commercial Paper Notes shaU include:
(a) upon presentment at maturity of a Coinmercial Paper Note, paying the principal
of and interest on the Cormncrcied Paper Note to the Owner thereof;
(b) making the necessary and timely drawings under the Letter of Credit in
accordemce with the terms and provisions thereof in order to effectuate the timely
payment of prindped emd interest on the Commercied Paper Notes as the same become
due;

 83156

JOURNAL- CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(c) crediting amounts received fi-om the City for the payment of the principal of or
interest on the Commercial Paper Notes to the related Series subaccount ofthe Bank
Payment Account;
(d) crediting eimounts received fi-om the Bank as a result of drawings undei: the
Letter ofCredit to the Commercial Paper Debt Service Account; and
(e) keeping eimounts on deposit i n the Commercied Paper Debt Service Account
separate fi^m aU other funds, accounts and subaccounts of the Issuing and Paying
Agent, and utilizing such amounts i n accordance with the terms hereof and of the
Commercial Paper Indenture.
In making draws under the Letter of Credit, the Issuing emd Paying Agent shaU be
acting solely on behalf and for the benefit ofthe Owners ofthe Commercial Paper Notes,
and not as agent of the City.
The Issuing and Paying Agent shedl have no obfigation to pay amounts due on the
Commerdal Paper Notes at their maturity other them from funds received by the
Issuing and Paying Agent from, or for the account of, the City, or from draws under the
Letter of Credit.
Section 8. Bank Notes.
(a) The City agrees from time to time to instruct the Trustee to furnish the Issuing
and Paying Agent with em adequate supply of executed Bank Notes, which eire i n form
satisfactory to comply with the provisions of the Commercial Paper Indenture and
which are seriaUy numbered and executed by facsimUe signatures in accordance with
the Commercial Paper Indenture, with the principal amount, date of issue, maturity
date and Owner left blank. The Issuing and Paying Agent agrees to hold the unissued
Bank Notes in safekeeping for the account ofthe City in accordance with the customary
practice of the Issuing and Paying Agent.
(b) Upon receipt of written notice firom the Bank that em Advance made by the Bank
has not been reimbursed on the day thereof and ofthe certificate of em Authorized City
Representative, the Issuing and Paying Agent agrees to viathdraw the necessary Bemk
Note(s) from safekeeping and, in accordance "with such notice emd certificate, agrees to:
(i) complete each Bank Note as to principal amount, date of issue, series and
maturity date in accordance with the Commercial Paper Indenture, register such
Bank Note in the neime ofthe Bemk and record each payment emd prepayment on the
schedule attached thereto;
(ii) manuaUy authenticate each Bank Note by any officer or employee duly
authorized emd designated for such purpose;

 5/ 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITFEES

83157

(ui) defiver the Bank Note(s) to or upon the order of the Bank; and
(iv) promptiy deliver one (1) nonnegotiable copy of each Bemk Note to the City.
(c) The Issuing emd Paying Agent shedl credit amounts received from the City for
payment of the prindpal of and interest on Bank Notes to the Bank Note Account.
Section 9. Notice.
The Issuing and Paying Agent's duties, and responsibifities i n cormection with
providing notification of certain matters described i n the Commercial Paper Indenture
shaU include:
(a) notification by 4:00 P.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) one (1) Business Day prior to
the maturity date of emy Commerded Paper Notes to the City of the total amount due
•with respect to such maturing Commerdal Paper Notes;
(b) notification by 2:00 P.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) on the maturity date of any
Commerdal Paper Notes to the City, if funds held i n the Bank Payment Account on
such maturity date, together with the proceeds of Commercial Paper Notes to be
issued on such date, are insufficient to repay an Advance - made pursuemt to a
Reimbursement Agreement in coimection with the maturity of such Conunercial
Paper Notes, which notification shaU spedfy the amount of the deficiency;
(c) notification by 3:00 P.M. (Chicago, Illinois time) on the maturity date of any
Conunercial Paper Notes to the Bemk, ff insufSdent fiinds have been deposited in the
Series Bank Payment Accounts to reimburse the Beink for an Interest Advemce made
on such day;
(d) monthly notification to the City on the first (1") business day of each month
stating the amount of interest peiid on Commercial Paper Notes during the prior
month; and
(e) emy notification to be provided by the Issuing emd Paying Agent as specified in
the Commercial Paper Indenture.
Section 10. Operating System. .
Issuance Requests may be delivered by a Designated Representative through either
the Dealer's or the Issuing emd Paying Agent's commercial paper electronic instruction
and reporting communication service (each a "System", and coUectively the "Systems").
Electronic instructions must be transmitted in accordemce with tlie procedures
furnished by the either the Dealer or the Issuing and Paying Agent, as applicable, to the

 83158

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

City in connection vrith the Systems. These transmissions shall be the equivalent to
the giving of a written Issuance Request to the Issuing emd Pajong Agent, ff either
System is inoperable at any time, a Designated Representative may defiver written,
telephone or facsinule instructions to the Issuing and Paying Agent, which instructions
shaU be verified i n accordance with any security procedures agreed upon by the
parties.
Section 11.

Representations.

(a) The City represents to the Issuing and Paying Agent that this Agreement, the
Commercial Paper Notes and the Bank Notes have been duly authorized, and that this
Agreement, when executed, and the Commerdal Paper Notes emd the Bank Notes,
when issued in accordance with the Issuemce Requests and the Commercial Paper
Indenture, wiU be vafid and binding obfigations of the Cify, enforceable i n accordance
with their respective terms, subject to bankruptcy, insolvency, moratorium emd other
simUar laws affecting creditors' rights generaUy and to equitable principles when
equitable remedies are sought.
(b) The Cify represents to the Issuing and Paying Agent that each Commerdal Paper
Note and each Bank Note issued under this Agreement wiU be exempt from registration
under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
Each Issuance Request to issue Commercial Paper Notes under this Agreement and
the Commercied Paper Indenmre shaU be deemed a representation by the City as of the
date thereof that such issuance conforms i n aU respects to the requirements of the
Commercial Paper Indenture emd this Agreement, and that the representations herein
are true and correct as if made on and as of such date.
Section 12. Additional Information.
Upon the reasonable request ofthe City, the Trustee or the Bank, as applicable, given
at any time emd from time to time, the Issuing and Paying Agent agrees promptly to
provide the City, the Tmstee or the Bank, as appUcable, vrith infonnation with respect
to the Commercial Paper Notc(s), including, without fimitation, the Bank Notes, issued
and paid hereunder. Such request sheiU be in written form and shaU include the
prindped amount, date of issue, maturity date, interest rate and amount of interest, as
applicable, of each Conunercial Paper Note which has been issued or paid by the
Issuing and Paying Agent, and for which the request is being mace.
Section 13.

Compensation.

The City agrees to pay compensation for the Issuing and Paying Agent's services
pursuant to this Agreement in accordance with the Issuing emd Paying Agent's fee

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83159

schedule, as amended from time to time, and to reimburse the Issuing and Paying
Agent for such disbursements (including the reasonable fees emd expenses of counsel).
The City shaU also reimburse the Issuing emd Paying Agent for any fees and charges
imposed by the Note Depository with respect to Commercial Paper Notes issued i n
book-entty form.
Section 14. Liabifity.
The City agrees that the Issuing emd Paying Agent shaU not be fiable for any losses,
damages, liabUities or costs suffered or incurred by the City or the Issuing and Paying
Agent as a result of (a) the Issuing and Paying Agent's having duly executed Issuance
Requests in good faith in accordance therewith and with the Commei-cied Paper
Indenture and this Agreement, except to the extent, if any, that such execution
constitutes negfigence by the Issuing and Paying Agent; (b) the Issuing and Paying
Agent's improperly executing or fading to execute any Issuemce Requests because of
any material error contained in information provided by the City to the Issuing and
Paying Agent for the purpose of preparing such Issuance Request, faUure of
communications media or any other drcumstances beyond the Issuing and Paying
Agent's control; (c) the actions or inactions of D.T.C. or any broker, dealer, consignee
or agent not selected by the Issuing aind Paying Agent; or (d) any other acts or
omissions o f t h e Issuing and Paying Agent (or of any of its agents, directors, officers,
employees or correspondents) relating to this Agreement or the transactions or
activities contemplated hereby, except to the extent, i f any, that such other acts or
omissions constitute negUgence or willful misconduct by the Issuing emd Paying Agent.
This section sheiU survive any termination of this Agreement, the issuance emd payment
of any Note(s) and the resignation or removal of the Issuing and Paying Agent.
Section 15. Indemnity.
The City agrees to indemnify and hold the Issuing and Paying Agent, its employees
emd any of its officers and agents harmless from and against, and the Issuing emd
Paying Agent shedl not be fiable for, any emd aU losses, fiabifities (including UabiUties
for penalties), actions, suits, judgments, demands, damages, costs and expenses of emy
nature (including, without limitation, attorneys' fees and expenses) eirising out of or
resulting from the exercise of its rights and/or the performance of its duties (or those
of its agents and employees) hereunder; provided, however, that the City shaU not be
fiable to indemnify or pay the Issuing and Paying Agent or any of its officers or
employees with respect to any loss, fiabifity, action, suit, judgment, demand, damage,
cost or expense that results from or is attributable to the Issuing and Paying Agent's
negfigence or willful misconduct or that of its officers or employees. The foregoing
indemnity includes, but is not limited to, any action taken or omitted to be teiken by the
Issuing and Paying Agent or any of its officers or employees upon written, telecopy,
telephonic or other clectronicedly tremsmitted instructions (authorized herein) received
by the Issuing and Paying Agent from, or befieved by it in good faith to have been given

 83160

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

by, an Authorized City Representative or Designated Representative. The provisions
of this section shall survive (i) the Issuing and Paying Agent's resignation or removed
hereunder, and (u) the termination of this Agreement.
Sectiori 16. Temunation.
Subject to the terms of the Commercial Paper Indenture, either the Issuing and
Paying Agent or the City may terminate this Agreement at any time, upon not less than
sixty (60) days prior written notice i n the case of the Issuing and Paying Agent, and
upon written notice in the case of the City, to the other emd to the Trustee and the
Bank. No such termination sheiU eiffect the rights and obfigations of the City and the
Issuing and Paying Agent which have accrued under this Agreement prior to
terinination. No termination can occur prior to (1) a substi'tute Issuing and Paying
Agent being appointed bythe City and assuming its duties under the Commercial Paper
Indenmre, and (2) the Letter ofCredit being transferred to the substitute Issuing and
Paying Agent. If no substitute Issuing and Paying Agent has been appointed at the end
of the sixty (60) day period, then the Issuing and Paying Agent may petition a court of
competent jurisdiction to make such appointment.
Section .17. Addresses.
Issuance Requests hereunder shedl be (a) maUed, (b) telephoned, (c) tremsmitted by
facsimUe device, and/or (d) transnutted electronicaUy to the Issuing and Paying Agent
at the address, telephone number and/or facsimile number specified below, and shaU
be deemed delivered upon receipt by the Issuing and .Paying Agent at the address,
telephone number and/or facsimUe number specified below.
AU notices, requests, demands, including any No Issuance Notices and other
communications hereunder (excluding Issuance Requests) shaU be i n writing and shedl
be deemed to have been duly given (a) upon defivery by hemd (against receipt), (b) by
facsimile, or (c) three (3) days after such notice, request, demand or other
communication is defivered to a United States Post Office certified meiU (against receipt)
or by regular mail (upon receipt) to the party and at the address set forth below or at
such other address as a peirty may designate by written notice:
(a) IfTo The City:

City of Chicago
33 North LaSaUe Street, 6"" Floor
Chicago, Ilfinois 60602
Attention: Chief Financial Officer

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83161

(b) If To The Issuing
and Payirig Agent:

(c) I f T o The Bank:

Section 18.

to the address set forth i n the
Reimbursement Agreement

MisceUaneous..

(a) Governing Law. This Agreement sheiU be governed and interpreted i n accordemce
with the laws of the. State of lUinois.
(b) Assignment, Modification And Amendment; Issuing And. Paving Agent's
Successor In Interest. This Agreement may not be assigned by either the City or the
Issuing and Paying Agent, and may not be modified, amended or supplemented except
by a writing or writings duly executed by the duly authorized representative s of the Cify
and the Issuing and Paying Agent. Anything in this Agreement to the contrary
notwithstanding, any corporation or nationed banking association uito which the
Issuing and Paying Agent may be merged or converted, or with which it may be
consofidated, or any corporation or national beinking assodation resulting from any
merger, consofidation or conversion to which the Issuing and Paying Agent shaU be a
peirfy, or any corporation or national banking association succeeding to the corporate
trust business of the Issuing and Paying Agent, shaU be the successor of the Issuing
and Paying Agent i l such successor corporation or national banking association is
otherwise efigible under Section 7.03 o f t h e Commerdal Paper Indenture, without the
execution or filing of emy document or the undertaking of emy further act on the part
of the Issuing and Paying Agent or such successor corporation or national banking
association.
(c) Complete Agreement. This Agreement contains the entire understanding and
agreement between the parties with respect to the subject matter hereof, emd all prior
agreements, understandings, representations, statements, promises, inducements,
negotiations and undertakings between the pennies with respect to said subject matter
are superseded hereby. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions hereof
and the Commerdal Paper Indenture, the provisions of the Commercial Paper
Indenture shaU govem.

 83162

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(d) Singuleir Plured And Gender References. With respect to aU references of the
Commercial Paper Indenture shaU govem herein to nouns, insofeir as the context
requires, the singular form shedl be deemed to include the plured, the plural form shaU
be deemed to indude the singuleir, emd the neuter, masculine and femiiune genders
shall be deemed to refer to edl such genders. The words "hereor, "herein", "hereby" and
"hereunder" and words of simUar import, refer to this Agreement as a whole.
(e) Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in counterparts, each of which
shaU be an original, and aU of which shaU constitute but one and the same instrument.
(f) Section Headings. Section headings in this Agreement are for convenience of
reference only, shaU not constitute part of this Agreement and shedl not be used to
construe the meaning or intent of the provisions hereof.
(g) Waiver Of Set-Off, Offset Lien Or Counterclaims. The Issuing and Paying
Agent hereby waives to the fullest extent possible under applicable law emy and edl
rights of set-off, offset, fien or counterdeiim it may have with respect to emy amounts
held by it in the Beink Payment Account, the Bank Note Account and the Commerdal
Paper Debt Service Account by reason of emy claim it may have against the City, the
Trustee, the Bank or any other person.
(h) Benefit Of Agreement. This Agreement is solely for the benefit of the parties
hereto and the owners of the Commerdal Paper Notes and the Bank Notes, and no
other person shaU acquire or have any right under or by virtue hereof.
In Witness Whereof, The parties, hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly executed
emd defivered by their respective officers thereunto duly authorized as of the date first
above -written.
City of Chicago

By:
Chief Finemcial Officer
(Seal)

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83163

Attest:

City Clerk

as Issuing emd Paying Agent

By:
Its:
[(Sub)Exhibits ."Ar .and "B" referred to i n this Issuing
and Paying Agent Agreement unavaUable
at time of printing.)
[(Sub)Exhibit "C" referred to in this
Issuing
and Paying Agent Agreement
constimtes
Appendix "A" to the Commerdal
Paper
Dealer Agreement and is printed
on pages 83150. through 83151
of this JoumaL]

(Sub)Exhibit "D" referred to i n this Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement reads as
follows:

(Sub)Exhibit "D".
(To Issuing And Paying Agent Agreement)

Issuance
Request
(2002 Program).
The undersigned, a Designated Representative ofthe City of Chicago (the "City") does
hereby request
. as Issuing and Paying Agent (the

 83164

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

"Issuing and Paying Agent") under the Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement, dated as
of
1, 2002 (the "Issuing and Paying Agent Agreement"), between the
City and the Issuing and Paying Agent, to issue Commercieil Paper Notes as foUows:
1.

Date of Issuance:

2.

Principal Amount:
A.

B.

3.

••-

Series A (Tax Exempt)
Refunding Notes, 2002 Program Scries A

$_

New Money Notes, 2002 Program Series A

$_

Series B (Taxable)
Refunduig Notes, 2002 Program Series B

$_

New Money Notes, 2002 Program Series B

$_

Total Principal Amount and Purchase Price
for Notes

$_

*Terms of Series A Notes (Tax Exempt):
Maturity Date

Principal Amount

Interest Rate

Interest Amount

To be completed by 1 1:30 A.M. (Chicago, lUinois time) on ihc Date or issuance specified in Paragraph I .

 5/1/2002

4.

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83165

*Terms of Series B Notes (Taxable):
Maturity Date

Prindpal Amount

Interest Rate

Interest Amount

Pursuemt to Section 2.06(b) of that certeun Trust Indenture, dated as of
1, 2002 (the "Indenture"), by and between the City and
as trustee, relating to Commerdal Paper Notes, 2002
Program, the undersigned hereby certifies as foUows:
(i)

a Letter of Credit with respect to the Series
and effect;

Notes is in fiiU force

(ii)

eifter the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes as requested hereby and
the appfication of proceeds thereof, the aggregate principal amount of
ConunerdeU Paper Notes Outstanding wiU not exceed the eimount
currentiy authorized to be Outstanding under the Indenmre as
provided i n Section 2.0 1(b) thereof;

(in)

the issuance of Commerded Paper Notes, Series A requested hereby,
if refunding notes issued under the 2002 Program, wiU be appUed to
pay $
of Commerdal Paper Notes, Series A maturing
on the date hereof and wiU not be used to pay any Commercial Paper
Notes, Series B;

To be completed by U :30 A.M. (Chicago, Illinois tJrre) on the Date of Issuance specified in Paragraph 1

 83166

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

(iv)

the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes, Series B requested hereby,
if refimding notes issued under the 2002 Program, wiU be appUed to
pay $
of Commercial Paper Notes, Series B maturing
on the date hereof and wiU not be used to pay any Commercial Paper
Notes, Series A;

(v)

the aggregate prindpal amount of Commercial Paper Notes described
i n this Issuance Request (together with the interest thereon), plus the
aggregate principal amount of aU Coinmercial Paper Notes currently
outstanding (together with the interest thereon), less the aggregate
prindpal amount of any of the currentiy Outstanding Commerdal
Paper Notes to be retired concurrentiy with the issuance of the
Commerded Paper Notes described i n this Issuance Request (including
interest thereon), does not exceed the eimount avaUable to be drawn
under theLetter ofCredit securing such Conunercial Paper Notes;

(vi)

unless interest on the Commercial Paper Notes to be issued is taxable,
to the City's knowledge there has been no change in the facts,
estimates, drcumstances and representations of the City set forth or
made (as the case may be) i n each Tax Certificate appficable to the
Commerdal Paper Notes being issued and to the extent that Note
Proceeds are being deposited to the Proceeds Fund or are being used
during the eighteen (18) month period described i n the Tax Certificate
to reimburse interest on Commercial Paper Notes then maturing, a
certificate regarding the use of such proceeds, as required by the Tax
Certificate, is attached hereto as Attachment A;

(vii)

the term to mamrity of the Commerdal Paper Notes lo be defivered
does not exceed two hundred seventy (270) days, and the maturity
dates of such Commercial Paper Notes set forth herein do not extend
beyond the Termination Date of the Letter of Credit securing such
Commercial Paper Notes;

(viii)

the City has not been notified by Bond Counsel that its opinion with
respect to the validity of the Commercial Paper Notes and, unless
interest on the Commerdal Paper Notes is to be taxable, the tax
treatment of the interest thereon has been revised or withdrawn or, if
any such revision or withdrawal has occurred, the revised opinion or
substitute opinion has not been revised or withdrawn;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83167

(ix)

to the actued knowledge of the City, no Event of Default has occurred
and is now continuing;

(X)

of Note Proceeds shaU be deposited into the
appropriate subaccount of the Bank Payment Account;.,
of Note Proceeds shedl be deposited into the
$_
appropriate account of the Proceeds Fund; and
$
_ of funds shall be deposited by the City into the
appropriate subaccount of the Bank Payment Account to reimburse
interest currentiy payable on maturing Commercial Paper Notes; and

(xi)

aU of the conditions precedent to the issuance of Coinmercial Paper
Notes set forth in Section 2.06 o f t h e Indenmre have been satisfied.

AU capitafized terms used but not defined herein shaU have the meanings ascribed
thereto in the Indenture!
Date:

City of Chicago

Request Number:

By.
Designated Representative

(Attachment "A" referred to i n this Issuance
Request unaveiilable at time of printing.]

 83168

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Exhibit "D".
(To Ordinance)
Indenture Of Trust
Between
City Of Chicago
And
IName Of Trustee]
As Trustee
Relating To
$

.

City Of Chicago, Illinois
Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
Dated As Of

•

, 2002.

or TRUST, made and entered into as of
, 2002 (tiiis
"Indenture"), by and between the CITY OF CHICAGO (the "Issuer"), a municipal corporation and
a home rule unit of local government of the State of Illinois, and [NAME OFTRUSTEE], as Tmstee
(the "Trustee"), a banking corporation, with its principal corporate tmst office located in
THIS INDENTURE

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83169

WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, the Issuer is a municipal coiporation and a home mle unit of local
government of tbe State of Illinois, in accordance with the provisions of Section 6(a) of Article
vn of the 1970 Constimtion of the State of Dluiois: and
WHEREAS, the execution and delivety of tbis Indentiaf e and the issuance of the

Bonds have been in aU respects duly and validly authorized by an ordinance of the Issuer adopted
on
., 2002; and
WHEREAS, aU acts and pioceedings required by law necessaty to make the Bonds
when executed by the Issuer, authenticated and deUvered by the Trustee and duly issued, the
vafid, binding and legal direct and general obUgations of the Issuer, and to constimte this
Indentuie a valid and binding agreement for the uses and purposes herein set forth, in accordance
with its terms, have been done and taken; and the execution and delivety of tbis Indenture have
been in all respects duly authorized;

Now, THEREFORE, THIS INDENTURE OF TRUST WHNESSETH, and it is expressly
.declared, that aU Bonds issued and secured hereunder are to be issued, authenticated and
deUvered, upon and subject to the teims. conditions, stipulations, covenants, agreements, trusts,
uses and purposes as hereinafter expressed, and the Issuer has agreed and covenanted, and does
hereby agree and covenant, with the Trustee and with tbe respective owneis from time to time of
the Bonds, as follows:
ARTICLE I
Definitions and Rules of Interpretation
Section 1.01. Rules of Interpretation. For all purposes of this Indeniuie, except
eis otherwise expressly provided or unless the context otherwise requites:
(A)
AU references in this Indenture to designated "Articles," "Sections" and
other subdivisions are to the designated Articles, Secuons and other subdivisions of this
Indentuie.
(B)
The words "heiein," "hereof." "heieto," "hereby," and "hereunder" and
other words of sinular import refer to this Indenture as a whole and not to any particular
Anicle, Section or other sulxlivision.
(C)
The terms defined in this Article have the meanings assigned to them in this
Anicle, and include the plural as well as the singular.

 83170

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(D) All accounting terms not otherwise defined herein have the meanings
assigned to them in accoidance with generaUy accepted accounting principles as in effect
from tune to time.
.. .
.
(E)
Evety "request," "order," "demand," "application," "appointment,"
"notice," "statement," "certificate," "consent," "direction," "instruction" or simUar
action hereunder by the Issuer shaU, unless tbe form thereof is specificaUy provided, be
in writing signed by the Authorized Issuer Representative.
(F)
AU other terms used herein which are defined in the Auction Procedures
shaU have the same meanmgs assigned them in the Auction Procedures unless the context
otherwise requires.
Section 1.02. Definitions. For aU puiposes of this Indenture, except as otherwise
expressly provided or unless the context otherwise requires:
"Administrative Expenses" means the reasonable and necessaty expenses (including
the reasonable and necessaty out-of-pocket expenses and fees of Counsel) incurred by die Issuer
in connection with the Bonds, this Indenmre and any transaction or event contemplated by the
Agreement or this Indenture.
"Auction Procedures" shaU mean with respect to the Bonds during an Auction Rate
Period the procedures set forth in Appendbi B to this Indenmre.
"Authorized Denominations" means withrespectto any Term Rate Period. $5,000
and any integral multiple thereof; with respect to any Daily Rate Period or Weekly Rate Period,
$100,000 and any mtegral multiple of $5,000 in excess thereof; widi respect to any Flexible Rate
Period, $100,000 and any integral multiple of $5,000 in excess thereof; and with respect to any
Auction Rate Period, $25,000 and any integral multiple thereof.
"Beneficial Owner" means the owner of a Bond or portion thereof for federal
income tax purposes.
"Bond" or "Bonds" means any one or more of the bonds authorized, authenticated
and delivered under this Indenture.
"Bond Fund" means the fund created by Section 6.02 hereof,
"Bond Fund Requirement" means, as of any date of calculation, an amoum equal
to the sum of (i) the interest on the Bonds accmed and unpaid; (ii) the interest on the Bonds to
accme to the first Business Day of the next month calculated at the then current rate to the end
of the then current Rate Period and thereafter at the rate of [18]% per annum; (iii) the principal
of the Bonds then due and unpaid; and (iv) if principal of the Bonds matures within one year of
the first Business Day ofthe next month, ihai portion of the principal next due that would have
accrued to the fust Business Day ofthe next month if deemed to accrue daily from a date one year
prior to its due date.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83171

"Bondholder" or "holder" or "Owner" or "owner of Bonds" means die Person or
Persons in whose name or names a Bond shall be registered on books of the Issuer kept by the
Registrar for that puipose in accordance with the tenns of this Indenture.
"Bond Insurance Poficy" means the financial.guaranty insurance policy, including
the endorsements thereto, issued by the Bond Insurer guaranteeing payment of principal of and
interest on the Bonds.
"Bond Insurer" means
or any successor thereto.

• .a

_,

"Book Entry Bond" means a Bond authorized to be issued to andrestrictedto bemg
registered in the name of a Securities Depository.
"Business Day" means a day on which bankmg institutions, located, in New York,
New Yoik, and Chicago, Qlinois and in the city or cities in which the Designated. OfBce of the
Trustee is located, are not required or authorized toremainclosed and on wluch the New York
Stock Exchange is not closed.
"Counsel" means an attorney at law or a fiim of attorneys (who may be an
employee of or counsel to the Issuer or the Trustee) duly admitted to the practice of law before
tbe highest court of any state of the Um'ied States of America or of tbe District of Columbia.
"DaUy Rate" means the interest rate on the Bonds esublished in accordance with
Section 2.03(a) hereof.
"DaUy Rate Period" means each period during which Bonds bear interest at DaUy
Rates.
"Dated Date" means (i) the date of issuance and delivety to the Underwriters of
tiie Bonds or (ii)
, 2002 if the uiitial Rate Period for the Bonds is a Tenn Rate
Period.
"Default" or "default" means any event which with the giving of notice, the
passage oftime,or both, becomes an "event of default".
" Designated Office" means the office of the Tnistee or its affUiaies designated from
time to lime by the trustee as the appropriate office for a given purpose herein, and in tbe absence
of a contraty designation, means the Principal Office of the Trustee. The Designated Office for
purposes of tenders shall initiaUy be
"DTC" means The Depository Trust Company, a limited purpose trust company
organized under the laws of tbe State of New Yoik, and its successois and assigns.
"Event of Default" or "event of default" means an occurrence or event specified
in and defmed as such by Seciion 9.01 hereof.

 83172

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Extraordinaty Services" and "Extraordinaty Expenses" means aU services
rendered and aU expenses (including fees and expenses of Counsd) incurred imder this Indentme
other than Ordinary Services and Ordinaty Expenses.
. " Fiscal Year" shaU mean the period of time beginning on Januaty 1 and ending on
December-31 of each year, or sucb other simUar period as the City designates as tbefiscalyear,
ofthe City
;..
"Fitch" means Fitch IBCA, Inc., its successois and their assigns, and, if such
securities rating agency shaU be dissolved or liquidated or shall no longer perform the functions
of a securities rating agency, "Fitch" shaU be deemed to refer to any other nationaUy recognized
securities rating agency designated by the Issuer and approved by the Bond Insurer, with notice
to the Trastee.
"Flexible Rate" shaU mean, withrespectto any Bond, the interest rate associated
with such Bond established in accordance with Section 2.03(d) hereof.
"Flexible Rate Period" means each period, comprised of Flexible Segments, during
which Bonds bear interest at Flexible Rates.
"Flexible Segment" shall mean, with respect to each Bond bearing interest at a
Flexible Rate, the period estabfished in accordance, with Section 2.03(d) hereof.'
"Government Obligations" means each ofthe foUowing:
1.
United States Treasuty Certificates, Notes and Bonds (including State and
Local Government Series — "SLGs").
2.
Direct obligations of the United States Tieasuty which have been stripped
by the United States Treasuty itself.
3.
The interest component of Resolution Funding Coiporation strips which
have been stripped by request to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
4.
Pre-refimded municifal bonds rated "Aaa" by Moody's and "AAA" by
Standard & Poor's Corporation.
5.
Obligations issued by the following agendes which are backed by the full
faith and credit of the United States:
a-

United States Expon-lmport Bank (Eximbank)
Direct obligations or fiiUy guaranteed certificates of beneficial ownership

 5/1/2002

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

b.

83173

Fanners Home Administration (FmHA)
Certificates of beneficial ownership

c.

Federal Financing Bank

d.

General Services Administration
Participation certificates

e.

United States Maritime Administration
Guaranteed Titie XI financing

f.

United Stales Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUDt
Project Notes
Local Authority Bonds
New Communities Debentures —United States government guaranteed
debentures
United States Public Housing Notes and Bonds —United States government
guaranteed public housing notes and bonds

"Indenture" means this Indenture of Trust, including any indentures supplemental
hereto or amendatory hereof.
"Interest Payment Date" means (i) with respect to any Daily Rate Period or Weekly
Rate Period, the first Business Day of each calendar month, (u) with respect to any Term Rate
Period, the first day of the sixth calendar month following the effective date of such Term Rate
Period, and the fiist day of each successive sixth calendar month, if any, of such Tenn Rate
Period, (ui) with respect to any Flexible Segment, the Business Day next succeeding the last day
thereof, (iv) with respect to any Auction Rate Period, (A) for an Auction Period nominaUy of less
than seven days, the first Business Day of the first calendar month commencing after the end of
such Auction Period, (B) for an Auction Period of 91 days or less (other than an Auction Period
described in clause (A)), the Business Day next succeedmg the last day of such Auction Period
and (C) for an Auction Period of more than 91 days, (1) each 13Ui Thursday after the fust day
of such Auction Period (or if such Thursday shall not be a Business Day, the next succeeding
Business Day) and (2) the Business Day next succeeding the last day of such Auction Period, and
(v) withrespectlo each Rate Period, the Business Day next succeeding the last day thereof
"Investment Securities" means each of the following:

 83174

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

^/1/2002

A.
Direct obligations of the United States of America (including obUgations
issued or held in book-entty fonn on the books of the Department of the Treasuty, and
CATS and TIGRS) or obfigations tbe principal of and interest on which are
unconditionaUy guaranteed by the United States of America.
B.
Bonds, debentures, notes or other evidence of indebtedness issued or
guaranteed by any of the following federal agendes and provided such obligations are
backed by tbe fiill faith and credit of the United Stales of ^erica (stripped securities are
only pennitted if they have been stripped by the agency itself):
1.

United.States Export-Import Bank (Eximbank)
Direct obligations or fidly guaranteed certificates of beneficial ownership

2.

Fanners Home Administration (FmHA)
Certificates of beneficial owneiship

3.

Federal Financing Bank

4.

Federal Housinp Administration Debentures (FHA)

5.

General Services Administration
Participation certificates

6.

Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA or "Ginnie Ivlae")
GNMA — guaranteed mortgage-backed bonds
GNMA — guaranteed pass-through obligations
(not acceptable for certain cash-flow sensitive issues'!

7.

United States Maritime Administration
Guaranteed Tide XI financing

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

8.

83175

United States Department of Housing and Uiban Development (HUD)
Project Notes
Local Authority Bonds
New Communities Debentures —United States government guaranteed
debentures
United States Public Housing Notes and Bonds —United States government
guaranteed pubUc housing notes and bonds

C.
Bonds, debentures, notes or other evidence of indebtedness issued or
guaranteed by any of tbe foUowing non-fiiU faith and credit United States government
agencies (including stripped securities if stripped by the agency itself):
1.

Federal Home Loan Bank System
Senior debt obligations

2.

Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC or "Freddie Mac")
Participation certificates
Senior debt obUgations

3.

Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA or "Fannie-Mae")
Mortgage-backed securities and senior debt obligations

4.

Student Loan Marketuig Association (SLMA or "SaUie Mac")
Senior debt obligations

5.

Resolution Funding Corp. (REFCORP) obfigations

6.

Farm Credit Svstem
Consolidated systemwide bonds and notes

D.
Money market fiinds registered under the Federal Investment Company Act
of 1940, whose shares are registered under the Federal Securities Act of 1933, and having
arat'uigby Standard & Poor's Corporation of AAAm-G; AAA-m; or AA-m and if rated
by Moody'sratedAaa, Aal or Aa2.

 83176

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

E.
Certificates of deposit secured at aU times by coUateral described in (A)
andVor (B) above. Such certificates must be issued by commercial banks, savings and loan
association or mutual savings banks. The coUateral must be held by a third.party and the
Bondholders must have a perfected first security interest in the collateral.
F.
Certificates of deposit, savings accounts, deposit accounts or money market
deposits which arc luUy insured by FDIC, includmg BIF and SAIF.
G.
Investinent Agreements, including GIC's, Forward Purchase Agreements
and Reserve Fund Put Agreements acceptable to the Bond-Insurer.
H.
Commercial paperrated,at the time of purchase, "Prime -1" by Moody's
and "A-l" or better by Standard & Poor's Corporation.
I.
Bonds or notes issued by any state or municipafity which areratedby
Moody's and Standard & Poor's Corporation in one ofthe two highestratingcategories
assigned by such agencies.
J.
Federal fiinds or bankers acceptances with a maxi"""" term of one year of
any bank which has an unsecured, uninsured and unguaranteed obUgationratingof
"Prime - 1" or "A3" or better by Moody's and "A-l" or "A" or better by Standard &
Poor's Corporation.
K.
Any pool investment fiind administered by the State of Dlinois in which the
Issuer is permitted or required to invest fimds.
L.
Repurchase Agreements for 30 days or less must foUow the foUowing
criteria: Repurchase Agreements which exceed 30 days must be acceptable to the Bond
Insurer. (Repurchase Agreements provide for the transfer of securities from a dealer bank
or securities firm (seUer/boirower) to the Issuer (buyerAender), and the transfer of cash
from the Issuer to the dealer bank or securities firm with an agreement that the dealer bank
or securities firm wiU repay die cash plus a yield to the Issuer in exchange for the
securities at a specified date.)
1.

Repurchase AgreemenK must be between the Issuer and a dealer bank or
securities firm
a.

Primary dealers on the Federal Reserve reporting dealer list which
are rated A or better by Standard & Poor's Corporation and
Moody's, or

b.

Banksrated"A" or above by Standard & Poor's Corporation and
Moody's

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

2.

The written Repurchase Agreement contract must include the following:
a.

Securities which are acceptable for transfer are:
(1)

Direct United States government obfigations, or

(2)

Federal agendes backed by the full faith and credit of die
United States government (and FNMA & FHLMC)

b.

The term of the Repurchase Agreement ihay be up to 30 days

C;

The collateral must be delivered to the Issuer, the Tmstee (if the
Trustee is not supplying the coUateral) or third party, acting as
agency for the Trustee (if die Trastee is supplying the collateral)
before/simultaneous with payment (perfection by possession of
certificated securities)

d.

Valuation of Collateral
(1)

The securities must be valued weeklv. marked-to-market at
current market price plus accmed interest
(a)

3.

83177

The value of coUateral must be equal to 104% of the
amount of cash transferred by the municipal entity to
the dealer bank or security firm under the
Repurchase Agreement pliis accrued interest. If the
value of securities held as collateral declines below
104% of the value of the cash transferred, by the
Issuer, then additional cash and/or acceptable
securities must be transferred. If, however, the
securities used as collateral are FNMA or FHLMC.
then the value of coUateral must equal 105%.

Legal opinion which must be delivered to the Issuer staling that the
Repurchase Agreement meets guidelines under state law for legal
investment of public fimds.

"Moody's" means Moody's Investors Service, Inc., a coiporation organized and
existing under the laws of the State of Delaware, its successois and their assigns, and, if such
corporation shall be dissolved or liquidated or shall no longer perform the fimctions of a securities
rating agency, "Moody's" shaU be deemed to refer to any other nationally recognized securities
rating agency designated by the Issuer and approved by the Bond Insurer, with notice to the
Trustee.

 83178

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Ordinaty Services" and "Ordinaty Expenses" means those services normally
rendered and those expenses (including fees and expenses of Counsel) nonnally incurred by a
trustee or paying agent under instruments similar to this Indenture.
"Outstanding" or "outstanding" or "Bonds Outstanding," in connection with the
Bonds means, as of the time in question, aU Bonds authenticated and delivered under this
Indenture, except:
A.
Bonds theretofore canceled or required to be canceled under Section 2.10
or 6.07 hereof; ,
B.
Bonds which are deemed lo have been paid in accordance with Article vm
hereof; and
C.
Bonds (including Bonds which are deemed to have been purchased pursuant
to Section 4.03 bereoQ in substitution for which other Bonds have been authenticated and
delivered pursuant to Article n hereof.
"Paying Agent" means die Tnistee, acting as paying agent for the Bonds hereunder.
"Person" means natural persons, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations,
tnists, limited liabiUty companies and public bodies.
"Prevailing Market Conditions" means, without linutation, the foUowing factors:
existing short-term marketratesfor securities, the interest on which is excliidedfromgross
income for federal income tax purposes, indices of such short-termratesand the existing market
supply and demand for securities bearing such short-termrates,existing yield curves for shorttenn and long-term securities for obligations of credit quality comparable to tbe Bonds, the
interest on which is excludedfromgross income for federal income tax purposes, general
economic conditions, industry economic and financial conditions that may affect or be relevant
to the Bonds, and such other'facts, circumstances and conditions as the Remarketing Agent, in its
sole discretion, shall deteimine to be relevant.
"Principal Office" means, with respect to the Trustee, the designated corporate
tmst office of the Trustee, which office at the date of acceptance of the Trustee of the duties and
obligations imposed upon it hereunder is located at the address specified in Section 13.05 hereof.
"Rate Period" means any DaUy Rate Period, Weekly Rate Period, Flexible Rate
Period, Auction Rate Period or Term Rate Period.
"Rating Category" or "Rating Categories" means one or more of the generic rating
categories of a nationaUy recognized securitiesratingagency, withoutregardto any refinement
or gradation of such rating category or categories by a numerical modifier or otherwise.
"Record Date" means with respect to any Interest Payinent Date in respect of a
Daily Rate Period, a Weekly Rate Period, a Flexible Segment or an Auction Rate Period, the

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83179

Business Day next preceding such Interest Payment Date and, .withrespectto any Interest Payment
Date in respect of a Tenn Rate Period, the fifteenth day of the calendar month next preceding such
Interest Payment Date.
"Registrar" means the.Trustee, acting as.registrar for the Bonds hereunder.
"Remarketing Agent" means theremarketingagent appointed in accordance with
Section 4:08 hereof and any permitted successor thereto.
"Responsible Officer" means when used with respect to the Trustee,, any officer
of the Trustee including any Vice President, Assistant Vice President, coiporate trust officer or.
any other officer ofthe Trastee customarily performingfrmcdonssimUar to those performed by
any ofthe above designated.officers and also, with respect to a particular matter, any other officer
to whom such matter is referred because of sucb officer's knowledge of and familiarity with the
particular subject.
"Securities Depositoty" means, wilh respect to a Book Entty Bond, DTC or any
person,firm,association or coiporation constituting a "clearing agency" (securities.depositoty)
registered under Section 17A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which may at
anytimebe substituted in its place to act as Securities Depository for the Bonds, or its successors,
or any nominee therefor.
"Series
Bond Ordinance" means the ordinance of the Issuer adopted on
, 2002 authorizing the issuance of the Bonds.
"Series

Bond Order" means the written order of the Chief Financial Officer

or ComptroUer of the Issuer fixing and deteimining the details of the Bonds.
"State" means the State of Illinois.
"Tender Agent" means the Trustee, acting as tender agent for the Bonds hereunder.
"Term Rate" means ihe interestrateon the Bonds established in accordance with
Section 2.03(c) hereof.
"Term Rate Period" means each period during which a Term Rate is in effect.
"Tmstee" means [Name of Trustee] and any successor tmstee appointed and
qualified pursuant lo Section 10.06 or 10.09 hereof at the time serving as successor Trustee
hereunder.
"Underwriter" means,

.

"Weekly Rate" means the interestraieon the Bonds established in accordance with
Seciion 2.03(b) hereof

 83180

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCII^-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

• "Weekly Rate Period" means each period during wluch Bonds bear interest at
Weekly Rates.
Section 1.03. Number and Gender. The singular form of any word used herein,
including the terms defmed in Section 1.02. shaU include the plural, and vice versa. Tbe use
herein of a word of any gender shall include aU genders.
Section 1.04. Bonds Owned By Issuer. In deteimining whether the Owners of
a requisite aggregate prindpal ainount of outstanding Bonds have concurred in any request,
demand, authorization, direction, notice, consent or waiver under the provisions of this Indenture,
Bonds which are owned of record by tlie Issuer or held by tbe Tnistee for tbe account of the Issuer
sbaU be disregarded and deemed not to be Outstanding hereunder for the purpose of any such
detennination (except that, in determining whether the Tnistee shaU be protected inrelyingupon
any suchrequest,demand, authorization, direction, notice, consent or waiver, only Bonds which
a Responsible Officer of tbe Tnistee actuaUy knows to be so owned or held sbaU be disregarded).
ARTICLE n
Tbe Bonds
Section 2.01. Authorized Amount of Bonds. The Bonds are issued pursuant to
Section 6 of Article Vn of the Illinois Constitution of 1970. No Bonds may be issued under the
provisions of this Indenture except in accordance with this Article. The total principal amount
of Bonds that may be issued hereunder is hereby expressly limited to $200,(XX),000 less the
prindpal amount of commercial paper or other bonds or obligations issued pursuant to the Series
Bond Ordmance and then outstanding, except as provided in Section 2.08 hereof.
Section 2.02. Issuance of Bonds, (a) Authorization oflssuance. The Issuer may
issue the Bonds following the execution of this Indenture; and the Tnistee shall, at the Issuer's
• written request, authenticate such Bonds and defiver them as specified in such request. The Bonds
shaU be designated "City of Chicago Auction Rate Bonds, Series
." The Bonds shaU be
issuable as fiiUyregisteredbonds without coupons in Authorized Denominations. Unless the Issuer
shaU otherwise direct, the Bonds shaU be numbered consecutively from I upwards.
(b)
General Terms. The Bonds shall be issued as fiiUy registered bonds,
without coupons, in Authorized Denominations, shall be dated the Dated Date, shall mature
subject to prior redemption upon the terms and conditions heieinafter set forth, on Januaty 1,
20 , the maturity date specified in the Series
Bond Order, and shaU bear interest as herein
provided from the Dated Date. Interest on each Bond shall be payable on each Interest Payment
Date for each such Bond for the period commenclDg on the next preceding Interest Payment Date
(or if no interest has been paid thereon, commencing on the Dated Date) and ending on the day
next preceding such Interest Payment Date; provided, however, that if, as shown by the records
of the Tmstee, interest on the Bonds shall be in default. Bonds shall bear inieiesi from the last
date to which interest has been paid in full or duly provided for on the Bonds or, if no interest has
been paid or duly provided for on the Bonds, from the Dated Date thereof. Each Bond shall bear

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83181

interest on overdue prindpal at therateborne by the Bonds on the date on which such principal
became due and payable. Tbe Tmstee shaU insert the date of authentication of each Bond in tbe
place provided for such puipose in the fonn ofthe certificate of authentication of the Trustee to
be printed on each Bond.
(c)
Manner of Payment. The principal of and preinium, if any, and interest on
the-Bonds shaU be payable in any coin or currency of the United States of America which, at the
respective dates of payment thereof, is legal tender for the payment of pubUc and private debts
(which shaU be immediately available fimds), and such prindpal and premium, if any, shaU be
payable at the Designated Office of the Tnistee, as Paying Agent. Payment of interest on any
Interest Payment Date on any Bond shaU be made to tbe Owner thereof as of tbe close of business
on the Record Date immediately prior thereto and shaU be (i) made by check of the Tnistee, as
Paying Agent, to the extent it has been provided with fimds for such puipose in a timely manner.
maUed on the lnterest Payment Date to the Owner as of the close of business on the R ^ r d Date
immediately preceding the Interest Payment Date, at die Owner's address as it appears on the
registration books of the Issuer kept by the Trustee or at such other address as is furnished to the
Trustee in writing by such Owner not later than the close of business on the Record Date for such
Interest Payment Date, or (ii) except with respect to interest in respect of any Term Rate,
transmitted by wire transfer to the accounts with members of the Federal Reserve System located
within the continental United States of Ainerica of those Owners which own at least $1,000,000
in aggregate principal amount of tbe Bonds and which shaU have provided written wire transfer
instmctions to the Trustee prior to the close of business on such Record Date, but in the case of
interest payable inrespectof a Flexible Segment, only upon presentation of such Bond (if such
Bond is not a Book Entty Bond) at the Designated Office of the Trustee for exchange or transfer
in accordance with.tbe provisions hereof, except, in each case, that, if and to tbe extent that there
shaU be a default in the payment of the interest due on such Imerest Payment Date, such defaulted
interest shaU be paid to the Owners in whose names any siich Bonds areregisteredat the close of
business on the fifth (5th) Business Day next preceding the date of payment of such defaulted
interest.
(d)
Interest. The Bonds shall bear interest from and including the Dated Date
untU payment ofthe principal or redemption price thereof shaU have been TpaH<» or provided for
in accordance wilh the provisions hereof, whether at maturity, upon redemption or otherwise, at
therateorratesper annum deteimined pursuant to Section 2.03 hereof. Interest on the Bonds
shaU be paid on each Interest Payment Date. During any Flexible Rate Period, Daily Rate Period
or Weekly Rate Period, interest on the Bonds shall be computed upon the basis of a 365 or 366day year, as applicable, for the number of days actuaUy elapsed. During any Term Rate Period,
interest on the Bonds shaU be compuled upon the basis of a 360-day year, consisting of twelve
(12) thirty (30) day months. During any Auction Rate Period, interest on the Bonds shaU be
computed on the basis of a 360-day year for the number of days actually elapsed.
Section 2.03. Determination of Rate Periods and Interest Rates. In the manner
hereinafter provided, the term of the Bonds will be divided into consecutive Rate Periods during
which the Bonds shall bear interest at the Daily Rate, the Weekly Rate, the Flexible Rate, the
Term Rate, or the Auction Rate. Prior to an adjustment to a Daily Rate, Weekly Rate, Term Rate
or Flexible Rate, the Issuer and the Trustee shall enter into a Supplemental Indenture pursuant to

 83182

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 11.01 hereof and in form approved by the Bond Insurer, such approval to be evidenced
by the written consent of the Bond Insurer filed with the Trastee. The first Rate Period shaU
commence on the date of issuance of the Bonds hereunder and shaU be die Rate Period elected by
tbe Issuer m writing upon.the issuance of the Bonds. AU Bonds shaU be in tbe same Rate Period.
The Bonds shaU bear interest at the rate or rates per annum established fiom time to time in
accordance with the provisions of this Indenture.
(a)
(i) Detennination of DaUv Rate. During each Daily Rate Period, the Bonds
shaU bear interest at the DaUy Rate, which shaU be determined by the Remarketing Agent on each
Busmess Day for such Busmess Day. The DaUy Rate shall be the lowest rate determined by the
Remarketing Agent to be the interestratewhich would enable the Remarketing Agent to seU the
Bonds on the effective date of suchrateat a price equal to 100% of the principal ainount thereof
(without regard to accmed interest); provided, however, that withrespectto any day which is not
a Business Day and any other day for which the Remarketing Agent shaU not have determined a
DaUy Rate, the DaUy Rate for such day shaU be the same as the DaUy Rate for the immediately
preceding day; provided, fiirther, that if a DaUy Rate for the first day of any DaUy Rale Period
is not determined, the DaUy Rate for thefirstday of such DaUy Rate Period shall be one hundred
percent (100%) of the most recent One-Year Note Index theretofore published in The Bond Buyer
(or, if Tbe Bond Buyer is no longer published or no longer pubfishes the One-Year Note Index,
the one-year note index contained in the pubfication determined by the Remarketing Agent as tbe
most comparable to The Bond Buyer). In no event shaU the DaUy Rate exceed the lesser of [18] %
per anmim and the maximumrateper aTinnni then permitted by appUcable law. Tbe Remarketing
Agent shaU provide the Tmstee with immediate notice by facsinule of each DaUy Rate, as
determined.
(u)
• Adjustment to Daily Rate. At any time, the Issuer, by written direction to
the Trustee and the Remarketing Agent, may elect that the Bonds shaU bear interest at a
DaUy Rate. Siich direction shaU (A) specify the effective date of such adjusonent to a
Daily Rate which shaU be a Business Day not earlier than thefifteenth(15th) day
foUowing thefifth(5th) Business Day after the date of receipt by the Trustee of such
direction, and shall be (1) in the case of an adjustmentfroma Term Rate Period, the day
immediately foUowing the last day of the then current Term Rate Period, (2) in the case
of an adjustmentfroma Flexible Rate Pen'od, the day immediately foUowing the last day
of the then current Flexible Rate Period as determined in accordance with
Section 2.03(d)(iv) hereof, and (3) in the case of an adjustmentfroman Auction Rate
Period, the day immediately foUowing the last day of the then current Auction Rate
Period; and (B) in the case of an adjustment from a Tenn Rate Period having a duration
in excess of one year or an Auction Rate Period, be accompanied by an opinion of Bond
Counsel staring that such adjustment (1) is authorized or permitted by this Indenture and
(2) wiU not adversely affect ihe exclusion of the interest on the Bonds from gross income
for federal income tax purposes. During each Daily Rate Period commencing on a dale
so specified or determined (provided that the opinion of Bond Counsel described in clause
(B) above, if required, is reaffinned as of such date) and ending on the day immediately
preceding the effective date of the next succeeding Rate Period, the interest rate borne by
the Bonds shall be a Daily Rate.

 5/1/2002

R E P O R T S O F COMMITTEES

83183

(iii)
Notice of Adhistment to Daily Rate. Following the Issuer's election
pursuant to Section 2.03(a)(u) hereof, the Trustee shaU give notice of an adjustment to a
DaUy Rate Period to Owneis, by first class maU, postage prepaid, postmairked not less
than fifteen (15) days prior to the effective date of such Daijy Rate Period. Such notice
shaU be prepared by the Issuer and shaU state (1) that the interest rate on the Bonds wiU
be adjusted to a DaUy Rate (subject to the receipt of tbe rcafiinning opinion of Bond
Counsel referred to in tbe immediately pieccding paragraph (a)(u), if reqiUred, and to the
Issuer's abifity to rescind its election as described in Section 2.03(f) hereof), (2) the
. effective date of such DaOy Rate Period, (3) that aU Bonds are subject to mandatoty
purchase on such effective date and (4) the procedures of such purchase and payment of
the purchase price.
(b) . (i) Determination of Weeklv Rate. During each Weekly Rate Period, the
Bonds shaU bear interest at the Weekly Rate, which, in the case of the first Weekly Rate
determined for each Weekly Rate Period, shaU be deteimined by the Remariceting Agent no later
than thefirstday of such Weekly Rate Period and thereafter no later than the Business Day next
preceding Wednesday of each week during such Weekly Rate Period. The Weekly Rate shaU be
tbe rate detenniped by the Remarketing Agent to be the lowest interest rate which would enable
the Remarketing Agent to seU the Bonds on the effective date of suchrateat a price equal to 100%
of the principal amount thereof (withoutregardto accmed interest); provided, however, that if
the Remarketing Agent shall not have deteimined a Weekly Rate for any period, the Weekly Rate
for such period shaU be the same as tbe Weekly Rate for the immediately preceding period;
provided, however, that if, for any reason, thefirstWeekly Rate for any Weekly Rale Period shaU
not be delezmined or become effective, the Rate Period for the Bonds shaU be adjusted to a DaUy
Rate Period. In no event shaU the Weekly Rate exceed the lesser of [18]% per annum and the
maximum rate per annum then pennitted by applicable law. Tbe first Weekly Rate deteimined
for each Weekly Rate Period shaU apply to the period commencing on the first day of such period
and ending on the next succeeding "Tuesday.. Thereafter, each Weekly Rate shall apply to the
period commencing on each Wednesday and ending on the next succeeding Tuesday; provided,
however, if a Weekly Rate Period shall end on a day other than Tuesday, die last Weekly Rate
for such Weekly Rate Period shall apply to the period commencing on the Wednesday preceding
the last day of such Weekly Rate Period and ending on such last day. The Remarketing Agent
shall provide the Trustee with Immediate telephonic notice (promptiy confiimed in writing) or
facsimUe notice of each Weekly Rate, as deteimined.
(u)
Adjustment to Weeklv Rate. At any time, the Issuer, by written direction
to the Trustee and the Remarketing Agent, may elect that the Bonds shall bear interest at
a Weekly Rate. Such direction shaU (A) specify the effective date of such adjustment to
a Weekly Rate which shaU be a Business Day not earlier than the fifteenth (15th) day
following the fifth (5th) Business Day after the date of receipt by the Tmsiee of such
direction, and shaU be (1) in the case of an adjustment from a Term Rate Period, the day
immediately following the last day ofthe then curtenl Term Rate Period, (2) in the case
of an adjustment from a Flexible Rate Period, the day immediately following the last day
of the then current Flexible Rate Period as determined in accordance with
Section 2.03(d)(iv) hereof, and (3) in the case of an adjustmem from an Auction Rate
Period, the day immediately following the last day of the then ciureDt Auction Rate

 83184

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

Period; and (B) in the case of an adjustment from a Term Rate Period having a duration
in excess of one year or an Auction Rate Period, be accompanied by an opinion of Bond
Counsel stating that such adjustment (1) is authorized or permitted by diis Indenture and
(2) wiU not adversely affect tbe exclusion of the interest on the Bonds from gross income
for federal income tax purposes. During each Weekly Rate Period commencing on a date
• so specified or determined (provided that the opinion of Bond Counsel described in clause
(B) above, if required, is reaffinned as of such date) and ending on the day immediately
precedingflieeffective date offlicnext succeeding Rate Period, the interestrateborne by
flie Bonds shaU be a Weekly Rate.
(iii)
Notice of Adjustment to Weeklv Rate. FoUowing tbe Issuer's election
pursuant to Section 2.03(b)(u) hereof, the Trustee shaU give notice of an adjustment to a
Weekly Rate Period to Owners, by first class maU, postage prepaid, postmarked not less
thanfifteen(15) days prior to the effective date of such Weekly Rate Period. Such notice
shaU be prepared by the Issuer and shall state (1) that the interestrateon the Bonds wUl
be adjusted to a Weekly Rate (subject to the receipt of the reaffirming opinion of Bond
Counselreferredto in the immediately preceding paragnqih (ii), if required, and lo the
Issuer's abUity torescindits election as described in Section 2.03(0 hereoO, (2) the
effective date of such Weekly Rate Period. (3) that aU Bonds arc subject to mandatoty
purchase on such effective date, and (4) the procedures of such purchase and payment of
the purchase price.
(c)
(i) Determination of Term Rate. During each Term Rate Period the Bonds
shaU bear interest at the Term Rate determined by the Remarketing Agent on a Business Day
selected by the Issuer but not more than thirty (30) days prior to thefirstday of such Term Rate
Period. The Term Rate shaU be theratedetermined by the Remarketing Agent on such date, and
filed on such date with the Tmstee and the Issuer, by written notice or by telephone promptiy
confinned by telecopy or other writing, as being the lowest rate which, would enable the
Remarketing Agent to seU the Bonds on the effective date of such Term Rate at a price equal to
100% ofthe principal amount thereof; provided, however, that if, for any reason, a Term Rate
for any Term Rate Period shall not be determined or become effective, then (1) in the event the
current Term Rate Period is for one year or less, the Rate Period for the Bonds shaU automaticaUy
adjust to a DaUy Rate Period and (2) in the event the ciurent Term Rate Period is for more than
one year, the Rate Period for the Bonds shaU automatically adjust to a Term Rate Period of one
year and one day, subject to the proviso contained in the last sentence of Section 2.03(c)(ii);
provided, fiirther, that in the case of clause (2) above, if the Issuer delivers to the Trustee an
approving opim'on of Bond Counsel prior to the end of the Uien effective Teim Rate Period, the
Rate Period for the Bonds wUl adjust lo a Daily Rate Period. If a Daily Rate for the first day of
any such DaUy Rate Period is not determined as provided in Section 2.03(a)(i) hereof, the DaUy
Rate for the first day of such DaUy Rate Period shall be 100% of the most recent One-Year Note
Index theretofore published in The Bond Buyer (or, if The Bond Buyer is no longer published or
no longer publishes the One-Year Note Index, the one-year note index contained in the publication
determined by the Remarketing Agent as the most comparable to The Bond Buyer). If a Term
Rate for any such Term Rate period described in clause (2) above is not determined as described
in the second precedmg sentence, the Term Rate for such Term Rate Period shall be 100% of die
most recent One-Year Note Index theretofore published in The Bond Bnyer (or, if The Bond

 5/1/2002"

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83185

Buyer is no longer published or no longer publishes the One-Year Note Index, the one-year note
index contained in the publication deteimined by the Remarketing Agent as the most comparable
to The Bond Buverl. In no event shaU any Tenn Rate exceed the lesser of [18%] per annum and
the maximumrateper annum then pemiitted by applicable law. The Remarketing Agent shaU
provide the Trustee with immediate telephonic notice (promptly confirmed in writing) or facsinule
notice of each Term Rate, as determined.
(ii)
Adjustment to or Continuatioh of Term Rate. At any time, the Issuer, by
written direction to the Trastee and the Remarketing Agent, may elect that the Bonds sbaU bear,
or continue to bear, interest at a Term Rate, and if it shaU so elect, shaU determine the duration
of the Term Rate Period during which the Bonds shaU bear interest at such Term Rate. As a part
of such election, the Issuer also may determine thattiieinitial Term Rate Period shaU be foUowed
• by successive Term Rate Periods and, if the Issuer so elects, shaU specify-^ the duration of each
such successive Term Rate Period as provided in this paragraph (u). Such direction shaU
(A) specify the effective dale of each Term Rate Period (which shaU be a Business Day not earlier
than thefifteenth(15th) day foUowing the fifth (5ih) Business Day after the date of receipt by the
Trustee of such direction, and shaU be (1) in the case of an adjustmentfroma Flexible Rate
Period, the day immediately foUowing the last day of the then current Flexible Rate Period as
deteimined in accordance with Section 2.03(d)(iv) hereof, (2) in the case of an adjustment from
a Term Rate Period, the day immediately foUowing the last day of the then current Term Rate
Period, and (3) in the case of an adjustmentfroman Auction Rate Period, the day immediately
foUowing the last day of thetihencurrent Auction Rate Period; (B) specifyttielast day of such
Tenn Rate Period or, if successive Teim Rate Periods shaU have been designated, the last day of
each such Term Rate Period (which shaU be for each Term Rate Period either the date
immediately preceding thefinalmamrity of the Bonds, or a day which both immediately precedes
a Business Day and is at least 90 days after the effective date thereoO and (C) in the case of an
adjustmentfroma DaUy Rate Period, a Weekly Rate Period, a Flexible Rate Period, an Auction
Rate Period or a Term Rate Period having a duration of one year or less to a Term Rate Period
having a duration in excess of one year, or an adjustment from a Term Rate Period having a
duration m excess of one year to a DaUy Rate Period, a Weekly Rate Period, a Flexible Rate
Period, an Auction Rate Period or a Term Rate Period having a duration of one year or less, be
accompanied by an opinion of Bond Counsel stating that such adjustment (1) is authorized or
permitted by this Indenture and (2) wUl not adveisely affect the exclusion of the interest on the
Bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes. If the Issuer shall designate successive
Term Rate Periods, but shaU not, with respect to the second or any subsequent Term Rate Period,
specify any of the infoimation described in clause (A) above, the Issuer, by written direction to
the Tmstee and the Remarketing Agent, given not later than thefifth(5th) Business Day precedmg
thefifteenUi(15th) day prior to the first (1") day of sucb successive Term Rate Period, may
specify any of such infonnation not previously specified with respect to such Term Rate Period
which information shall be accompanied by an opinion of Bond Counsel as described above, if
required. During the Term Rate Period commencing and ending on the dates so determined and
during each successive Term Rate Period, if any, the interestrateborne by the Bonds shall be a
Term Rate (provided that the opinion of Bond Counsel described in clause (C) above, if required,
is reaffirmed as of such date of commencement). If, by thefifth(5th) Business Day preceding
the founeenth (14th) day prior to the last day of any Term Rate Period, the Trustee shall not have
received notice of the Issuer's election that, during the next succeeding Rate Period, the Bonds

 83186

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

'5/1/2002

shall bear inierest at a Daily Rate, a Weekly Rate, a Flexible Rate, an Auction Rate or a Term
Rate, tbe next succeeding Rate Period shaU be a Tenn Rate Period of the same duration as the
immediately preceding Term Rate Period; provided, however, that if the last day of any
successive Term Rate Period shaU not be a day immediately pieceding a Business Day, then such
successive Term Rate Period shaU end on the first day immediately pieceding the Business Day
next succeeding such day or, if such Term Rate Period would end after the day prior to the. final
maturity date of the Bonds, the next succeeding Rate Period shall be a Term Rate Period ending
on the day prior to the final maturity date of tbe Bonds.
(in) Noti'ce of Adjustment to or Continuation of Term Rate. Following the
Issuer's election pursuant to Section 2.03(c)(i0 hereof, the Trustee shaU give notice of an
adjustment to a (or the continuation of another) Term Rate Period to Owners, by first class maU,
postage prepaid, postmarked not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the effective date of such Term
Rate Period. Such notice sbaU be prepared by.the Issuer and shall state (1) that the. interest rate
on the Bonds wUl be adjusted to, or continue to be, a Term Rate (subject to tbe receipt of the
reaffirming opinion of Bond Counselreferredto in the immediately preceding paragraph (u), if
required, and to the Issuer's abUify to rescind its election as described in Section 2.03(0 hereoO,
(2) the effective date and the last day of such Term Rate Period, (3) that the Term Rate for such
Term Rate Period wiU be determined on or prior to the effective date thereof, (4) how such Teim
Rate may be obtainedfromthe Remarketing Agem, (5) tbe Interest Payment Dates after such
effective date, (6) that aU Bonds are subject to mandatoty purchase on such effective date, (7) the
procedures for such purchase and the payment of the purchase price, (8) that, during such Term
Rate Period, Owners wiU not have therightto require the purchase of Bonds, but that aU Bonds
wiU be subject to mandatoiy purchase on the day foUowing the last day of such Term Rate Period
and (9) the redemption provisions set forth in Section 3.01 hereof which wUI apply during such
Term Rate Period.
(d)
(j) Determination of Flexible Segments and Flexible Rates. During each
Flexible Rate Period, each Bond shall bear interest during each Flexible Segment for such Bond
at the Flexible Rate for such Bond as described herein. Different Flexible Segments may apply
to different Bonds at any time andfromtime to time. The Flexible Segment for each Bond shaU
be a period of at least one day and not more than 270 days ending on a day that , immediately
precedes a Business Day, determined by the Remarketing Agem in consultation with the Issuer.
The Flexible Rate for each Flexible Segmem for each Bond shaU be determined by the
Remarketing Agem no later than the first day of such Flexible Segment (and in time to enable the
Remarketing Agent to give to the Tnistee the noticerequiredby Section 4.04(c) hereoO W be the
lowest interestratewhich would enable the Remarketing Agent to sell such Bond on the effective
date of suchrateat a price equal to 100% ofthe principal amount thereof. If a Flexible Segment
or a Flexible Rate for a Flexible Segment is not determined or effective, the Hexible Segmem for
such Bond shaU be a Flexible Segment of at least one day ending on the day immediately
preceding the next succeeding Business Day. and the interestratefor such Flexible Segment shall
be 100% of the most recent One-Year Note Index theretofore pubUshed in The Bond Buyer (or,
if The Bond Buyer is no longer published or no longer publishes the One-Year Note Index, the
one-year note index contained in the publication determined by the Remarketing Agent as most
comparable to The Bond Buyer). In no event shall the Flexible Rate for any Flexible Segment
exceed the lesser of [18%] per annum and the maximum rate per annum then pennitted by

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83187

applicable law. The Remarketing Agent shaU provide the Trustee with facsmule notice of each
Flexible Segment and Flexible Rate, as provided in Section 4.04(c) hereof.
(iO
Adjustment to Flexible Rates. At any time, the Issuer, by written direction
to the Tmstee and the Remarketing Agent, may elect that the Bonds shaU bear interest at Flexible
Rates. Such direction shaU (A) specify die effective date of the Flexible Rate Period during which
the Bonds shall bear interest at Flexible Rates which shall be a Busmess Day not earlier than the
fifteenth (15th) day foUowing thefifth(5th) Business Day after the date of receipt by the Tnistee
of such direction, and sbaU be, in tbe case of an adjustmentfroma Term Rate Period, the day
immediately foUowing the last day of the then current Term Rate Period, and in the case of an
adjustment from an Auction Rate Period, the day immediately foUowing the last day of the then
current Auction Rate Period; and (B) in the case of an adjustmentfroma Teim Rate Period having
a duration in excess of one year or zn Auction Rate Period, be accompanied by an opinion of
Bond Counsel stating that such adjustment (1) is authorized or permitted by the Indenture and
(2) wiU not adversely affect the exclusion of the interest on the Bondsfromgross income for
federal income tax purposes. During each Flexible Rate Period commencing on the date so
spedfied (provided that the opinion of Bond Counsel described in clause (B) above, if required,
is reaffirmed as of such date) and ending on the day immediately preceding the effective date of
the next succeeding Rate Period, each Bond shaU bear interest at a Flexible Rate during each
Flexible Segment for such Bond.
(in)
Notice of Adjustment to Flexible Rates. FoUowing the Issuer's election
pursuant to Section 2.03(d)(ii) hereof, the Trustee shaU give notice of an adjusttnent to a Flexible
Rate Period to Owners, byfirstclass mail, postage prepaid, postmarked not less than fifteen (15)
days prior to the effective date of such Flexible Rate Period. Such notice shaU be prepared by the
Issuer and state (1) that the interestrateon the Bonds wiU be adjusted to the Flexible Rate (subject
to receipt of the reaffirming opinion of Bond Counselreferredto in the immediately preceding
paragraph (ii), if required, and to the Issuer's ability to rescind its election as described in
Section 2.03(0 hereoO, (2) die effective date of such Flexible Rate Period, (3) that all Bonds arc
subject to mandatory purchase on such effective date, and (4) the procedures of such purchase and
the paymem of the puichase price.
(iv)
Adjustment from Flexible Rate Period. As a condition precedem to the
election during a Flexible Rate Period to adjust to a different Rate Period for the Bonds pursuant
to Section 2.03(a)(u), (b)(ii) or (c)(ii) hereof, the Remarketing Agent shall determine, not later
than the founeenth (14th) day foUowing the fifth (5th) Business Day after receipt by the Trustee
of the direction of the Issuer effecting such election. Flexible Segments of such duration that, as
soon as possible, all Flexible Segments shall end on the same date. The date on which all Flexible
Segments so determined shall end shaU be the last day of the Uien cunent Flexible Rate Period
and the day next succeeding such date shall be the effective date of the DaUy Rate Period, ihe
Weekly Rate Period, the Term Rate Period or the Auction Rate Period elected by the Issuer. The
Remarketing Agent, prompdy upon the determination thereof, shall give wrinen notice of such
last day and such effective dates to the Issuer and the Trustee.

 83188

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(e)
(i) • Detennination of Auction Rates and Auaion Periods. If the Interest
Rate Mode for the Bonds is the Auction Rate, the Auction Rates and Auction Periods shall be
determined as described herein, subject, in aU cases, to Section 12.12 hereof.
Auction Rates. The interestrateon the Bonds for each Auction Period shaU be the
rate detennined by the Auction Agent at or prior to 3:00 p.m. (New York Cify time) on the
Auction Date in accordance with the Auction Procedures; provided that the initial Auction Period
of an Auction Rate Period shall be a period selected by the Issuer at the time of the election of the
Auction Rate Period as tbe initial Rate Period for the Bonds or at the time of tbe election to adjust
to the Auction Rate Period, as the case may be, and the Auction Raie for the initial Auction Period
of an Auction Rate Period shaU be therateestablished by the Underwriter withrespectto the
initial Auction Period if the initial Rate Period for the Bonds is the Auction Rate Period and by
the Remariteting Agem for the imtial Auction Period in the case of an adjustment to tbe Auction
Rate Period on a date no later than the effective date thereof as the TniniTTniin late of interest
necessaiy, in the judgment of the Underwriter or the Remarketing Agent, as the case may be,
talcing into account then PrevaUing Market Conditions, to enable the Underwriter or the
Remarketing Agent, as the case may be, to seU the Bonds on the effiective date of such Auction
Period at tbe principal amount thereof.- If on any Auction Date, the Auction Agent ghail faU to
take any action necessary to determine or take any action which effectively prevents the
determination of, arateof interest puisuam to the Auction Procedures, the Auction Rate for the
next succeeding Auction Period shaU equal the No Auction Rate on such Auction Date or, in the
evem the No Auction Rate cannot be detennined, then the currem Auction Rate shaU remain in
effect for the succeeding Auction Period. Tbe Auction Rate for each Auction Period commencing
after the occurrence of an Event of Default to and including the Auction Period; if any, during
which or commencing less than two Business Days after such Evem of Default has been cured or
waived shaU be equal to the Maximum Auction Rate as detennined on the Auction Date.
Auction Periods. Each Auction Period shall be a Standard Auction Period unless
a different Auction Period is established as herein provided and each Auction Period which
immediately succeeds a non-Standard Auction Period shaU be a Standard Auction Period unless
a different Auction Period is established as herein provided. During an Auction Rate Period, the
Issuer may change tbe length of a single Auction Period or the Standard Auction Period by written
notice delivered at least 20 days but not more than 60 days prior to the Auction Date for sucb
Auction Period to the Tnistee, the Remarketing Agem, the Auction Agem, the Bond Insurer and
the Securities Depositoty. If sucb Auction Period wiU be less than 7 days, such notice shall be
effective only if it is accompanied by a written statement of the Registrar, the Paying Agem, the
Tmstee, the Remarketing Agem. the Auction Agem and the Securities Depositoty to the effect that
they are capable of performing their duties hereunder and under the Remarketing Agreemem and
the Auction Agreemem withrespectto sucb Auction Period. If such notice specifies a change in
the length ofthe Standard Auction Period, such notice shall be effective only if il is accompanied
by the written consem of the RemarketiDg Agent to such change. The length of an Auction Period
or the Standard Auction Period may not be changed unless Sufficient Clearing Bids existed at both
the Auction immediately preceding the date the notice of such change was given and the Auction
immediately preceding such changed Auction Period. The change in length of an Auction Period
or the Standard Auction Period shall take effect only if (W) the Trustee, the Bond Insurer and the
Auction Agent receive, by 11:00 a.m. (New York Citytime)on ihe Business Day immediately

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83189

precedmg die Auction Date for such Auction Period, a certificatefromdie Issuer by telecopy
iiotice, authorizing the change in the Auction Period or the Standard Auction Period, which shall
be specified in such certificate, and confinning tliat Bond Counsel expects to be able to give an
opinion on thefirstday of such Auction Period to the effect that the change in the Auction Period
is authorized by this Indenture and wiU not adversely affect the exdusionfromgross income of
iioterest on the Bonds for federal income tax purposes, (X) the Trustee shaU not have delivered
to the Auction Agem by 12:00 noon (New York City time) on the-Auction Date for such Auction
period notice that a faUure to deposit has occurred, (Y) SufiicieDt Clearing Bids exist at the
Auction on the Auction Date for such Auction Period, and (Z) the Tmstee. the Bond Insurer and
the Auction Agent receive by 9:30 a.m. (New York Cify thne) on thefirstday of such Auction
period, an opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that the change inttieAuction Period is
authorized by this Indenture and wiU not adversely affect the exclusionfromgross income of
interest oh the Bonds for federal income tax purposes. If the conditionreferredto in (W) above
is not met, the Auction Rate for the next succeeding Auction Period shaU be detennined pursuam
to the Auction Procedures and the next succeeding Auction Period shaU be a Standard Auction
period. If any of die conditionsreferredto in (X), (Y) or (Z) above is not met, the Auction Rate
for the next succeeding Auction Period shaU equal the Maximum Auction Rate as determined as
offlieAuction Date for such Auction Period. During an Auction Rate Period,flieRemarketing
Agem. -with the written consent of the Issuer, may change, in order to confoim with then-cuirem
market practice with respect to simUar securities or to accommodate economic and financial
factois that may affect or berelevamto the day of the week constimting an Auction Date, the
Auction Date for aU future Auction Periods to a differem day, so long as the first such Auction
Date wiU be a Business Day in the calendar week in which the next succeeding Auction Date is
then scheduled to occur. If a change in an Auction Date is undertaken m conjunction with a
change in an Auction Period and the conditions for the establishment of such cbange in Auction
Period are not met, the Auction Date may be, and the next succeeding Auction Period may be
adjusted to end, on a Business Day in the calendar week in which such Auction Date was
scheduled to occur and such Auction Pen'od was scheduled to end to accommodate the change in
the Auction Date. The Remarketing Agent shall communicate its determination to change an
Auction Date by means of a written notice delivered at least 10 days prior to the Auction Date
immediately pieceding such Auction Date to the Issuer, the Trustee, the Bond Insurer, the Auction
Agent and the Securities Depository which shaU state (i) the detennination of the Remarketing
Agem to change the Auction Date, (u) the new Auction Date and (in) the date on which such
Auction Dale shall be changed. If, after any proposed change in die Auction Date, any Auction
Period would be less than 7 days in duration, such notice shall be effective only if it is
accompanied by a written statement of the Bond Registrar, the Paying Agent, the Tmstee, the
Remarketing Agem,. the Aurtion Agent and the Securities Depository to the effect that they are
capable of performiag their duties hereunder and under the Remarketing Agreement and Auction
Agency Agreemeni with respect to any such Auction Period.
(ii)
Adjustment to Auction Rate. At any lime, the Issuer, by written direction
to die Tmstee and the Remarketing Agent, may electfliaithe Bonds shaU bear interest at the
Auction Rate. Such direction shall (A) specify the effective date of such adjustment to the Auction
Rate which shall be a Business Day not earlier than thefifteenth(15th) day foUowmg the
fifth (5th) Business Day after the date of receipt by the Trustee of such direction, and shall be
(1) in the case of an adjustment from a Term Rate Period, the day immediately following the last

 83190

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

day of the then current Term Rate Period, and (2) in the case of an adjusnnentfroma Flexible
Rate Period, the day immediately foUowing the last day of the then current Flexible Rate Period
as determined in accordance with Section 2.03(d)(iv) hereof; and (B) be accompanied by an
opinion of Bond Counsel stating that such adjustment (1) is authoiized or permitted by this
Indenmre and (2) will not adversely affect the exclusion of the imerest on the Bonds from gross
income for federal income tax purposes. During each Auction Rate Period commencing on a date
so specified or determined (provided that the opinion of Bond Counsel described in clause
(B) above is reaffinned as of such date) and ending on the day immediately preceding the effective
date of the next succeedinjg Rate Period, the interestrateborne by the Bonds shaU be the Auction
Rate.
(iii)
Notice of Adjustment to Auction Rate. Following the Issuer's election
pursuant to Section 2.03(e)(ii) heieof, the Tnistee shaU give notice of an adjustment to the Auction
Rate Period to Owners, byfirstclass maU, postage prepaid, postmarked not less thanfifteen(15)
days prior to the effective date of such Auction Rate Period.-. Such notice shaU be prepared by the
Issuer and shaU state (1) that the interestrateon the Bonds wiU be adjusted to the Auction Rate
(subject to the receipt of the reaffirming opinion of Bond Counsel referred to in the immediately
preceding paragraph (ii), ifrequired,and to the Issuer's abUity to rescind its election as described
in Section 2.03(0 hereoO, (2) the effective date of such the Auction Rate Period, (3) that all Bonds
are subject to mandatoty purchase on such effective date, (4) the procedures of such purchase and
paymem of the purchase price, and (5) the identify of the Auction Agent.
(iv)
The Auction Agent Concurrentiy with the giving of notice for an
adjustment of the interest rate to the Auction Rate, or upon the election of the first Rate Period
if k be the Auction Raie Period, the Issuer shaU appoint an Auction Agent for the Bonds. The
Auction Agent shall evidence its acceptance of such appointmem by emering into an Auction
Agreement with the Issuer. The Auction Agem shall be (a) a bank or trust company duly
organized under the laws of the United States of America or any state or territoty thereof having
its principal place of business in the Borough of Manhattan, in The City of New York and having
a combined capital stock, surplus and undivided profits of at least $
or (b) a member
of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc., havmg a capitalization of at least
$
.
and, in either case, authorized by law. to perform aU the duties imposed upon il
under the Auction Agreement. The Auction Agem may at any timeresignand be discharged of
the duties and obligations created by this Indenture by giving at least 45 days' notice to the
Tnistee, the Issuer, the Remarketing Agent and the Market Agem. The Auction Agent may be
removed at any time by the Issuer upon at least 45 days' notice; provided that the Issuer shall have
entered imo an agreement in substantiaUy the form of the Auction Agreemeni with a successor
Auction Agent. The appointment of a successor Auction Agent shaU be subject to the appioval
of the Bond Insurer. The Trustee shall, within 25 days of the resignation or removal of the
Remarketing Agent, the Tender Agent or the Auction Agent or the appointment of a successor
Remarketing Agent, Tender Agent, or Auction Agent give notice thereof by firsi class mail,
postage prepaid, to ihe owners of die Bonds.
(v)
The Market Agent.
is hereby
appointed as the initial Market Agem. On or before the effective date of any subsequent
adjustment to an Auction Rate Period, or upon the resignation or removal of the Market Agent,

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83191

a Market Agent shaU be appointed by the Issuer. Any such Market Agent shall be a BrokerDealer, and shall signify its acceptance of the duties and obligations imposed on it hereunder as
Market Agem by the execution of the Broker-Dealer Agreemem. The Market Agent may at any
time resign and be discharged of the duties and obligations created by this Indenmre by giving at
least 45 days' notice to the Trustee, tbe Auction Agem and the Issuer. The Market Agent may
beremovedat any time by the Issuer upon at least 45 days' notice; provided that, the Issuer or
the Auction Agem shaU have entered imo ah agreement in substantiaUy the foim of the BrokerDealer Agreement with a successor Market Agent. The appointmem of a successor Market Agem
shaU be subject to the approval of the Bond Insurer. During an Auction Rate Period, all
references in this Indenture to the Remarketing Agem shaU, to the extent not inconsistcntwith the
rights, duties and obligations of the Maricet Agem, be deemed to refer to the Market Agent.
(0 ' Notwithstanding anything hereinm the contraty, the Issuer may rescind any
election by.it to adjust to, or in the case of a Term Rate Period continue, a Rate Period pursuam
to Section 2.03(a)(U). (b)(ii), (c)(u), (d)(U) or (e)(u) hereof by giving written noticefliereofto the
Trastee and the Remarketing Agem prior to such effective date, ff the Trustee receives notice of
such rescission prior to the time tbe Trustee has given notice to-the Owners of the Bonds of the
change in or continuation of Rate Periods pursuant to Section 2.03(a)(iii), (b)(iu), (c)(uO, (cl)(iu)
or (eXiii) hereof, then such rescission shaU be immediately effective withom any fiirther action
by the Issuer or the Trustee and such notice of a change in or continuation of Rate Periods shall
be of no force and effect and shaU not be given to the Owners, ff the Trustee receives notice of
such rescission aftet the Trustee has given notice to the Owners of the Bonds pursuam to
Section 2.03(a)(uO, (b)(iu), (c)(iu), (d)(iu) or (e)(Ui) hereof from odierfliana Term Rate Period
in excess of one year or an attempted adjustmemfromone Rate Period (other than a Term Rate
Period in excess of one year) to anoflier Raie Period does not become effective for any other
reason, then the Rate Period for the Bonds shall automatically adjust to or continue in a DaUy Rate
Period and the Trastee shaU°prompdy give notice thereof to the Owners of the Bonds, ff the
Trustee receives notice of suchrescissionafter the Trustee has given notice to the Owners of the
Bonds pursuant to Section 2.03(c)(ui) of an adjustmemfroma Teim Rate Period in excess of one
year to another Rate Period (including a Term Rate Period of a differem duration), or if an
attempted adjustmem from a Teim Rate Period in excess of one year to another Rate Period
(including a Term Rate Period of a differem duration) does not become effective for any reason,
then the Rate Period for the Bonds shall continue to be a Term Rate Period of the same duration
as the immediately preceding Term Rate Period, provided that if the Issuer delivers to the Tmstee
an approving opinion of Bond Counsel prior to the end of the then effective Teim Rate Period,
the Rate Period for the Bonds shall be as directed by the Issuer in writing,ffa DaUy Rate for the
first day of any DaUy Rate Period to which a Rate Period is adjusted under this Section 2.03(0
is not determined as provided in Section 2.03(a)(i) hereof the Daily Rate for thefirstday of such
DaUy Rate Pericxl shall be 100% of the most recent One-Year Note Indexflieretoforepublished
in The Bond Buyer (or, if The Bond Buyer is no longer pubfished or no longer publishes the OneYear Note Index, the one-year note index contained in the publication detennined by the
Remarketing Agem as most comparable to The Bond Buyer). The Trustee shall prompdy give
wrinen notice of each such automatic adjustment to a Rate Period pursuant to this Section 2.03(0
to the Owners in the form provided in Section 2.03(a)(iii) or (c)(iii) hereof, as the case may be.
Notwithstanding the rescbsion of any election to adjust to or continue a Rate Period, if notice has

 83192

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

been given to Bondholders pursuant to Section 2.03(a)(iu), (b)(iU), (c)(ui), (d)(iii) or (e)(ui), die
Bonds shafi be subject to mandatoty purchase as specified in sucb notice.
(g)
The determination as herein provided by the Remarketing Agem and the
Auction Agem, as the case may be, of the various imerestrates.Flexible Segments and Auction
Periods shaU be conclusive and binding upon the Trustee, tbe Issuer and the Owners of the Bonds.
Section 2.04. Ownership, Transfer, Exchange and Registration of Bonds. The
Issuer shaU cause books for theregistrationand for the transfer of the Bonds as provided herein
to be kept by the Tmstee at its Principal Office, which is hereby constimted and appointed the
Registrar and transfer agent for the Bonds. The Issuer shaU prepare ami defiver to the Tnistee,
and the Trustee shaU k ^ custody of, a supply of unauthenticated Bonds duly executed by the
Issuer, as provided in Section 2.(S hereof, for use in the.transfer and exchange of Bonds. The
Trustee is hereby authorized and directed to complete such foims of Bonds as to principal amounts
andregisteredowners,, and in the case of a Bond bearing interests at a Flexible Rate the
information specified in the second paragraph of Section 2.06 hereof, m accordance, with the
provisions hereof, in effecting tiansfeis and exchanges of Bonds as provided herein.
Upon smiender for transfer of any Bond at the Designated Office of the Trastee,
duly endorsed for transfer or accompanied by a written instrument or inscmmenls of transfer in
fonn satisfactoty to the Trustee diUy executed by the registered owner or his attorney duly
authorized in writing, the Trustee shaU date and execute tbe certificate of authentication on and
deliver in tbe name of the transferee or transferees a new Bond or Bonds duly executed by tbe
Issuer of Authorized Denominations and for a like aggregate principal amount.
Any Bond or Bonds may be exchanged at the Designated Office of the Trustee for
a new Bond or Bonds of like aggregate principal amount in Authorized Denominations. Upon
surrender of any Bond or Bonds for exchange, the Tmstee shall date and execute the certificate
of authentication on and deliver a new Bond or Bonds duly executed by tbe Issuer which the
Bondholder making the exchange is entitied to receive.
Except in connection wifli theremarketingof Bonds, the Tnistee shaU not be
required to transfer or exchange any Bond after the mailing of notice caUing such Bond or portion
thereof for redemption, nor during the period of ten days next preceding the mailing of such
notice of redemption.
Except as provided in Section 4.03, hereof, the person in whose name any Bond
shall be registered shall be deemed and regarded as the absolute owner thereof for aU purposes,
and payment ofthe principal of, premium, if any, or interest on any Bond shall be made only to
or upon the written order of theregisteredOwner thereof or his legal representative, but such
registration may be changed as hereinabove provided. All such payments shall be valid and
effective to satisfy and discharge the liability upon such Bond to the extent of die sum or sums so
paid.
The Issuer and the Tmstee shall require the payment by the Bondholder requesting
exchange or traasfer (other than an exchange upon a partial redemption of a Bond) of any tax, fee

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83193

or other governmental chargerequiredto be paid with respect to such exchange or transfer, but
otherwise no charge shaU be made lo the Bondholder for such exchange or transfer.
Section 2.05. Execution of Bonds. The Bonds shaU be executed on behalf of flie
Issuer with tbe manual or facsinule signature of its Mayor, and attested by tbe manual or facsimUe
signature of its City Clerk, and shaU have impressed or imprinted thereon the official seal of the
Issuer or a facsimUefliereof.In case any officer who shaU have signed any of the Bonds. shaU
cease to be such officer before the Bonds so signed or attested shaU have been authenticated or
delivered by the Registrar or issued by the Issuer,'such Bonds may neverthdess be authenticated,
delivered and issued and, upon such authentication, defivety and issuance, sbaU be as binding
upon the Issuer as though those who signed and atteisted the same had continued to be such
officers offlieIssuer. Also, any Bond may be signed on behalf of the Issuer by such peisons as
on the actual date of the execution of such Bond shaU be the proper officers although on the
nominal date of such Bond any such peison shall not have been such officer.
Section 2.06. Authentication. No Bond shaU be vafid for any purpose untU the
certificate of authentication on such Bond shaU have been duly executed by the Tmstee, and such
aiithentication shaU be conclusive proof that such Bond has been duly authenticated and delivered
under this Indenture and that the Owner thereof is entitied to the benefits of the trust hereby
created. The Trustee's certificate of authentication on any Bond shall be deeined to have been
executed by it ff manually signed by an authorized signatoty of the Tnistee, but it shaU not be
necessatyfliatthe same signatory sign the certificate of authentication on aU of the Bonds issued
hereunder.
Upon audientication of any Bond,flieTnistee shall set forth on such Bond (1) flie
date of such authentication and (2) in the case of a Bond bearing interest at a Flexible Rate, such
Flexible Rate, the day next succeeding the last day of the applicable Flexible Segment, the number
of days comprising such Flexible Segmem and the amount of uiterest to accme during such
Flexible Segmem.
Seciion 2.07. Form of Boods; The Bonds and tbe certificate of authentication to
be executed thereon shaU be in substantiaUy the form attached hereto as Appendix A, with such
appropriate variations, omissions and insertions as are permitted or required by this Indenmre.
Upon adjustmem to a Term Rate Period, the form of Bond may include a summaty of the
mandatoty and optional redempdon provisions to apply to the Bonds during such Term Rate
Period, or a statemem to the effect that the Bonds wUl not be optionaUy redeemed during such
Term Rate Period, and a statement indicating the applicable Term Rale and the duration of the
applicable Term Rate Period, provided that the Registtar shaU not authenticate such a revised
Bond form prior to receiving an opinion of Bond Counsel that such Bond fonn conforms to the
terms of this Indenmre and that authentication thereof wUl not adversely affect the exclusion of
interest on the Bonds from gross income for federal income lax purposes.
Section 2.08. MutUated, Desfroyed, Lost or Stolen Bonds. In die event any
Bond or temporary Bond is mutilated, lost, stolen or destroyed, the Tmsiee may authenticate a
new Bond duly executed by the Issuer of like date and denomination as that mutilated, lost, stolen
or destroyed; provided that, in the case of any mutilated Bond, such mutilated Bond shall first be

 83194

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

surrendered to the Trustee, and in the case of any lost, stolen or destroyed Bond, there shaU be
first fiimished to the Trustee evidence of such loss, theft or destmction satisfactoty to the Trustee,
together with indemnity to the Issuer and the Tmstee satisfactoty to them. In the event any such
Bond sbaU have matured, instead of issuing a duplicate Bond, the Tnistee on behalf of the Issuer
may pay the same without surrender thereof. The Issuer and the Trustee may charge the Owner
of such Bond with their reasonable fees and-expenses in this connection. The Issuer shaU
cooperate with the Trustee in connection with the issuance of replacement Bonds, but nothing in
this Section shaU be construed in derogation of anyrightswhich the Issuer or the Tnistee may
have to receive indemnification against liability, or paymem or reimbuisemem of expenses, in
connection with the issue of a replacement Bond. Ail Bonds shall be held and owned upon the
express condition that the foregoing provisions are, to the extent pennitted by law, exclusive with
respect to the replacement or paymem of mutilated, destroyed, lost or stolen Bonds, and shall
predude any and aU otherrightsor remedies.
Seciion 2.09. Temporary Bonds. Pending preparation of definitive Bonds, or by
agieemem with the purchaseis of aU Bonds, the Issuer may issue and, upon its request, the
Tnistee shaU authenticate, in fieu of definitive Bonds, one or more temporaiy printed or
typewritten Bonds in Authorized Denominations of substantiaUy the tenor recited above. Upon
request of the Issuer, the Trustee shaU authenticate definitive Bonds in exchange for and iqxin
surrender of an equal principal amount of temporary Bonds. UntU so exchanged,, temporaty
Bonds shaU have the samerights,remedies and security hereunder as definitive Bonds.
Section 2.10. CanceUation and Dispositi'on of Surrendered Bonds. Whenever
any Outstanding Bond shaU be defivered to the Trustee for transfer, exchange or canceUation
pursuant to this Indenture, upon payment of the priiicq>al amoimt represented thereby, or for
replacement pursuam to Section 2.08 hereof, such Bond shaU be prompdy canceled and disposed
of by the Trustee in accordance with its ordinaty customs and practices.
Section 2.11. DeUvery of the Bonds. Upon the execution and defiveiy of this
Indenture, the Issuer shaU execute and defiver to the Tmstee and the Tmstee shaU authenticate the
Bonds and deliver them to the purchasers as directed by the Issuer as hereinafter in this
Section provided.
Prior to the delivery by the Trustee of any of the Bonds there shall be filed with
the Trustee;
(1)

A duly certified copy of the Series

Bond Ordinance.

(2)

An original executed counterpart of this Indenture.

(3)

An original executed copy of the Series

Bond Order.

(4)
An order to authenticate the Bonds, signed by the Chief Financial Officer
or City Comptroller of the Issuer.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83195

Section 2.12. Book Entry System. The Trustee and the Issuer, mayfromtime
to time enter into, and discontinue, an agreement with a Securities Depositoty to establish
procedures with respect to the Bonds not inconsistent with the provisions offliisIndenmre;
provided, however, that, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Indenture, any such
agreemem may provide:

(a)
that such Securities Depository is not required to present a Bond to the
Tmstee in order to receive a partial payment of principal;
(b) : that such Securities Depositoty is not required to present a Bond or any
portion thereof in order to receive paymem of a purchase price;
(c)
that beneficial owners may give, or cause to be given, notices respecting
the tender of a Bond or portion thereof for purchase;
(d)
that differem provisions for notice to or by such Securities Depositoty may
be set forth therein; and
(e)
that a legend may appear on each Bond so long as the Bonds are subject to
such agreemem.

With respect to Bonds registered in tbe name of a Securities Depositoty (or its
nominee) neither the Tmstee, the Bond Insurer nor the Issuer shall have any obligation to any of
its meml>eis or participants or to any person on behalf of whom an interest is held in the Bonds.
WhUe an agreement with a Securities Depositoty is in effect, the procedures established thereiu
shaU apply to the Bonds notwithstanding any other provisions of this Indenture to the contraty.
Section 2.13. DeUvery of the Bonds; Designation of the Bonds as Book Entry
Bonds; Appointment of Initial Securities Depository for the Bonds. The Bonds are hereby
authorized to be and shall be issued initially, subject to the provisions of this Indenture, as Book
Entty Bonds within the meaning of and subject to Section 2.12 hereof. DTC is hereby appointed
as the initial Securities Depository for the Bonds.

 83196

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 2.14. CUSIP Numbers. The Issuer in issuing flie Bonds may use
"CUSIP" numbers (iffliengenerally in use), and, if so, the Trastee shaU use "CUSIP" numbers
in notices of redemption as a convenience to Owners; provided that any such notice may state that
no representation is made as to the correcmess of such numbers eiflier as printed on the Bonds or
as contained in any notice of a redemption and that reliance may be placed only on the. other
identification numbers printed on tbe Bonds, and any such redemption shaU not be affected by any
defect in or omission of such numbers. The Issuer wiU promptiy notify the Tmstee of any change
in the "CUSIP" numbers.

ARTICLE m
Redemption of Bonds Before Maturity
Section 3.01. Redemption Dates and Prices. The Bonds shall be subject to
redemption prior to maturity, at the written direction of the Issuer to the Trustee, in the amounts,
at the times and in the manner provided below.
(A)
Optional Redemption. (l)Onany Business Day during a DaUy Rate Period
or a Weekly Rate Period, and on the day next succeeding the last day of each sucb Rate Period,
the Bonds shaU be subject to optional redemption by the Issuer, in whole or in part, at 100% of
their principal amoum, plus accnied interest, if any, to the redemption date.
(2)
On the day next succeeding the last day of any Flexible Segmem with
respect to any Bond, such Bond shall be subject to optional redemption by the Issuer, in whole
or in part, at 100% of its principal amount.
(3)
On the Business Day immediately succeeding any Auction Date, the Bonds
shall be subject to optional redemption by the Issuer, m whole or in part, at 100% of their
principal amount, together with accmed interest, if any, to the redemption date.
(4)
During any Term Rate Period, and on the day next succeeding the last day
of each Terra Rate Period, the Bonds shall be subject to optional redemption by the Issuer, during
the periods specified below, in whole at any lime or in panfromtime to time on any date, at the
redemption prices (expressed as percentages of principal amoum) hereinafter indicated plus
accmed interest, if any, to the redemption date:

 5/1/2002

Length of CurrcDi Term
Rate Period

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

Commenceineiu of Redemption Period '

83197

Redemption Price as
Peitenuge of Principal Amoimt

More than 15 years

Tenth anniversary of coninicncemcnl of
Term Rate Period

102%, declining t^y 1/2% on each
succeeding anniversary of the first day of
ibe redemption period- unti] reaching
100% and thereafter 100%

More than 13 years, but
no more than 15 years

Eighth anniversary of commencement of
Term Rate Period

102%,- declining by 112% on each
succeeding amuveisaiy of the first d^ of
die redempdon period imiil leaching
100% and thereaAer 100%

More than 10 years, but Fifth anniversaiy of commencement of
no more than 13 years
Tenn Rate Period

101-1/2%, declining by 1/2% on each
succeeding anniveisaiy of the first day of
tbe redempdon period until reaching
100% and thereafter 100%

More than 7 years, but
no more than 10 years

Fourth anniversaiy of commencement of
Term Rate Period.

101%, declining by 1/2% on each
succeediiig anniversary of thefirstday of
the redemption period until reaching
100% and thereafter 100%

More than 3 years, Inii
not more than 7 years

Third anniversaiy of .commcscemcm of
Tenn Raie Period

101%. declining to I0O% on the next
succeeding anniversary ofthe first day of
the redempdon period and thcteafter
100%

3 years or less

On day next succeeding last day of Tenn
Raie Period

100%.

With respect to any Term Rate Period, the Issuer may specify in the notice required
by Section 2.03(c)(iu) hereof redemption prices and periods other thanflioseset foith above for
Bonds not then caUed for redemption; provided, however, that such notice shall be acconqianied
by an opinion of Bond Counsel stating that such changes inredemptionprices and periods (i) are
authorized or pennitted by tliis Indentiire and (ii) wiU not adversely affect the exclusion of the
interest on the Bondsfromgross income for federal income tax purposes.
(B)
Mandatory Redemption. The Bonds are subject to mandatory redemption
on the dales and inflieprincipal amounts set forth below at a redemption price equal to 100% of
the principal amount thereof plus accmed interest, if any, to the redemption date.
Date

Principal Amount

Section 3.02. Notice of Redemption. Notice of the call for any redemption of
Bonds or any portion thereof (which stiall be in Authorized Denominations) pursuant to

 83198

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 3.01 hereof identifying the Bonds or portions thereof to be redeemed, specifying the
redemption date, the redemption price, the place and manner of payment and that from the
redemption date interest wiU cease to accme, shaU be given by the Tmstee by mailing a copy of
the redemption notice byfirst-classmaU, postage prepaid, to. the Owner of each Bond to be
redeemed iQ. whole or in pan at the addiess shown on the registration books. Sucb notice shaU
be given at leastfifteen(15) days (thirty (30) days if tbe Rate Period for the Bonds isfliena Term
Rate period) prior to the datefixedfor redenqition to the Owners of Bonds to be redeemed;
provided, however, that failure to duly give such notice, or any defect therein, shaU not affect the
vafidity of any proceedings for the redemption of Bonds with respect to which no such faihire or
defect occnired. Upon presentation and surrender of Bonds so caUed for redemption in whole or
in part at the place or places of payment, except as otherwise provided pursuant to Section 2.12
hereof withrespectto Book Entty Bonds, such Bonds or portions thereof shaU be redeemed. Any
notice maUed as provided in this Section shaU be conclusively presumed to have been duly given,
whether or not the Owner receives the notice, ff a Bond is presented to the Trustee for transfer
after notice of redemption of such Bond has been maUed as herein provided, the Trustee shaU
deUver a copy of such notice of redemption to the new Owner of such Bond.
Withrespectto any notice of optional redemption of Bonds, unless upon the giving
of such notice such Bonds shaU be deemed to have been paid within the meaning of Article Vm
hereof, such notice may state (ff so directed by the Issuer) that such redenq)tion shaU be
conditional upon .the receipt by the Trustee on or prior to the datefixedfor such redemption of
moneys sufficiem to pay the principal of, and premium, if any, and interest on, such Bonds to be
redeemed, and thatffsuch moneys shaU not have been so received said notice shall be of no force
and effect and tbe Issuer shaU not be required toredeemsuch Bonds. In the evem that such notice
of redemption contains such a condition and such moneys are not so received, the redemption shaU
not be made and the Trustee shaU within a reasonable time thereafter give notice, in the manner
in which the notice of redemption was given, that sucb moneys were not so received.
Section 3.03. Deposit of Fimdls. For the redemption of any of the Bonds, the
. Issuer shaU cause to be deposited in the Bond Fund, to the extent legaUy available therefore,
moneys sufficient to pay when due the principal of and premium, tf any. and interest on the
redemption date.
Section 3.04. Partial Redemption of Bonds. In case a Bond is of a denomination
larger than the minimum Authorized Denomination, aU or a portion of such Bond may be
redeemed provided the principal amoum not being redeemed is in an Authorized Denomination.
Upon surrender of any Bond for redemption m part only, the Issuer shaU execute and the Trustee
shaU authenticate and defiver to the Owner thereof, wifliout cost to the Owner, a new Bond or
Bonds of Authorized Denominations Ln aggregate principal amount equal to the unredeemed
pomon of the Bond surrendered.
Section 3.05. Selection of Bonds for Redemption, ff less than all of the Bonds
are called for redemption, the Trustee shall select the Bonds or portions thereof to be redeemed,
from the Bonds Outstanding not previously called for redemption, at random or in such other
manner as in tbe Tmstee's sole discretion it shall deem appropriate and fair, in either case in
Authorized Denominations provided that the aggregate principal amount of each Bond remaining

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83199

Outstanding following such redemption shaU be in an Authorized Denomination. The Tmstee shaU
have no liabifify to any person as a result of making any sucb selection. Tbe Trustee sbaU
promptiy notify the Issuer in writing of the Bonds or portions thereof selected for redemption,
provided, however, that in connection with any redemption of Bonds the Tnistee sbaU first select
for redemption any Bonds held by the Trustee for the accoum of the Issuer or held of record by
the Issuer and thatff,as indicated in a certificate of an Authorized Issuer Representative delivered
to the Trustee, the Issuer shaU have offered to purchase aU Bonds then outstanding and less than
aU such Bonds shaU have been tendered to the Issuer for such purchase, tbe Tnistee, at the
direction of the Issuer, shaU select for redemption aU- such Bonds which have not been so
tendered, ff it is detenmned that one or more, but not aU, of tbe units of prindpal amoum
represented by any sucb Bond is m be called for redemption, then, upon notice of intention to
redeem such unit or units, the Owner of such Bond shaU, except as provided in Section 2.12
tiereof with respect to Book-Enny Bonds, forthwith sunender such Bond to the Trustee for
(a) paymem to such Owner of the redemption price offlieunit or units of principal amoum caUed
for redemptictn, and (b) defivery to such Owner of a new Bond or Bonds in the aggregate principal
^ount of the unredeemed balance of the principal amount of such Bond. New Bonds
representing the umedeemed balance of the principal amoum of such Bond shaU be issued to the
Owner thereof, without diarge therefor. If the surrender of such Bonds isrequiredhereunder and
the Owner of any such Bond shall faU to present such Bond to the Trustee for payment and
exchange as aforesaid, such Bond shall, nevertheless, become due and payable, and imerest
thereon shaU cease to accme, on the date fixed for redeiiq)tion to the extent of the unit or units
of principal amoum caUed for.redemption (and to that extent only).

ARTICLE IV
Tender and Purchase of Bonds;
Remarketiiig; Remarketing Agent
Section 4.01. Furchaseof Bonds At Option of Owners, (a) Daily Rate Period.
On any Business Day during any DaUy Rate Period, any Bond (or portion thereof in an
Authorized Denomination provided that the prindpal amoum to be retained by the Owner sbaU
be m an Authorized Denomination) shaU be purchased by the Trustee, acting as Tender Agent,
to the extent it has been provided withfimdssufficient to make such payment, at a purchase price
equal to 100% of the principal amoum thereof plus accmed interest, ff any, thereon tofliedate
of purchase, upon, subject to Section 4.10 hereof, (i) defiveiy by the Owner of such Bond to the
Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, at its Principal Office by no later than 9:30 a.m.. New York
time, on such Business Day, of an irrevocable written notice or an inevocable telephonic notice,
which states the principal amount or portion thereof to be purchased and number of such Bond
3nd the date on which such Bond shall be purchased pursuant to this subsection (a), and
(ii) delivery of such Bond to the Tnistee, acting as Tender Agent, at its Designated Office
accompanied by an instrument of transfer thereof, in form satisfactory to the Trustee, executed
in blank by the Owner thereof with the signature of such Owner guaranteed, at or prior to 1:00
p.m.. New York time, on such Business Day.

 83200

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(b)
Weekly Rale Pen'od. On any Business Day during any Weekly Rate Period,
any Bond (or portion thereof in an Authorized Denomination provided that the principal amoum
to be retained by the Owner shaU be in an Authorized E>enoinination) shaU he purchasedfiT>mits
Owner by the Tnistee, acting as Tender Agem, to flie extent it has been provided -with funds
sufficient to make such payment, at a.purchase price equal to 100% pf the principal ainount
thereof plus accraed interest, ff any, thereon to the date of puichase, upon, subject to Section 4.10
hereof, (i) defivety by the Owner of such Bond to flie Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, at its
principal Office of an irrevocable written notice or an irtevocable telephonic notice promptiy
confirmed by telecopy or other writing, which states tbe principal amoimt or portion'thereof to
be purchased and number of such Bond and the date on which the same shaU be purchased, which
date shaU be a Business Day not prior to the seventh day next succeeding the date of the defivety
of such notice to the Trostee, and (ii) defivety of such Bond to the Tnistee, acting as Tender
Agent, at its Designated Office, acconqpanied by an instrumem of transfer thereof, in form
satisfactoty to the Trustee, executed in blank by the Owner thereof with the signature of such
Owner guaranteed, at or prior to 11:00 a.m.. New York time, on the date specffied in such notice.
Section 4.02. Mandatory Purchase of Bonds, (a) Bonds shaU be subject to
tfiandatoty purchase at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, on the
foUowing dales: (i) as to each Bond in a Flexible Rate Period, on the day next succeeding the last
day of each Flexible Segment applicable to such Bond; (u) in the evem of an adjustmemfromone
Rate Period to a differem Rate Period, on the day next succeeding the last day of the preceding
Rate Period; and (iU) in the evem of an adjustmemfromone Tenn Rate Period to anoflier Term
Rate Period (including a Term Rate Period of the same duration), on the day next succeeding the
last day of the pieceding Term Rate Period.
(b)
An Owner must deliver each Bond subject to mandatory purchase as
provided in Section4.02(a) hereof to the Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, at its Designated Office
accompanied by an instrument of transfer thereof, in form satisfactoty to the Trustee, executed
in blank by the Owner thereof, with the signature of such Owner guaranteed at or prior to 11:(X)
a.m.. New York time, on the purchase date in order to receive payment of the puichase price on
such date to the extent the Trustee, acting as Tender Agem, has been provided with ftinds
sufficiem to make such payment.
(c)
Notice of each mandatoiy purchase pursuant to the provisions of
Section 4.02(aKii) and Section. 4.02(a)(ifi) hereof is required by the provisions of
Section 2.03(a)(ui), 2.03(b)(ui). 2.b3(c)(ui), 2.03(d)(iU) or 2.03(e)(ui), as die case may be, to be
included in the notice given puisuant to such Section.
Section 4.03. ObUgation To Surrender Bonds. The giving of notice as provided
in Section 4.01 hereof shall constimte tlic irrevocable tender for purchase of each Bond or portion
diereof wilh respect to which such notice shaU have been given, irtespective of whether such Bond
shall be delivered as provided in Section 4.01. The occmrence of any event specUied in
Section 4.02(a) hereof shall constimte the mandatory tender for purchase of each Bond or portion
ibeieof, irrespective of whether such Bond shall be delivered as provided in Seciion 4.02(b).
Upon the purchase of each Bond or portion thereof so deemed to be tendered, such Bond or
portion thereof shall cease to bear inicrest payable to the former Owner thereof, who thereafter

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83201

shall have norightswithrespectthereto, other than therightto receive the purchase price thereof
upon smrender of such Bond to the Tnistee, acting as Tender Agent, and such Bond or portion
thereof shaU be no longer outstanding. Tbe Trustee shaU authenticate, register and deliver new
Bonds in replacement of Bonds or portions thereof deemed so tendered and not surreiidered on
the date of purchase.
Section 4.04. Remarketing of Bonds, (a) By 11:30 a.m.. New York time, on
the date the Tnistee receives notice ftom any Bondholder in accordance with Section 4.01(a)
hereof, and promptiy, but in no event later than 11:30 a.m., New York time, on the Business Day
foUowing the day on which the Trustee receives noticefromany Bondholder of its demand to have
the Trustee purchase Bonds pursuant to Section 4.01(b) hereof, the Trustee shaU give facsinule
or telephonic notice, confinned in writing thereafter, to the Remarketing Agent specifying the
principal amount of Bonds which such Bondholder has demanded to have purchased and the date
on which such Bonds.are demanded to be purchased.
(b)
Upon the giving of notice to the Tmstee by any Bondholder in accordance
with Section 4.01(a) or (b) hereof and the giving of notice by the Trustee toflieRemarketing
Agem as provided in Section 4.04(a) hereof withrespectto such notices, and on each date on
which the Bonds are to be purchased in accordance with Section 4.02 hereof, the Remarketing
Agent shaU offer for sale and use its best efforts to sell such Bonds on the date such Bonds are
to be purchased at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount-thereof plus accmed
interest, ff any. to the purchase date. AU sales of Bonds hereunder must be at a pun:hase price
equal to 100% of tbe principal amount of such Bonds plus accraed interest, ff any, thereon.
(c)
Not later than 1:00 p.m.. New York time, on the date on which Bonds are
to be purchased pursuant to Section 4.01(a) or 4.02(a)(i) hereof, and not later than 3:00 p.m..
New Yoik time, on the Business Day next preceding the d^^tf on which Bonds are to be purchased
pursuant to Section 4.01(b) or Section 4.02(a)(ii) hereof, flie Remarketing Agent shaU give
(i) facsinule or telephonic notice to the Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, specifying the names,
addresses and taxpayer identification numbers of the purchasers of, and the principal amount and
denominations of, and with respect to Bonds which are being purchased pursuam to
Section 4.02(a)(i) hereof the Flexibje Segments and the Flexible Ratesfor,sucb Bonds remarketed
by it pursuam to subsection (b) and the amount of remarketing proceeds it wUl provide to the
Trustee, acting as Tender Agem, on the date on which the Bonds are to be purchased, as set forth
in Section 4.04(d) hereof and (u) telephonic notice to the Issuer and the Tmstee, acting as Tender
Agent, of the principal amount of and accrued interest on any Bonds not remarketed by such time;
provided, however, that, in addition, on any date on which Bonds are to be purchased pursuant
to Section 4.01(a) or 4.02(a)(i) hereof, if aU the Bonds wUl not be remarketed, the Remarketing
Agent shall give the Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, and die Issuer notice by 12:00 noon. New
York time, rather than by 1:00 p.m.. New York time, of the principal amount of and accrued
interest on Bonds that have not been remarketed.
(d)
Upon the giving of die notice specffied in Section 4.04(c)(i) hereof, the
Remarketing Agent shall be obligated to deliver to the Tmstec, acting as Tender Agem, the
amount of remarketing proceeds specified in such notice, as follows:

 83202

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(i)
in the case of Bonds which are being pmchased puisuant to Section 4.01
or 4.02(a)(u) hereof, by 1:00 p.m.. New York time, on the purchase date; and
(u)
in the case of Bonds which are being purchased puisuam to
"Section 4.02(a)(i) hereof, by 3:00 p.m.. New Yoifc time, on the purchase date, subject
only to timely delivety of Bonds by the Trustee, acting as Tender Agent, as set forth in
Section 4.04(e) hereof and verification by the Remarketing Agent that such Bonds conform
to the instmctions contained in the notice given by the Remarketing Agent to the Trustee
pursuant to Section 4.04(c) hereof.
Anyremarketingproceeds received by the Remarketing Agem in excess of such
amounts so transferred shaU be defivered to the Issuer as soon as practicable after the receipt
fliereof.
(e)
Upon receipt by the Trustee, acting as Tender Agem, of noticefromthe
Remarketing Agent puisuam to Section 4.04(c) hereof, the Trustee shall authenticate and deUver
new Bonds to the Remarketing Agem, as foUows:
(i)
in the case of Bonds which are being purchased pursuant to Section 4.01
or Section 4.02(a)(ii) hereof, and provided that moneys derivedfromthe sources specified
in Section 4.05(a) hereof in an amoum equal to the Purchase Price therefor shall have been
received by tbe Tnistee, acting as Tender Agem, by 1:00 p.m., New Yoric time, such new
Bonds shaU be delivered by 2:30 p.m.. New York time; and
(ii)
in the case of Bonds which are being purchased puisuant to
Section 4.02(a)(i) hereof, such new Bonds shaU be delivered by 2:30 p.m.. New York
time.
Section 4.05. Purchase of Bonds Tendered To Trustee, (a) By the close of
business on the date Bonds or portions thereof are to be purchased pursuam to Section 4.01 or
4.02 hereof by the Trustee, acting as Tender Agent,flieTrustee, acting as Tender Agent, shaU
purchase, but onlyfromtheftmdslisted below, such Bonds or portions thereof (in Audiorized
Denominations)fromthe Owners thereof at a purchase price equal to the prindpal amount theieof
plus accmed interest, ff any, to the date of purchase. Funds for the payment of such purchase
price shaU be derived from the foUowing sources in Ihe order of priority indicated:
(i)
proceeds of theremarketingof such Bonds pursuant to Section 4.04 hereof
to any purchaser; and
(ii)

moneys furnished by the Issuer toflicTrustee, acting as Tender Agent.

Under no circumstances shall the Tmstee be required to advance its own funds for
the purchase of any Bonds, and the Tmstee shall have no liability for its failure to purchase any
Bondsffit shall not have been provided with sufficient ftinds in a timely manner to permit such
purchase.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

(b)

83203

The Trustee, acting as Tender Agem, shall:

(i)
hold aU Bonds delivered to it pursuant to Section 4.01 or 4.02 hereof in
trust for the benefit of the respective Bondholders which shaU have so delivered such
Bonds untU moneysrepresentingthe purchase price of.such Bonds sbaU have been
delivered to or for the accoum of or to the order of such Bondholders; and
(u)
hold all moneys defivered to it heieunder for the purchase of such Bonds
in trust for the benefit of the person or entity which shaU have so deUvered sucb moneys
in a separate and segregatedftuul,and not commingle suchfimdswith any otherftmdsor
invest sucb funds, untU the Bonds purchased with such moneys shaU have been deUvered
or deemed deUvered. to or for the accoimt of such person or entify; provided, that any
moneys so deposited with and hdd by the Tmstee not so appfied to the purchase of Bonds
witiiin two (2) years after the date of purchase shaU be paid by the Tnistee to the Issuer
upon the written direction of the Authorized Issuer Representative and thereafter the
foimer Bondholders shaU be entided to look only to the Issuer for payment of such
purchase price, and then onlyfiomSubordinate lien Revenues and only to the extent of
the amount so repaid, and the Issuer shaU not be liable for any interest thereon and shaU
not be regarded as a tnistee of such moneys, and the Tnistee shaU have no fiirther
responsibility with respect to such moneys. To the extent any moneys are held by the
Tmstee for the paymem ofthe purchase price of Bonds wluch have not been presented for
payment, such moneys shaU not be invested.
Section 4.06. DeUvery of Purchased Bonds, (a) Bonds sold by the Remarketing
Agem pursuant to Section 4.04 hereof shall be defivered to the Remarketing Agent, as specified
in Section 4.04(e) hereof.
(b)
Bonds purchased by the Trastee, acting as Tender Agent, hereunder with
moneys described in clause (u) of Section 4.05(a) hereof shaU be canceled.
Section 4.07. No Sales After Default. Anything infliisIndenture to the contrary
notwithstanding, at the direction of the Remarketing Agent there shaU be noremarketingof Bonds
pursuant to this Article IVffthere shaU have occurred and be continuing an event of default under
Section 9.01 hereof; provided, that nothing in this Section 4.07 shaU be constmed as prohibiting
purchases of Bonds pursuant to Section 4.01 or 4.02 hereof.
Section 4.08. Remarketing Agent. The Remarketing Agent shaU be
;
; provided, however, that the Issuer may remove
the Remarketing Agent and appoint a successor Remarketing Agent for the Bonds. The
appointment of a successor Remarketing Agent shall be subject to the approval of ihe Bond
Insurer. The Remarketing Agent shall signify its acceptance of the duties and obligations.imposed
upon it hereunder by a written instrumem of acceptance delivered to the Tmsiee and the Issuei.
Section 4.09. QuaUfications of Remarketing Agent; Resignation and Removal.
The Remarketing Agent shall be a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc.
and authorized by law to perform all the duties irapwsed upon it by this Indenmre. Tbe

 83204

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Remarketing Agent may at any time resign and be discharged of its diities and obligations created
by Ihis Indenture by giving at least twenfy Business Days' notice to the Issuer and the Tnistee.
The Remarketing Agent may be removed at any time,.at the direction of the Issuer, upon at least
five Business Days' notice by an instrumem signed by the Issuer and filed with the Remarketing
Agem and the Trastee. Noremovalof the Remarketing Agem shaU become effective untU a
successor Remarketing Agent has delivered a written acceptance of appoimment.
Section 4.10. Tender and Purchase of Book-Entry Bonds. Notwithstanding any
proArisions of this Indentuie to the contrary, at any time whUe the Bonds are Book-Entty Bonds,
. the provisions of this Article IV are modified as follows:
(a)
Any notice pursuam to Section 4.0I(a){i) or 4.01(b)(0 hereof may be given
by any direct paiticipam in the Securities Depository acting on behalf of either any owner of a
benefidal imerest in the Bonds or any indirect participam in the Securities Depositoty acting on
behalf of such an owner, provided that any such notice shaU not berequiredto contain the bond
number of Bonds'to be tendered for purchase and the Trastee may conclusively rely on any
written certification or representation by a person, firm, corporation or other entify that it is acting
as a direct participam in the Securities Depositoty for the Bonds for the purposes of giving any
such notice.
(b)
Delivety of Bonds to the Trustee, as provided in Sections 4.0I(a)(ii),
4.01(b)(u) and 4.02(b) hereof, shaU be effected by book-entty credit to tbe account of the Tnistee
on tbe records of the Securities Depositoty, at or prior to 1:00 p.m., New York time, on the date
Bonds or portions thereof are required to be tendered to the Trustee for purchase, of a beneficial
interest in the Boiids to be purchased on such date.
(c)
The Remarketing Agem shall give the infonnation required by Section
4.04(c) hereof to the Securities Depositoty instead of to the Trustee, but shaU at the same time
give facsimfle or telephonic notice to the Trustee specifying the principal amount of such Bonds
which it has been unable to remarket (ff such be the case).
. (d)
The Remarketing Agent shall deliver remarketing proceeds in accordance
wilh the provisions of Section 4.04(d) hereof to the Securities Depositoty instead of to the
Trustee, acting as Tender Agent.
(e)

Section 4.04(e) hereof shaU be inapplicable.

(0
The provisions of Sections 4.05 and 4.06 hereof shall apply only if Bonds
are purchased wifli moneys described in clause (ii) of Section 4.05(a) hereof; the beneficial
interests in Bonds purchased with moneys described in clause (i) of Section 4.05(a) shall be
transferred in accordance with the procedures of the Securities Depository.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83205

ARTICLE V
Payment; Further Assurances
Section 5.01. Payment of Prindpal or Redemption Price of and Interest On
Bonds. The Issuer shaU prompdy pay or cause to be paid tbe principal of and premium,ffany,
and interest on, evety Bond issued hereunder according to the terms thereof and hereof. The
Issuer hereby appoints tbe Trustee to act as the Paymg Agem for the Bonds, and designates the
Designated Office of the Tnistee as the place of payment for the Bonds, sucb appointmem and
designation toremainin effect untU notice of change, is fUed with the Trastee.
Section 5.02. limited Tax General ObUgations. Tbe Bonds shall be direct and
general obligations of the Issuer, and shaU be secured by a pledge of, lien on and securify imerest
in aU amounts in tbeftmdsand accounts created or maintained pursuam to this Indenture,
including earnings on such amounts, subject only to the provisions of this Indenmre permitting
the appUcation thereof for the puiposes and on the tenns and conditions set forth herein' and
therein. The obUgation ofthe Issuer to make payments of the principal of, [the redemption
premium on,] and the interest on the Bonds shaU be payablefromany fiinds legaUy available for
such purpose. The Issuer covenants and agrees to take aU necessaty action to annuaUy appropriate
fimds in atimelymanner so as to provide for tbe making of aU such payments with respect to the
Bonds; provided however, that in no event shall the Issuer be obligated to levy any separate ad
valorem or other tax in addition to other Cify taxes or any special ad valorem or other tax
unlimited as to rate or amount to pay such principal, [redeinption preinium] or interest.
Section 5.03. Extension or Funding of Claims for Interest. In order to prevent
any accumulation of claims for imerest after maturify, the Issuer shaU not, directiy or indirecdy,
extend or assent to the extension of the time for the payment of any claim for interest on any of
the Bonds, and shall not, directiy or indirecdy, be a party to or approve any such artangemem by
purchasing or fimding such claims or in any other manner. In case any such claim for interest
shall be extended or funded, whether or not with the consent ofthe Issuer, such claim for interest
so extended orftmdedshaU not be entitied, in case of defriult hereunder, to tbe benefits of this
Indenture, except subject to the prior paymem in full of the principal of aU of the Bonds then
outstanding and of aU claims for interest which shall not have been so extended or fimded.
Section 5.04. Performanceof Covenants; the Issuer. The Issuer covenants that
it will faithfully perform at all times any and all covenants, undertakings, stipulations and
provisions contained in this Indenture, in any and every Bond executed, authenticated and
delivered hereunder and in all of its proceedings pertaining thereto.
Section 5.05. Instruments of Further Assurance. The Issuer covenants that it
will do. execute, acknowledge and deliver or cause to be done, executed, acknowledged and
delivered, such indenmres supplemental hereto and such further acts, instruments and transfers
as ihe Tmstee may reasonably require for the better assuring, transferring, conveying, pledging,
assigning and confinning unto the Trustee all and singular therightsassigned hereby and the

 83206

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCILS-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

amounts pledged hereto, to the payment of the principal of and preinium,ffany, and interest on
the Bonds.
Section 5.06. Tax Covenants. The Issuer shaU not take, or omit to take, any
action lawful and within its power to take, which action or omission would cause imerest on any
Bond to become subject to federal income taxes in addition to fedeial income taxes to which
interest on such Bond is subject on the date of original .issuance thereof.
The Issuer shall not permit any of the proceeds of the Bonds, or any facUities
financed with such proceeds, to be used in any manner that would cause any Bond to constitute
a "private activity bond" within the meaning of Section 141 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986. ..
•
The Issuer shaU not pcimit any of the proceeds of the Bonds or other moneys to
be invested in any maimer that would cause any Bond to constimte an ."arbitrage bond" within the
meaning of Section 148 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or a "hedge bond" within the
meaning of Section 149(g) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
The Issuer shaU comply with the provisions of Section 148(0 of the Intemal
Revenue Code of 1986relatingto therebateof certain investment earnings at periodic intervals
to the United States of America.
Section 5.07. Indenture to Constitute Contract. In consideration ofthe purchase
and acceptance of the Bonds by those who shall hold the samefromtimeto time, the provisions
of this Indenture shall be a part of the contract of the Issuer with the Owners of the Bonds and
shaU be deemed to be and shaU constimte a contract between the Issuer, the Tmstee ami the
Ownersfromtime to time of the Bonds.
ARTICLE VI
Funds
Section 6.01. Creation of the Bond Fund. There is hereby created by the Issuer
and ordeied estabfished with the Tmstee, a trust fiind to be designated "Cify of Chicago, lUinois
Auction Rate Bonds, Series
- Bond Fund," which shall be used to pay the principal of and
preinium, if any, and the interest on the Bonds.
Secti'on 6.02. Payments Into the Bond Fund. There shall be deposited into the
Bond Fundfromlime to lime the foUowing:
(a)

all accnied interest, ff any, paid by the initial purchasers of the Bonds;

(b)
on thefirstBusiness Day of each month, the Issuer shall pay to the Trustee
for deposit into the Bond Fund, the amount required so that the sum then held in the Bond
Fund will equal the Bond Fund Requirement; and

 5 / 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83207

(c)
all other moneys received by the Tnistee under and, pursuant, to the
provisions of this Indenture, when accompanied by directions from the person depositing
such moneys that such moneys are to be paid imo the Bond Fund.
The Issuer hereby covenants and agrees that so long as any of the Bonds issued
hereunder are outstanding it wiU cause to be deposited in the Bond Fund sufficiem amounts
promptiy to meet and pay the principal of and premium,ffany, and interest on the Bonds as the
same become due and payable. Nothing herein shall be constmed torequirethe Issuer to levy any
separate ad valorem or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to pay the. principal of and
premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds as the same become due-and payable.
Section 6.03. Use of Moneys In the Bond Fund and Certain Other Moneys.
Except as provided in Sections 6.07, 6.10 and 10.03 hereof, moneys in the Bond Fund shaU be
used solely for the paymem of the prindpal of and premium,ffany, and interest on the Bonds as
the same shaU become due and payable at maturify, upon leden^tion or otherwise. Ftmds for
such payments ofthe principal of and premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds shaU be derived
from the foUowing sources in the order of priority indicated:
- (i) from moneys paid imo the Bond Fund pursuant to Section 6.02(a) hereof
which shaU be applied to the payment of interest on the Bonds;
(U) fiom moneys held by the Tnistee puisuam to Article V M hereof, such
moneys to be appUed only to the payment of the principal of and premium, ff any, and
interest on Bonds which are deemed to be paid in acconlaiice with Artide Vm hereof; and
(in) from aU other amounts on deposit in the Bond Fund. and proceeds fhim the
investment thereof.
Section 6.04. Custody ofthe Bond Fund. The Bond Fund shaU be in the custody
of the Tmstee but in the name of the Issuer and the Issuer hereby authorizes and directs the
Trustee to withdraw in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.03 of this Indenmre sufficiem
fiindsfromthe Bond Fund to'pay the principal of, premium,ffany, and interest on the Bonds as
the same become due and payable, which authorization and direction the Tmstee hereby accepts.
Section 6.05. Available Moneys To Be Paid Over To Trustee. The Issuer wUl
cause moneys legaUy avaUable for the payment of the Bonds to be paid to the Trustee for deposit
in the Bond Fund in accordance with the terms of this Indenture to effect payment of the principal
of and premium, ff any, and interest on the Bonds as the same become due.
Section 6.06. Payments of Prindpal and Interest. The Trustee shall pay from
moneystimelyreceived by the Trustee, inflieorder of priority bdicated in Section 6.03 hereof,
the principal of and premium, ff any, and interest on, the Bonds as the same become due and
payable. If, prior to the maturity of any Bond, the Issuer surrenders such Bond lo the Tnistee for
cancellation, the Tmsiee shall cancel such Bond.

 83208

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 6.07. Non-Presentment of Bonds. In the event any Bond shall not be
presented for paymem when the principal thereof becomes due, either at maturify or otherwise,
or at the date fixed for redemption thereof or in the evem any interest payment thereon is
undaimed, if moneys sufficient to pay such Bond or uiterest shaU have been deposited in the Bond
Fund, it sfaaU befliedufy of the Trustee to hold sucb moneys, without liabiUfy for imerest
thereon, for the benefit of the Owner of such Bond who shaU thereafter berestrict«lexclusively
to such moneys, for any claim of whatever nature on his part under this Indenture or on, or with
respect to, said Bond. Any moneys so deposited with and held by the Trustee not so appfied to
the payment of Bonds or such interest, if any, within two (2) years afterfliedate on which the
same shaU have become due shaU be paid automaticaUy by tbe Trustee to the Issuer and thereafter
Bondholdeis shaU be entitied to look only to the Issuer for paymem, and then only to the extern
of die amount so repaid, and the Issuer sbaU not be liable for any interest thereon and sbaU not
be regarded as a tmstee of such moneys and the Trustee shaU have no fiirther responsibifify with
respect to such moneys.
Section 6.08. Funds To Be Held For All Bondholders; Certain Exceptions.
Moneys in the Bond Fund shall, until applied as provided in this Indenture, be held by the Tmstee
for the benefit of the Owners of aU Outstanding Bonds, except as provided by Sections 6.07 and
6.10 hereof and except that any portion of the Bond Fund representing principal of and premium,
ff any, and interest on, any Bonds previously caUed for redeinption in accordance wifli Article Iff
of tbis Indenmre or previously matured or representing unclaimed interest on the Bonds shaU be
held for the benefit of the Owners of such Bonds only and shaU not be deposited or invested
pursuam to Article VU hereof, notwithstanding any provision of Article VII.
Secti'on 6.09. Moneys To Be Hdd In Trust. All moneysrequiredto be deposited
with or paid to the Trustee for deposit into the Bond Fund under any provision hereof, aU moneys
withdrawnfiomthe Bond Fund and held by the Trustee shaU be held by the Trustee m trust, and
sucb moneys (other than moneys held pursuant to Section 6.07 hereoO shaU, whUe so held,
constimte part offlieTmst Estate and be subjea to the Uen hereof. Moneys held for the payment
of die purchase price of Bondis pursuant to Article IV hereof shaU not constimte part of the Trust
Estate.
Section 6.10. Repayment To the Issuer from the Bond Fund. Any amounts
remaining in the Bond Fund after payment in full of the principal of and preinium, ff any. and
imerest on the Bonds (or provision for paymem thereof as provided in this Indenmre), the fees,
charges and expenses of the Trustee, the Remarketing Agem and aU other amounts required to be
paid under this Indenmre shall be paid to the Issuer.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83209

ARTICLE v n
Investment of Moneys
The Trustee shaU invest and reinvest any moneys held as part of the Bond Fund in
accordance with the specific written direction (or the specific oral direction promptiy confinned
in writing) of an Authorized Issuer Representative in Investment Securities. Any such investments
shaU be held by or under the control of the Tnistee and shaU be deemed at aU times a part of the
fiind for which they were made. The interest accruing thereon, any profit realizedfromsuch
investments and any loss resultingfromsuch investooents shaU be credited or charged to the Fund
in which such moneys are deposited. The Trustee shaU seU and reduce to cash a sufficient amount
of such investments of the Bond Fund in accoidance with written directions (or oral directions
prompdy confiimed by telecopy or other writing) of an-Authorized Issuer Representative,
whenever the cash balance ui the Bond Fund is insufficiem to pay the principal of and premium,
ff any, and interest on the Bonds when due. The Trustee may make any and aU such investments
through its and its affiliates' own bond departments. As and when any amount invested puisuant
to this Article may be needed for disbursement, the Tnistee may cause a sufificiem ainount of such
invesunents to be sold and reduced to cash tofliecredit of such fimds. Moneys held for the
payment of the purchase price of Bonds pursuant to Article IV hereof, orfliepaymem of Bonds
pursuant to Section 6.08 hereof, shaU not be invested except in overnight Govermnent ObUgations
in accoidance with the specific written direction (or the specific oral direction prtanpfly confirmed
in writing) of an Authorized Issuer Representative. Any. pioceeds under the Bond Insurance
Pofity shaU be held uninvested.

ARTICLE v r a
Defeasance
If the Issuer shall pay or cause to be paid, or there shaU be otherwise paid or
provision for paymem made to or for the Owneis of the Bonds the principal, premium,tfany, and
interest due or lo become due thereon at the times and in the manner stipulated therein, and ff the
Issuer shall keep, perfoim and observe aU the covenants and promises in the Bonds and in this
Indenmre expressed as to be kept, performed and observed by it or on its part, and shall pay or
cause to be paid to the Tnistee aU sums of money due or to become due according to the
provisions hereof, then this Indenture and thefien,rightsand interests created hereby shaU cease,
determine and become nuU and void (except as to any survivingrightsof payment, registration,
dransfer or exchange of Bonds berein.provided for), whereupon the Trustee upon written request
of an Aulhorized Issuer Representative shaU cancel and discharge this Indenmre, and execute and
deliver to the Issuer such instrumems in writing as shaU be requested by an Aulhorized Issuer
Representative and requisite to discharge this Indenture, and release, assign and defiver unto the
Issuer any and all the esute,right,titieand interest in and to any and allrightsassigned or
pledged to the Trustee or otherwise subject to this Indenmre, except moneys or securities held by
the Tmstee for the payment of the principal of and premium, if any, arid interest on, and purchase
prices of, the Bonds.

 83210

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Any Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof shaU be deemed to be paid wifliin
the meaning of this Indenture (provided that the unpaid portion of such Bond is also an Authorized
Denomination) when (a) paymem of the principal of and premium, tf any, on such Bond or
Authorized Denomination thereof, plus interest thereon to the due date thereof (whether such due
date is by reason of mamrify or upon redemption as provided herein) either (i) shaU have been
made or caused to be made in accordance with the terrns thereof, (ii) shaU have been provided for
by irrevocably depositing suffidem moneys for sucb payment with the Tmstee and the due date
of such principal, interest and premium,ffany, has occuired, or (iu) in the case of a Bond which
bears interest at a Flexible Rate or a Term Rate or an Auction Rate, shaU have been provided for
by irrevocably depositing with the Trustee in trust and irrevocably setting aside exclusively for
such payment on such due date (which due date shaU be in the case of a Bond bearing interest at
a Flexible Rate no later than the Imerest Paymem Date for the then current Flexible Segmem for
such Bond and in the case of a Bond bearing interest at a Term Rate or an Auction Rate no later
than the last Interest Paymem Date for the then currem Tenn Rate Period or Auction Period for
such Bond) (1) moneys sufficient to make sucb payment and/or (2) non-callable Govemmem
Obfigations (provided that the Issuer .delivers to the Trastee, at the Issuer's expense, (A) an
opinion of Bond Counsel upon which the Tmstee mayrelyto the effect that aU conditions with
respect to such deposit specified in this Article Vm has been satisfied or provision therefor made
and that such deposit wiU not cause the interest on any of the Bonds to be includable for federal.
income tax puiposes in the gross mcome of any Owner or Beneficial Owner thereof and- (B) a
verification report of a certified public accountam as to the adequacy of such moneys and
Govermnent ObUgations) maturing as to prindpal and interest in such amount and at such time
as will insure tbe availabUity of sufficiem moneys to make such paymem, and (b) aU necessary
and proper fees, compensation and expenses of the Trustee pertaining to any such deposit shaU
have been paid or the paymem thereof provided for to the satisfaction of the Tmstee. At such
times as a Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof shaU be deemed to be paid hereunder, as
aforesaid, such Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof shaU no longer be secured by or
emifled tofliebenefits of this Indenmre (other than Sections 2.04 and 2.08 hereof in the case of
a deposit under clause (a)(iii) above), except for the purposes of any such payment from such
moneys or Govemment Obfigations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraph, in the case of a Bond or Authorized
Denomination thereof which by its terms may be redeemed prior to the stated maturify thereof,
no deposit under clause (aXiu) of the immediately preceding paragraph shaU he deemed a payment
of such Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof as aforesaid untU: (a) proper notice of
redemption of such Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof shaU have been previously given
in accordance with Article EI of this Indenture, or in the event said Bond or Authorized
Dcaomination thereof is not to be redeemed within the next succeeding sixty (60) days, untU die
Issuer shall have given the Tmstee, in form satisfactoty to the Tmstee, irrevocable instmctions
to notify, as soon as practicable, the Owner of such Bond or Audiorized Denomination thereof
in accordance with Article ID hereof, that the deposit required by (a)(ui) above has been made
wilh the Tmstee and that said Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof is deemed to have been
paid in accordance with this Article and stating the maturify or redemption date upon which
moneys are to be avaUable for the payment of the principal of and the applicable premium, if any,
on said Bond or Authorized Denomination thereof, plus interest thereon to the due date thereof,
or (b) the mamrity of such Bond or Aulhorized Denomination thereof.

 5 / 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83211

Notwithstanding any provision of any other Article of this Indenmre which may
be contraty to the provisions of tbis Article, aU moneys or Government Obligations set aside and
held in trust pursuant to the provisions of this Article for die payinent of Bonds or Authorized
Denominations theieof (including interest and premium thereon, ff any) shaU be appUed to and
used solely for the paymem of the particular Bonds or Aiithorized.Denominations thereof
(including imerest and premium thereon, ff any) with respect to which such moneys and
Government Obligations have been so set aside in tmst.
Anything in Article X I hereof to tbe contraty notwithstanding, ff moneys or
Govemment ObUgations have been deposited or set aside with the Trustee pursuam to this Article
for tbe paymem of Bonds or Authorized Denominations thereof and the interest and premium, if
any, thereon and such Bonds or Authorized Denominations thereof and the interest and preinium,
ff any, thereon shaU not have in fact been actually paid in fiiU, no amendment to the provisions
of this Article shaU be made wifliout the consent of the Owner of each of the Bonds affected
fliereby.

• ARTICLE IX
Default Provisions and Remedies
of Trustee and Bondholders
Section 9.01. Defaults; Events of DefaulL Ifany ofthe following events occurs,
it is hereby defined as and declared to be and to constimte a default or an Evem of Default:
(a)
FaUure to make paymem of any installment of interest upon any Bond after
such payment has become due and payable;
(b)
Failure to make payment of the principal of and preinium, ff any, on any
Bond at the stated maturity thereof or upon the unconditional redemption thereof;
(c)
A faUure by the Issuer to pay an amount due pursuant to Article IV hereof
when the same shall have become due and payable;
(d)
The occurrence of an "event of default" under Section 10.01 of the Master
Bond Ordinance; and
(e)
FaUure on the part of the Issuer lo perform or observe any of its covenants,
agreements or conditions in this Indenture or in the Bonds contained and failure to remedy
the same after notice thereof pursuant to Section 9.02 hereof.
Section 9.02. Notice of Event of Default Under Section 9.01(e) Hereof;
Opportunity of Issuer To Cure Defaults. No default described in Section 9.01(e) hereof shall
constimte an Event of Default until actual notice of such default, requiring that il be remedied and
suting thai such notice is a "Notice of Default" hereimder, by registered or certified mail shall
be given to the Issuer by the Trustee or to the bsuer and the Trustee by the Owners of a majority

 83212

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-rCHICAGO

5/1/2002

in aggregate prindpal amoimt of all Bonds Outstanding, and the Issuer shaU have bad thirty days
after receipt of such notice to correct said default or cause said default to be cortected, and shaU
not have cortected said default or caused said default to be corrected within the applicable period;
provided, however,tfsaid default be such that it cannot be corrected within the appficable period,
it shaU not constimte .an event of default ff coirective action is. instimted within the appficable
period and diligentiy pursued untU the default is coirected and the £ict of such non-correction,
coirective action and difigent pursuit is evidenced to the Tnistee and the Bond Insurer by a
certificate of an Authorized Issuer Representative.
Section 9.03. Remedies; Rig^its of Bondholders. Upon the occurrence and
continuation of an Evem of Default under Section 9.01 hereof, tbe Tnistee may with the written
consem of the Boiul Insurer, or shaU at tbe direction of the Bond Insurer, pursue any available
remedy at law or in equity by suit, action, mandamus or other proceeding to enforce the paymem
of the prindpal of and preinium,ffany, and interest on the Bonds then outstanding and to enforce
and compel the performance of the duties and obUgations of the Issuer as herein set forth.
If an Evem of Defaidi imder Section 9.01 hereof shall have occurred and be
contusuing and ff requested so to' do by the Owners of not less than a majorify in aggregate
principal amoum of Bonds then Outstanding and indemnified as provided m Section 10.6l(i)
heieof, the Trustee shall be obliged to exerdse such one or more of the rights and powers
conferred by this Section 9.03 as the Trustee bemg advised by Counsel shaU deem most eiqiedient
in the interests of the Bondholders.
No remedy by the tenns of this Indenture conferred upon or reserved to the Trustee
(or to the Bondholders) is intended to be exclusive of any other remedy, but each and evety such
remedy shall be cumulative and shaU be in addition to any other remedy given to the Trustee or
to the Bondholders hereunder or now or hereafter existing at law or in equity or by stamte.
No delay or omission to exercise any right, power or remedy accruing upon any
Event of Defiiult shaU impair any sucb right, power orremedyor shaU be constmed to be a
waiver of any such Event of Default or acquiescence therein; and evety such right, power or
remedy may be exercised fromtimeto time and as often as may be deemed expedient.
No waiver of any Event of Default hereunder, whether by the Tmstee or by the
Bondholdeis. shaU extend to or shall affect any subsequem Evem of Default or shaU impair any
rights or remedies consequent thereon.
Section 9;04. Right of Bondholders To Direct Proceedings. Anything in this
Indenture to the contrary notwidistanding and subject to the provisions of Section 9.10 hereof, the
Owners of not less than a majority in aggregate principal amount of Bonds then Outstanding shall
have the right, at any lime, by an instrument or instruments in writing executed and delivered to
the Tmstee, to direct the time, method and place of conducting all proceedings to be taken in
connection with the enforcemem of the terms and conditions of this Indenture, or for the
appointment of a receiver or any other proceedings hereunder; provided, thai such direction shall
not be otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of law and of this Indenture and could not
involve the Tnistee in personal liabUity.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES .

83213

Section 9.05. AppUcation of Moneys. AU moneys received by the Trustee
pursuant to anyrightgiven or action taken under the provisions of this Article shaU, after payment
of, or the reservation of funds sufficiem to pay,. aU costs and expenses ofthe proceedings resulting
in the coUection of such moneys and of the expenses, liabifities and advances inciured or made
by the Trastee and its Counsel, be deposited in the Bond Fund and aU such moneys in the Bond
Fund shall be appUed as foUows:
TmsT - To the payment to the persons entitied thereto of all interest then due on
the Bonds (other than interest due on Bonds forfliepaymem of which moneys are held pursuant
to the provisions of this Indemure), and,ffthe amount avaUable shaU not be sufficient to pay said
amoum in fiUl, then to the paymem ratably, according to the amounts due, to the persons entitied
thereto, without any discrimination or priyUege;.
SECOND - Tofliepaymem to the persons entitied thereto of the unpaid principal of
and premium, ff any, on any of the Bonds which shaU have become due (other than Bonds
matured .or caUed for reden^tion for the payment of which moneys are held pursuam.to the
provisions of this Indenture), and,ffthe amoum avaUable sbaU not be sufficient to pay in fiiU such
unpaid principal and premium, then to the payment ratably to tbe persons .cntifled thereto without
any discrimination or privUege; and

TmRD - To the payment to the persons entitied thereto of interest on overdue
principal of and premium, ff any, on any Bonds without preference or priority as between
principal or premium or imerest one over the others, or any installment of imerest over any other
installmem of interest, or of any Bond over any other Bond, andffthe amount avaUable shaU not
be sufficient to pay such amounts infiiU,then ratably, without any discrimination or privUege.
Whenever moneys are to be applied pursuant to tbe provisions of this Section, such
moneys shaU be applied at such times, andfromtime to time, as the Tmstee shaU determine.
Whenever the Tmstee shaU apply such moneys, it shaU fix the date upon which such appUcation
is to be made and upon such date imerest on the amounts of principal to be paid on such date shaU
cease to accme. The Trustee shaU give such notice as it may deem appropriate of the deposit with
it of any such moneys and of the fixing of any such date.
Whenever aU principal of and premium, if any, and interest on aU Bonds have been
paid under the provisions of this Section 9.05 and aU expenses and charges of the Tmstee have
been paid, any balance remaming in the Bond Fund shaU be paid to the Issuer.
Section 9.06. Remedies Vested In Trustee. Allrightsof action (including the
right to file proofs of claims) under this Indentme or under any of the Bonds may be enforced by
the Tiusiee without the possession of any of the Bonds or the production thereof in any trial or
other proceedings relating thereto and any such suit or proceeding instimted by the Tmstee shall
be brought in its name as Tnistee withoutflienecessity of joining as plaintiffs or defendants any
Owners of the Bonds, and any recovery of judgment shaU be for the equal and ratable benefit of
the Owners of the outstanding Bonds.

 83214

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 9.07. Rights and Remedies of Bondholders. No Owner of any Bond
shaU have anyrightto instimte any suit, action or proceeding in equity or at law for the
enforcement of this Indenture or for the execution of any trust thereof or for the appoimment of
areceiveror any otherremedyhereunder, unless (0 a default has occurred of which a Responsible
Officer of the Trustee has actual knowledge or has been notified as proyided in Section 10.01(g)
hereof, 00 such default sbaU have become an Event of Default hereunder and be continuing,
(iu) tbe Owners of more than a majority in aggregate principal amoum of Bonds then Outstanding
shaU have made written request to the Trustee, either to proceed to exercise the powers herein
granted or to instimte such action, suit or proceeding in its own name, and sbaU have offered to
the Trastee indemnify as provided in Section 10.01(i); and (iv)flieTrastee shaU for sixty (60)
days after such notice, request and offer of indemnify faU or refiise to exercise the poweis herein
granted, or to instimte such action, suit or proceeding in its own name; and such notification,
request and offer of indemnify , are hereby declared in evety case at tbe option of the Trastee to
be conditions precedent to the execution of the powers and trusts of this Indenture, and to any
action or cause of action for the enforcemem of this Indenmre, or for the appointmem of a
receiver or for any other remedy hereunder. No one or more Owners of the Bonds shaU have any
right in any maimer whatsoever to enforce anyrighthereunder except in tbe manner herein
provided, and aU proceedings at law or in et^uity shaU be instimted, had and maintained in the
manner herein provided and . for the equal andratablebenefit of the Owners of aU Bonds then
outstanding. Nothing in this Indenture shaU, however, affect or in^air the right of any
Bondholder to enforce the paymem of lbs principal of and premium, if any, and imerest on any
Bond at and after-the maturify thereof.
Section 9.08. Termination of PnKxedings. In case the Trustee shaU have
proceeded to enforce anyrightunder this Indenture by the appointmem of a receiver or otherwise,
and such proceedings sbaU have been discontinued or abandoned for any reason, or shaU have
been deteimined adversdy, then and in evety such case the Issuer, the Trustee, the Bond Insurer
and the Bondholders shaU be restored to their former positions andrightshereunder, respectively,
and aUrights,remediesand powers of the Trustee shaU contiaue as if no such proceedings bad
been taken. .
Section 9.09. Waivers of Events of Default. The Tmstee may in its discretion,
but with the prior written consent ofthe Bond Insurer, waive any Event of Default hereunder and
rescind its consequences and shaU do so upon the written request of the Owners of not less than
a majorify in aggregate principal amount of aU Bonds then Outstanding; provided, however, that
there shall not be waived any Evem of Default in the paymem of the principal of, or premium on,
any Outstanding Bonds when due (whether at maturify or byredemption),or any Event of Default
m the payment when due of the interest on any such Bonds, unless prior to such waiver and
rescission, all arrears of principal of and interest upon such Bonds, and mterest on overdue
principal at the rate borne by the Bonds on the date on which such principal became due and
payable, and aU artears of preinium,ffany, when due, together with the reasonable expenses of
the Tmstee and ofthe Owners of such Bonds, including reasonable attorneys' fees and expenses
paid or incurred, shall have been paid or provided for; provided further, there shall not be waived
any Event of Default in the payment when due of any purchase prices of any Bonds pursuant to
Article rV hereof unless prior to such waiver and rescission all artears of such purchase prices,
together with reasonable expenses of the Trustee and of the Owners of such Bonds, including

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83215

reasonable attorneys' fees and expenses paid or incurred, shall have been paid or provision
therefor made. In the case of any such waiver and rescission, or in case any proceeding taken by
the Trastee. on accoum of any such default shaU have been discontinued or abandoned or
detennined adversely, then and in evety such case the Issuer, the Trustee and the Bondholders
shaU berestoredto their former positions andrightshereunder, respectively, but no such waiver
and rescission shaU extend to any subsequent or other default, or impair any right consequent
thereon. AU waivers under this Indenmre shaU be in writing and a copy thereof shaU be delivered
to the Issuer and the Remarketing Agent.
Section 9.10. Rigbts of Bond Insurer Controlling. Anythmg m the Indentiire
to the contraty notwithstanding,fffllieBond Insurance Policy is in effect andflieBond Insurer is
not in defaidt of its obfigation to make payments thereunder, the Bond Insurer shall be deemed
to be the Owner of aU Bonds then Outstanding, for aU puiposes (including, without limitation, aU
approvals, consents, requests, waivers; authorizations', diiections, inspections and the instimtion
of any action), provided that nothing in this Section 9.10 shaU impair therightsofthe Bondowners
to recei-ve aU pajnments due under the Bonds, and the Bond Insurer shaU have the exclusive right
to exercise or direct the exercise ofremedieson behaff of the Owners of the Bonds in accordance
with the terms of the Indentme foUowing an Evem of Default thereunder. The principal of all
Bonds Outstanding may not be declared to be immediately due and-payable without the prior
written consent of the Bond Insurer.

ARTICLE X
The Trustee
Secti'on 10.01. Acceptance of the Trusts By Trustee. The Tmstee hereby accepts
the trusts imposed upon it by this Indenture, represents and covenants that it is fiilly empowered
Msder the applicable laws andregulationsof the State to accept said tmsts, and agrees to perform
said tnists, but omy upon and subject to the following express tenns and conditions, and no
implied covenants or obligations shaU be read into this Indemure agaimt the Tmstee:
«
(a)
The Trustee may execute any of the tnists or powers hereof and perform
any of its duties by or through attorneys, agents, affiliates, custodians, nominees, receivers
or employees and shall not be responsible for the supervision of, or the acts of any
attorneys, agents or receivers appointed by it in good faith and without negligence, and
shaU be entided to advice of Counsel chosen by it concerning aU mailers of trusts hereof
and the duties hereunder, and may in aU cases pay such reasonable compensation to aU
such attorneys, agents and receivers as may reasonably be employed in coimection with
die tmsts hereof. The Tmstee may act upon die opinion or advice of Counsel. The
Trustee shaU not be responsible for any loss or damage resultingfromany action or nonaction in good faith inrelianceupon such opinion or advice.
(b)
Except for its certfficate of authentication on the Bonds and the other
information the Tmstee is required lo set forth on the Bonds pursuant lo Seciion 2.06
hereof, the Tmstec shall not beresponsiblefor any recital herein or in the Bonds, or the

 83216

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

vaUdity, priorify,recording,or rerecording, filing, orrefilingof this Indenture or any
financing statement, amendments to this Indenture, or continuation statements, or for
reviewing any annual reports,financialstatements or audits, or for the validity of the
execution by the Issuer of this Indenture or for any supplements hereto or instruments of
fiirther assurance, or for the sufficiency of the securify for the Bonds issued hereunder or
intended to be secured hereby, or tbe tax-exempt status of the Bonds or the use or
- application of any money paid over by the Trustee in accordance with this Indenture. The
Trustee shaU not be bound to ascertain or inquire as to the performance or observance of
any covenants, conditions or agreements on the part of the Issuer, except as hereinafter
expressly set forth, but the Tnistee may require of the IssuerfiiUinformation and advice
as to the performance of the covenants, conditions and agreements .aforesaid. The Trastee
shaU not be responsible or liable for the selection of any investmem or for any loss
suffered, or any fee, tax or other charge incurred, in connection with any investmem of
fimds made by it La accordance with Article Vn hereof including, without limitation, any
loss suffered in connection with the sale of any investmem pursuant to Artide VH hereof.
(c)
The Trastee shaU not be accountable for the use of any Bonds authenticated
or defivered hereunder. The Trastee (or any affiliate of the Trustee) may become the
Owner of Bonds and otherwise transact banking and trustee business with the Issuer with
the samerightswhich it would haveffif were not Trastee.
(d)
The Trustee shaU be fiiUy protected in acting in good faith upon any notice,
request,resolution,consem, certificate, affidavit, letter, telegram or other paper or
documem, or oral communication or direction, befieved to be genuine and correct aixl to
have been signed or sent or given by the proper person or persons. Any action taken by
the Tmstee pursuant to this Indenture upon the request or authority or consent of any
person who at the time of making such request or giving such authorify or consem is the
owner of any Bond shall be conclusive and binding upon aU fiiture owners of the same
Bond and upon Bonds issued in exchange therefor or upon tiansfer or in place theieof.
(e)
As to the existence or non-existence of any fact or as m the sufficiency or
validity of any instniment. paper or proceeding, the Tmsiee shaU be entitied to
conclusivelyrelyupon a certificate signed on behalf of the Issuer by an Authorized Issuer
Representative as sufficiem evidence of the facts therein contained, and prior to the
occurrence of a default of which tbe Trustee has been notified as provided in
subsection (g) of this Section, or subsequent to the waiver, rescission or annulment of a
default as provided in Article DC hereofi shall also be at liberty to accept a similar
certificate to the effect that any particular dealing, transaction or action is necessaty or
expedient, but may at its discretion secure such fiirther evidence deemed necessary or
advisable, but shall in no case be bound to secure the same. The Tmstee may accept a
certificate signed on behalf of the Issuer by an Aulhorized Issuer Representative to the
effect that aresolutionin the form therein set forth has been adopted by the Issuer as
conclusive evidence that such resolution has been duly adopted, and is in full force and
effect.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83217

(0
The permissiverightof the Tmstee to do things enumerated in this
Indentme shall not be construed as a duty and the Tnistee shaU not be liable in the
peifoimance of its obligations hereunder, except for its negligence or wiUful misconduct.
(g)
The Trustee shaU not be required to take notice or be deemed to have notice
of any default or Event of Default hercwidcr, except faUure by the Issuer to cause to be
made any of the payments to the Tmstee required to be made by Article IV hereof and aU
defaults under Section 9.01(a), (b) or (c) hereof, unless a Responsible Officer shall be
specifically notified in writing of such default by the Issuer or by the Owners of at least
twenfy-five per cent (25%) in aggregate principal amount of aU Bonds then outstanding
or by the Remarketing Agent, and in tbe absence of any such notice may conclusively
assume that no such default or Evem of Default exists.
(h)
The Trustee shaU not be required to give any bonds or surety in respect of
the execution of its tmsts and poweis hereunder.
(i)
Before taking any action under Article DC hereof at therequestor direction
of the Bondholders, the Tmstec may require that an indeinnity bond satisfactoty to the
Tnistee be furnished by tbe Bondholders, for the reimbursemem of aU expenses to which
it may be put and to protect it against aU liabiUty, except liabifity which is adjudicated to
have resultedfromits negfigence or willftil default in connection with any action so taken:
(j)
AU moneys received by tbe Trustee or any Paying Agem shaU, until used
or applied or invested as herein provided, be held in tmst for the purposes for which they
were received and shall not be comnunglcd with the general fiinds of the Tmstee but need
not be segregatedfromother funds except to the extent required or permitted by law.
Neither the Trustee nor any Paying Agem shaU be under any liabifity for interest on any
moneys received hereunder except such as may be agreed upon.
(k)
The Tmstee, prior to the occurrence of an Event of Default specified in
Section 9.01 of this Indenture and after the curing or -waiving of all Events of Default
which may have occiured. undertakes to perform such duties and only such duties as are
specificaUy set fonh in this Indenture and, in the absence of bad faith on its part, the
Tmstee may conclusively rely, as to the tmth of the statements and correcmess of the
opinions expressed therein, upon certificates or opinionsftimishedto the Trustee and
conforming to the requirements of this Indenture; but in the case of any such certificates
or opinions which by any provision hereof are specifically required to be furnished to the
Tmstee, the Trastee shall be under a duty to examine the same to determine whether or
not they conform to the requirements of this Indemure. In case an evem of default has
occurted (which has not been cured or waived) the Tmstec shall exercise such of the rights
and powers vested in it by this Indenture, and use the same degree of care and skill in their
exercise, as a pmdent person would exercise or use under the circumstances in the conduct
of his own affairs.

 83218

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(1)
No provision of this Indenture shaU be constmed torelieveflieTriisiee from
fiabifity for its own negligent action, its own negligent failure to act, or its own wiUful
-misconduct, except that:
(i) This subsection shall not be constmed to limit flie effect of
subsection (k) of this Section;'
(u) The Tnistee shaU not be liable for any eiror of judgmem made in
good faith by an ofBcer ofthe Trustee, unless it shaU be proved that the Trastee
was negligem in ascertaining the pertinem facts;
(iu) The Trustee shaU not be liable withrespectto any action taken or
omitted to be taken by it in good faith in acconlance with the diiection of the
Owneis of a majority in aggregate prindpal amoum of the Bonds outstanding
relating to the time, method and place of conducting any proceeding or any remedy
available to the Tmstee, or exercising any trust or power conferred upon the
Trustee, under this Indenture; and
(iv) No provision of this Indenture sbaU require the Tmstee to expend
or risk its own fiinds or otherwise incur any financial liabifity in the performance
of any of its duties hereunder, or in the exercise of any of itsrightsor powers, tf
it shaU have, reasonable grounds for beUeving dliat repaymem of sucb fimds or
adequate indemnity against such risk or liabifity is not reasonably assured to it
provided, however, that norightof the Tnistee to indemnification shallrelievethe
TmsteefromresponsibUity for making payments on the Bonds when due from
moneys avaUable to it, orfix>mmalring any claim under the Bond Insurance Policy.
(m) Notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this Indenture contained, tbe Tmstee
shaU have theright,but shaU not be required, to demand, inrespectof the authentication
of any Bonds, the withdrawal of any cash, thereleaseof any property, or any action
whatsoever within the purview of this Indenture, any showings, certificates, opinions,
appraisals or other information, or coiporate action or evidence thereof, in addition lo that
by the terms hereof required as a condition of such action by the Tmstee, deemed
desirable for the puipose of establishing therightof the Issuer to the authentication of any
Bonds, the withdrawal of any cash, or as a condition to the taking of any action by flie
Tmstee.
(n)
In the evem the Tmsiee incurs expenses or renders services in connection
with an event of bankmptcy, reorganization or insolveixty, such expenses (including the
fees and expenses of its counsel) and the compensation for such services arc intended to
constitute expenses of administration under any bankruptcy, reorganization or insolvency.
(o)
To the extent that the Tmstee is also acting as Paying Agent. Registfar or
Tender Agent hereunder, therightsand protections afforded to the Trustee pursuant to this
Article X shall also be afforded to such Paying Agent, Registrar and Tender Agent.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83219

Section 10.02. Corporate Trustee Required; Efigibility. There shaU at all times
be a Tnistee hereunder which shaU be a coiporation organized and doing business as a commercial
bank or trust conqany under the laws of the United States of America or of one of the states of
the United States, be authorized under such laws to exercise corporate tmst powers, be authorized
to accept and exercise the tmsts herein provided, have a combined capital and surplus of at least
$25,000,0(X), be subject to supervision or examination by federal or state authority and have such
offices and agencies in such locations as arerequiredto enable it to perform the fimctioiis herein
comemplated. So long as DTC is the Securities Depositoty for the Bonds, the Tnistee must be
a Direct Participam m DTC. ff, and at aUtimeswhen,flieBonds are not Book Entity Bonds, flie
Designated Office of the Tmstee for purposes of tender must be located m New York City, ff
such corporation publishes reports of condition at least annually, pursuam to law or to the
requirements of the aforesaid supervising .or examining authority, then for tbe puiposes of this
Section 10.02, the combmed capital and surplus of sucb corporation shaU be deemed to be its
combined capital and suipliis as set forth in its most recem ieport of condition so published.
Section 10.03. Fees, Charges And Expenses of Trustee. The Trustee shall be
entitied to paymem and/or reimbursememfromthe Issuer for sucb fees as shaU be agreed upon
by the Issuer and the Tnistee for its Ordinaty Servicesrenderedhereunder and aU advances.
Counsel fees and other Ordinaty Expenses reasonably, and necessarily made or incurred by the
Trustee in connection with such Ordinary Services hereunder, and, subsequent to default, in
accordance with the Trustee's then-current fee schedule for de&ult administration (the entirety of
which compensation shaU not be limited by any provision of lawregardingcompensation of a
tmstee of an express trust); and, in the evem thai it should become necessaty that the Tmstee
perfoim Extraordinary Services, it shaU be entitied to reasonable extra compensation therefor from
the Issuer, and toreimbursememfromthe Issuer for reasonable and necessaty Extraordinaty
Expenses (including fees of Counsd) in connection therewith; provided, thattfsuch Extraordinaty
Services or Extraordinaty Expenses are occasioned by the negUgence or wiUfiU misconduct of the
Tmstee it shaU not be entitied to compensation orreimbursememtherefor. The Tnistee shaU have
a first lien with right of payment prior to payment on account of principal of or premium,tfany,
or imeiest on any Bond upon aU moneys in its possession under any provisions hereof for the
foregoing advances, fees, costs and expenses incurted; provided, however, that the Tmstee's lien
withrightof payment prior to paymem on accoum of principal of or premium,ffany, or interest
on any Bond with respect to moneys in the Bond Fund held for the paymem of the prindpal of
and premium, ff any, and interest on particular Bonds or moneys held for the paymem of the
purchase price of particular Bonds shaU be subordinate to that of the Bondholders. The Tmstee's
rigbts under this Section 10.03 shall survive the teimination or expiration of this Indenture; the
resignation or removal of the Tmsiee and the payment in fiiU of the Bonds. The Issuer agrees to
indemnify, defend and hold the Trustee harmlessfromand against any loss, liability or expense
incLured without negUgence or bad faith on its part, arising out of or in connection with the
acceptance or administration of the office of Tmstee under this Indenmre, including the costs of
defending itself against any claim or liabifity in connection with the exercise or performance of
any of its powers or duties hereunder or thereunder.
Section 10.04: Notice to Bondholders if Default Occurs. If a default occurs of
which the Tmstee is by Section 10.01(g) hereof required to take notice or if notice of default be
given as in said subsection (g) provided, the Trustee shall (i) promptly give notice of default to

 83220

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

the Bond Insurer and (u) wifliin sixty (60) days thereafter (unless such default is cured or waived),
give notice of such default to each Owner of Bonds then outstanding, provided that, exceptfaathe
case of a default in tbe payment of the prindpal of or premium,tfany, or interest on any Bond,
the Tmstee may withhold such notice to the Bondholders tf and so long as a trust committee of
Responsible Officers ofthe Trustee in good faith determine that the withholding of such notice
is in the imerests of the Bondholders and provided fiirther that nothing in tbis Section 10.04 shaU
be deemed to limit the notice required by the second paragraph of Section 9.05 hereof.
Section 10.05. Intervention by Trustee. In any judicial proceeding to which the
Issuer is a party and which in the opinion of the Trastee and its Counsel has a substantial bearing
on the interests of Owners ofthe Bonds, the Trustee may intervene onbehalf of Bondholdeis and,
subject to the provisions of Section 10.01(0, shaU do soffrequested in writing by the Owners of
a majorify in aggregate principal amount of aU Bonds then outstanding.
Section 10.06. Successor Tnistee. Any corporation or association imo which the
Trustee may be merged or converted, or with which it may be consofidated, or to which it may
seU, lease or transfer its corporate trust business and assets as a whole or substantially as a whole,
shaU be and become successor Trustee hereunder and shaU be vested with all the tmsts, powers,
rights, obligations, duties, remedies, immunities and privUeges hereunder as was its predecessor,
without the execution or filing of any instrumem on the pan of any of the parties hereto.
Section 10.07. Resignation by the Trustee. TheTrusteemay at any time resign
from the tmsts hereby created by giving sixfy (60) days written notice byregisteredor certified
maU to the Issuer, the Owner of each Bond, the Remarketing Agent and the Auction Agem, and
such resignation shaU not take effect unti] the appointment of a successor Tmstee pursuant to the
provisions of Section 10.09 hereof and acceptance by the successor Tmsiee of the tnists created
hereby. Upon receiving such notice of resignation, the Issuer shaU prompdy appoim a successor
Tmstee. ff no successor Trustee shaU have been so appointed and have accepted appointment
wifliin forfy-five (45) days of the givmg of written notice by theresigningTnistee as aforesaid,
the resigning Tnistee may petition, at the expense of the Issuer, any court of competent
jurisdiction for the appomtmem of a successor Tnistee or any Bondholder who. has been a bona
fide holder of a Bond for at least six months may, on behalf of itsdf and others similarly situated,
petition any such court for the appointment of a successor tmstee. Sucb court may thereupon,
after such notice, ff any, as it may deem proper and may prescribe, appoint a successor trustee.
Section 10.08. Removal of the Trustee, (a) In case at any time either of the
following shall occur:
(1)
the Tmstee shaU cease to be eligible in accordance with the provisions of
Section 10.02 hereof and shall fail to resign after wrinen request therefor by the Issuer or
by any Bondholder who has been a bonafideholder of a Bond for at least six. months, or
(2)
the Tmstee shaU become incapable of acting, or shall be adjudged a
bankmpt or insolvent, or a receiver of the Tnistee or of its property shaU be appointed,
or any public officer shall take charge or control of the Tmstee or of its property or affairs
for the purpose ofrehabilitation,conservation or liquidation,

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83221

then, in any such case, the Issuer mayremovethe Tnistee and appoint a successor trustee by an
instrumem in writing deUvered to the Trustee, the Bond Insurer and the Remarketing Agent, or
any such Bondholder may, on behalf of itself and all others similarly situated, petition any court
of competem jurisdiction for the removal of the Tmsiee and the appointment of a successor
tmstee. Such court may thereupon, after such notice ff any, as.it may deem proper and may
prescribe, remove the Tmstee and appoint a successor trustee.
If no successor Trastee shall have been so appoimed and have accepted appointmem
wifliin forty-five (45) days after the giving of such notice of removal, the Trustee being removed
may petition, at the expense of the Issuer, any court of competent jurisdiction for the appointmem
of a successor Trastee.
(b)
The Issuer (except during the occurrence and continuation of an Eyem of
Default), in its sole discretion, or the Owneis of a majorify in aggregate principal amoimt ofthe
Bonds at the time outstanding may at any time, with or without cause, remove the Tnistee and
appoint a successor trustee by an instimnent or concurrem instniments in writing signed by the
Issuer or such Bondholders, as the case may be.
(c)
Any resignation or removal of the Trustee and appointmem of a successor
trustee, puisuam to any of the provisions of this Section shall not become effective imtU the
acceptance of appointmem by the successor Tnistee as provided in Section 10.09 and acceptance
by the successor Trastee of the tnists created hereby.
Section 10.09. Appointment of Successor Trustee. In case the Tmstee hereunder
shall:
(a)

resign pursuant to Section 10.02 or 10.07 hereof;

(b)

beremovedpursuant to Section 10.08 hereof; or

(c)
be dissolved, taken under the control of any, public officer or officers or of
a receiver appointed by a court, or otherwise become incapable of acting hereunder,
a successor shaU be appoimed by the Issuer; provided, that ff a successor Trustee is not so
appointed within ten (10) days after notice of resignation is maUed or instrumem ofremovalis
delivered as provided under Sections 10.02, 10.07 and 10.08 hereof,respectively,or within urn
(10) days of the Issuer's knowledge of any offlieevents specified in (c) hereinabove, then the
Owners of a majority in aggregate principal amount of Bonds then outstand'mg, byfilingwith the
Issuer, the Bond Insurer and the Remarketing Agent an instrument or concurrent instruments in
writing signed by or on behalf of such Owners, may designate a successor Trustee. The
appointment of a successor Tmsiee shall be subject to the approval of the Bond Insurer.
In case at any lime the Trustee shall resign and no appointment of a successor
Trustee shall be made pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this Article X prior to the date
specified in die notice of resignation as the date when such resignation shall take effect, the Owner
of any Bond may apply to any court of competent juri.sdiction to appoint a successor Trustee. Such

 83222

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

court may thereupon, after such notice, if any, as it may deem proper and prescribe, appoint a
successor Tnistee.
Section 10.10. Concerning Any Successor Trustees. Evety successor Tnistee
appointed hereunder shaU execute, acknowledge and deliver to its predecessor and also to the
Issuer, an instrument in writing accepting sucb appointment hereimder. and thereupon sucb
successor shaU becomefiiUyvested with all tbe trusts, powers,rights,obligations, duties,
remedies, immunities and privUeges of its predecessor; but, nevertheless, and upon payment of
its charges (I) sucb predecessor shaU, on the written request offlieIssuer^ execute and deUver an
instrument transferring to such successor Tmstee aU the trusts, powers,rights,obligations, duties,
remedies, immunities and privUeges of such predecessor hereunder and (2) sucb predecessor shaU
ddiver aU securities and moneys held by it as Trastee hereunder to its successor. Should any
instniment in writing from the Issuer be required by any successor Trastee for more fiiUy and
certainly vesting in such successor the tmsts, poweis,rights;obligations, duties, remedies,
immunities and privUeges hereby vested in the predecessor any and aU such instniments in writing
shaU, on writtenrequest,be executed, acknowledged and defivered by the Issuer. The resignation
of any Tmstee and the instmmem or instruments removing any Trustee and appointing a successor
hereunder, togefljer with aU other instruments provided for in this Article, shaU befiledor
recorded by the successor Trustee in each recording office, ff any, where the Indenture or a
financing statement relating thereto shaU have beenfiledor recorded. No trustee hereunder shaU
be liable for the acts or omissions of any successor trustee.
Section 10.11. Trustee Protected In Relying Upon Resolution, Etc. The
resolutions, opinions, certificates and other instruments provided for in this Indenture may be
accepted by the Tmstee as conclusive evidence of the facts and conclusions stated therein and shall
be fuU warrant, protection to the Tmstee for thereleaseof property and the -withdrawal of cash
hereimder.
•
Section 10.12. Successor Trustee As the Trustee of Bond Fund, Paying Agent,
Tender Agent and Registrar. In the event of a change in the office of the Tmstee, the
predecessor Tmsiee which has resigned or been removed shaU cease to be Trustee of the Bond
Ftmd, Tender Agent and Registrar and a Paying Agent for principal of and preinium,ffany, and
uiterest on the Bonds, and the successor Trustee shall become such Tmstee, Tender Agent,
Registrar and a Paying Agem.
Section 10.13. Trust Estate May Be Vested m Co-Trustee. It isfliepuipose of
this Indenturefliatthere shall be no violation of any law of any jurisdiction (including particularly
the laws of the State) denying or restricting therightof banking corporations or associations to
transact business as tmstee in sucb jurisdiction. It is recognized lhal in case of litigation under
this Indenture, and in particular in case of the enforcement of this Indenture upon the occurrence
of an event of default, it may be necessaty that the Tmstee appoint an additional individual or
instimtion as a separate Tnistee or Co-Trastee. The following provisions of this Section 10.13
are adapted to these ends.
In the event of the incapacity or lack of authority of the Trustee, by reason of any
present or hirure law of any jurisdiction, to exercise any oftiierights,powers and trusts herein

 5/ 1 / 2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83223

granted to the Trustee or to holdtideto the Tmst Estate or to take any other action which may
be necessaty or desirable in connection therewith, each and evety remedy, power,right,claim,
demand, cause of action, immunity, estate,titie.interest and lien expressed or imended by tbis
Indenture to be exercised by or vested in or conveyed to the Tnistee with respect thereto shaU be
exercisable by and vest m such separate Trastee or Co-Tiustee but only to the extent necessaty
to enable the separate Trustee or Co-Trustee to exercise suchrights^powers and trusts, and evety
covenam and obligation necessaiy to the exercise thereof by such separate Tnistee or Co-Trustee
shaU run to and be enforceable by either of them.
Should any deed, conveyance or instrumem in -writingfromthe Issuer be required
by the separate Trustee or Co-Tmstee so appointed by the Trustee in order to more fiiUy and
certainly vest in and confirm to him or it such properties,rights,powers, trusts, duties and
obfigations, any and aU sucb deeds, conveyances and instruments shaU, on request, be executed,
acknowledged and delivered by the Issuer. In case any separate Tnistee or Co-Tmstee, or a
successor to either, shaU die, become incapable of acting, resign or be removed, aU the esutes,
properties,rights,powers, trusts, duties and obligations of such separate Trustee or Co-Trustee,
so far as peimitted by law, sbaU vest in and be exercised by the Trastee untU the appointmem of
a new Trastee or successor to such separate Trustee or Co-Trustee.
No Trustee shaU be liable for any act or omission of any other Trustee.
ARTICLE XI
Supplemental Indentures
Section 11.01.
Supplemental Indentures Not Requiring Consent of
Bondholders. The Issuer and tiie Tmstee may without the consent of, or notice to, any of the
Bondholders, enter into an indenture or indentures supplemental to this Indenmre for any one or
more of the following puiposes: (i) to add to the covenants and agreements of, and limitations
andrestrictionsupon, the Issuer in this Indenture, other covenants, agreements, limitations'and
restrictions to be observed by the Issuer which are not contrary to or inconsistem with this
Indentme as theretofore in effect; (u) to grant to or confer or impose upon the Trastee for the
benefit of the Bondholders any additionalrights,remedies,powers, authority, security, liabilities
or duties which may lawfuUy be granted, conferted or imposed and which are not contraty to or
inconsistent with this Indenmre as heretofore in effect; (iii) to cure any ambiguify or omission or
to cure, correct or supplemem any defective provision of this Indenture in each case in such
manner as shaU not adveisely affect the Bondholdeis; (iv) to evidence the appointment of a
separate trustee or a co-trustee or lo evidence the succession of a new trustee or a new co-trustee
hereunder; (v) to comply with the requirements of the Tmst Indenmre Act of 1939, asfromtime
to time amended; (vi) to obtain or maintain an appropriateratingorratingson the Bonds; (vii) to
provide for the use of an uncertificated book entry system; (viii) to authorize different Authorized
Denominations of the Bonds and to make coirelative amendments and modifications to this
Indenture regarding exchangeabifity of Bonds of different Authorized Denominations, redemptions
of portions of Bonds of particular Authorized Denominations and sinular amendments and
modifications of a technical nature; (ix) subject to the prior written consent of the Bond Insurer,

 83224

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

to provide for a liquidity facifity prior to the initial adjustment to a DaUy Rate, Weekly Rate,
Tenn Rate or Flexible Rate; (x) subject to the prior written consent of the Bond Insurer, to
provide additional security, inchiding, wifliout limitation, a letter of credit, to the Trastee for the
benefit of the Bondholders upon receipt by the Issuer and the Trustee of an opinion of Bond
Counsel to the effect that the provision of such additional security is pennitted by applicable law
and wiU not have an adverse effect on the exclusion of the interest on the Bondsfromthe gross
income of the Owners or Beneficial Owners thereof for federal income tax purposes and to
conform to or permit compliance with the terms and provisions of such additional security; or
(xi) to preserve the tax-exenqit status of interest on the Bonds.
No supplemental indenture entered into pursuam to this Section 11.01 shaU take
effect untU ten Business Days after the Bond Insurer sh:dl have been given written notice of such
supplemental indenmre. The Tmstee is directed to file with the Bond Insurer a copy of each
supplemental indenture.
Section 11.02. Supplemental Indentures Requiring Consent of Bondholders
and Bond Insurer. Exclusive of supplemental indenmres covered by Section 11.01 hereof and
subject to the terms and provisions contained in this Section and Section 9.10, and not otherwise,
the holders of not less than a majority in aggregate principal amoum of the Bonds then
Outstanding shaU have theright,fromtime totime,to consent to and approve the execution by
the Issuer and the Trustee of such other indemiiTB or indentures supplemental hereto for the
purpose of modifying, amending, adding to orrescinding,in any particular manner, any of the
tenns or provisions contained in this Indenture. As long as the Bond Insurance Policy is in effect
withrespectto aU Outstanding Bonds, no consent of Bondholders under this Section 11,02 shall
berequired;provided, however, that nothing in this Section contained shaU permit or be constmed
as permitting amendments of this Indenture, withoutflieconsent of the holders of 100% of the
Bonds then Outstanding affected by such amendmem, to effect '(a) an extension of the maturity
date of the principal of or the interest on any Bond issued hereunder, or (b) a reduction in the
principal amount of, preinium, if any, on any Bond or therateof uiterest thereon, or (c) an
adverse change in therightsof the Owners of the Bonds to the purchase thereof pursuant to'
Article IV hereof, or (d) a privUege or priority of any Bond or Bonds over any other Bond or
Bonds, or (e) a reduction in the aggregate principal amoum of the Bonds the Owners of which are
required to consem to such supplemental indenture.
If at any lime the Issuer shaU request the Tmstee to enier imo any such
supplemental indenture for any of the puiposes aUowed by this Section, the Trustee shaU, at the
writtenrequestof the Issuer and upon bemg satisfactorUy indenmified with respect to expenses
and upon receivingfromthe Issuer forms of notices and any otheirelaledsolicitation materials,
cause notice of the proposed execution of such supplemental indenture to be mailed in
substantially the manner provided in Section 3.02 hereof with respect to redemption of Bonds.
Such notice shall be prepared by the Issuer and shall briefly set forth the nature of the proposed
supplemental indenmre and shall state that copies thereof are onfileal die Principal Office of the
Tnistee for inspection by all Bondholders, ff, within sixty (60) days or such longer period of time
as shall be prescribed by the Issuer following die inailing of such notice, the Owneis of not less
than a majority or 100%, as the case may be, in aggregate principal amount of the Bonds
Outstanding at the time of the execution of any such supplemental indenmre shall have consented

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83225

to and approved the execution thereof as herein provided, no Owner of any Bond shall have any
right to object to any of the terms and provisions contained therein, or the operation thereof, or
in any manner to question the propriety of tbe execution thereof, or to enjoin or restrain the
Tnistee or the Issuerfromexecuting the same orfromtaking any action pursuant to the provisions
thereof. The Issuer shaU have therightto extend,fromtime to time the period within which such
consem and approval may be obtained from Bondholders. Upon the execution of any such
supplemental indenture as in this Section peimitted and provided, this Indenture shall be and be
deemed to be modified and amended in accordance therewitbu
A supplemental indenture under this Section 11.02 shaU not become effective unless
and untU the Bond Insurer shaU have consented to the execution and defivety of such supplemental
indenmre. The Tnistee shaUfilewith Standard & Poor's Coiporation a copy of each supplemental
indenture consented to by the Bond Insurer.
Section 11.03. Consent of Remarketing Agent. A supplemental indenture under
this Article XI which affects anyrights,duties or obligations of the Remarketing Agent shall not
become effective unless and untU the Remarketing Agent shall have consented to the execution
and delivety of such supplememal indenture. .
Section 11.04. Opinion of Bond Counsd; The Trustee may require that the
Issuer deliver to the Tmstee at the Issuer's expense an opinion of Bond Counsel upon whicb the
Trustee may conclusively rely to the effect that a supplemental mdennire is peimitted by
applicable law and wiU not adversely affect the tax-exempt status of the interest on the Bonds and
that such supplememal indenture conqilies with the teims and provisions of this Indenture.

ARTICLE x n
MisceUaneous
Section 12.01. Consents, Etc. of Bondholders. Any consent, approval, direction
or other instrument required by this Indenture to be signed and executed by the Bondholders may
be in any number of concurrent writings of similar tenor and may be signed or executed by such
Bondholdeis in person or by agent appointed in writing. Proof of the execution of any such
consent, approval, direction or other instniment or of the writing appointing any such agem, if
made in ihe following mannei, shall be sufficient for any. of the purposes of this Indenmre, and
shaU be conclusive in favor of the Trustee with regard to any action taken under such request or
other instniment, namely:
(a)
The fact and date of the execution by any Person of any such instrument or
writing may be proved by the certfficate of any officer in any jurisdiction who by law has
power to take acknowledgments within such jurisdiction that the Person signing such
instrument or writing acknowledged before him the execution thereof, or by affidavit of
any wimess to such execution or in any oihcf manner satisfactory to the Tmstee; or

 83226

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 / 2002

(b)
The fact of ownership of Bonds and the amount or amounts, numbers and
other identification of such Bonds, and the date of acquiring the same shaU be proved by
theregistrationbooks of the Issuer maintained by the Trustee pursuant to Section 2.04
hereof.
Any request, demand, authorization, direction, notice, consent, waiver or other
action by any Bondholder shaU bind evety future holder ofthe same Bond in respect of anything
done or suffered to be done by the Tmstee or the Issuer in reliance thereon, whether or not
notation of such action is made upon such Bond.
Section 12.02. Limitation of Rights. With the exception ofrightsherein.
expressly conferred, nothing expressed or mentioned in or to be impliedfrom.thisIndenture or
the Bonds is intended or shaU be constmed to give to any peison other than the parties hereto, the
Remarketing Agent, the Auction Agem. tbe Bond Insurer and the Owners of the Bonds any legal
or equitableright,remedy or claim under or in respect to this Indenture: This Indemure and aU
ofthe covenants, conditions and provisions hereof are imended to be and being for the sole and
exclusive benefit of the parties hereto, the Owners of the Bonds, the Remarketing Agent, the Bond
Insurer and the Auction Agent as herein provided.
Sectionl2.03. Waiver of Notice. Whenever in this Indenture the givii^ of notice
by maU or otherwise is required, tbe giving of such notice may be waived in writing by the peison
entitied toreceivesuch notice and in any such case the giving or receipt of such notice shall not
be a condition precedent to the'vafidity of any action taken inrelianceupon such waiver.
Section 12.04. SeverabiUty. ff any provision of this Indenmre shaU be invafid,
inoperative or unenforceable as appfied in any particular case in any jurisdiction or jurisdictions
or in aU jurisdictions, or in all cases because it confUcts with any other provision or provisions
hereof or any constimtion or stamte or rale of public policy, or for any other reason, such
circumstances shaU not have the effect of rendering the provision in question inoperative or
unenforceable in any other case or circumstance, or ofrenderingany other provision or provisions
herein contained invaUd, inoperative, or uneitforceable to any extent whatever. The invalidity of
any one or more phrases, sentences, clauses or Sections in this Indenture contained, shall not
affect the remaining portions of this Indenture, or any part thereof.
Section 12.05. Notices. Except as otherwise pro-vided herein, all notices,
certificates or other communications hereunder shall be sufficiendy given if in writing and sbaU
be deemed given when maUed byregistered,certified or first class maU, posuge prepaid, or by
qualified overnight courier service mumally acceptable to the delivering and recipient parties,
courier charges prepaid, addressed as foUows:
If to die Issuer:

City of Chicago, Illinois
33 North LaSaUe Sffeei, Sixth Floor
Chicago, Illinois 60602
Attention:

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83227

ff to the Trustee, the Paying
Agent or the Tender Agent:
Attention:
Telephone:
Telecopy:
If to the Auction Agent:

Attention:
Telephone:
Telecopy:
If to the Remarketing Agem:
Attention:
Telephone:
Telecopy:
Unless specificaUy otherwise required by the terms of this Indenture, any notice
required to be given pinsuam to any provision of this Indentuie may be given by any form of
electrode transmission that is capable of producing a written record, including, without limitation,
telecopy transmissions, provided that the deUverer of any such notice given by electronic
transmission shaU verify receipt of such notice promptiy upon the transmission thereof and. such
notice shaU not be deemed duly given unlessfiilland legible receipt thereof has been verified by
the recipient of such notice. The Issuer, the Trastee and the Remarketing Agent may, by notice
pursuant to this Section 13.05, designate any different addresses to which subsequem notices,
certificates or other communications shaU be sent. A dupficate copy of each notice, approval,
consent, request, complaim, demand or other communication given hereunder by the Issuer or the
Tmsiee to any one of the others shaU also be given to each one of the others.
Any notice to a party shall also be given to the Bond Insurer at the following
address:
[To Come]
Section 12.06. Hofidays. If the date for making any payment or the last date for
performance of any act or the exercismg of any right, as provided in this Indenmre. is not a
Business Day, such payment may be made or act performed orrightexercised on the next
succeeding Business Day with the same force and effect as tf done on tbe nominal date pro-vided
in this Indenture and no interest shall accme on the payment so dcferccd during the intervening
f>eriod.

 83228

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 12.07. Action by Issuer. Whenever it is herein provided or pennitted for
any action to be taken by the Issuer, sucb action may be taken by an Authorized Ismer
Representative under the Agreement unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Section 12.08. Counterparts. This Indenture may be simultaneously executed
in several counterparts, each of which shall be an original and aU of which shaU constimte but one
and tbe same instrument.
Section 12.09. Applicable Law. This Indenture shaU be governed exclusively by
and construed in accordance withflieapplicable laws of the State withoutregardto the principles
of confficts of laws thereof.
Section 12.10. Dealing In Bonds. The Tmstee, or the Remarketing Agem, in its
individual capacny, may in good faith buy, sell, own, bold and deal in any of the Bonds, and may'
jom in any action whicb any Bondholder may be entitied to take with lUs effect asffit did not
act in any capacify hereunder. The Tnistee or the Remarketing Agent, in its individual capacify,
eiflier as principal or agem, may also engage in or be interested in any financial or ofl!ier
transaction wifli the Issuer, and may act as depositoty, trastee or agent for any committee or body
of Bondholdeis secured hereby or other obfigations of the Issuer asfreelyas ff it did not act in
any capacity hereunder.
Section 12.11. Bond Insurance. The payment of the principal of and interest on
the Bonds when due is to be insured under, and to the extem provided in, the Bond Insurance
Poficy, including the endoisements thereto, to be issued by the Bond Insurer.
[Section 12.12. Bond Insurer's Auction Rate Provisions. Any conversion imo
an Auction Raie orfromone Auction Period to a differem Auction. Period (other thanfroman
Auction Period of 35 days or less to another Auction Period of 35 days or less) sbaU be
conditioned uponreceiptof afirmunderwriting commitment or contract of purchase from an
investment bank or other purchaser, acceptable to the Bond Insurer.
ff conversion fails for any reason, the Bonds (i) shaU remain in the Auction Rate
Periodfromwhich the conveision was artfmptf^ jf such Auction Rate Period is an Auction Rate
Period of 35 days or less or (fi) shaU automaticaUy be converted to an Auction Rate Period of 35
days.
In the event that the Issuer is in default under any of its obUgations relating to the
Bonds, the Bond Insurer wUl succeed to anyrightsof tbe Issuer to direct a conversion of the Rate
Period on the Bonds.
The Auction Procedures may omy be terminated for the following reasons: (i)
upon a successfid conversionfromthe Auction Rate Period to another Rate Period; or (ii) upon
a failure by the Bond Insurer to pay amounts due under the Bond Insurance Policy. There may
be no termination of the Auction Procedures for any other reason, induding defaults by the Issuer.
If the Issuer has faded to pay fees due to the Auction Agent or to any Broker-Dealer, the Bond

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83229

Insurer shall be given 45 days to cure the missed payments during which time the Auction
Procedures may not be suspended.
Any change in the Maximum Auction Rate or any default rate or the method of
calculating either must be approved by the Bond Insurer.
Any change in the Rate Period for the Bonds, other than a change in the Auction
Period from an Auction Period of 35 days or less to another Auction Period of 35 days or less,
shall not take effect until such change shall have been consented to by the Bond Insurer.]
Section 12.13, Payments Under the Bond Insurance PoUcy.
[To Come]

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, flie City of Chicago, has

caused these presents to be signed
in its name and behalf by its City Comptroller and its corporate seal to be hereunto affixed and
attested by its City Clerk, and to evidence its acceptance of the tmsts hereby created [Name of
Trustee] has caused these presents to be signed and sealed in its name and behalf by its duly
aufliorized officers, all as of the datefirstabove written.
C I T Y OF CHICAGO
(SEAL)

Attest:
By City Comptroller

:

Cily Clerk

[NAME OF TRUSTEE]
(SEAL)

Attest:

By

, as Tmstee

 83230

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Appendix 'A".
(To Indenture Of Trust)

{Form Of Bond]

United States Of America
State Of Ilfinois

City Of Chicago " '
Auction Rate Bond,
Series
.

Registered Number
R-

Registered
$
For Flexible Rate Periods Only

Interest
Rate
%
Dated Date:

Number Of
Mandatory Purchase
Days In Flexible
And Interest
Segment
Payment Date
"

Amount Of
Interest Due For
Flexible Segment
$
C.U.S.I.P.

Mamrity Date:
Registered Owner:
Principal Amount:

The City of Chicago (the "Issuer"), a municipal corporation and a home rule unit ofthe
State of LUinois, for value received, hereby promises to pay to the Registered Owner
identified above, or registered assigns as hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date
identified above, the Principal Amount identified above, and to pay interest on the
balance of said Principal Amount from time to time remaining unpaid untU payment

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

.

83231

of said Prindpal Amount has been made or duly provided for,' at the rates and on the
dates determined as described herein and in the Indenture as hereinafter defined, and
to pay interest on overdue principal at the rate borne by this Bond on the date on
which such principal became due and payable, except as the provisions set forth i n the
Indenture with respect to redemption may become appUcable hereto, the principal of
and premium, if any, and interest on this Bond being payable i n lawful money of the
United States of America at the Prindpal Office of
;
, as Paying
Agent (the "Paying Agent"); provided, however, payment of interest on any Interest
Payment Date shaU be made to the registered owner hereof as of the close of business
on the Record Date with respect to such Interest Payment Date and shaU be (i) paid by
check of the Paying Agent maUed to such registered owner hereof at his address as i t
appears on the registration books of the Issuer maintained by [Name of Trusteej, as
Trustee (the "Trustee") or at such other address as is furnished i n writing by such
registered owner to the Trustee not later than the close of business on the Record Date
or (u) except with respect to interest i n respect of any Term Rate, transmitted by wire
transfer to the accounts with members of the Federal Reserve System located within
the continental United States of America of those owners which own.at least One
MiUion DoUars ($1,000,000) i n aggregate prindpal amount of the Bonds and which
shaU have provided written wire transfer instructions to the Trustee prior to the close
of business on such Record Date, but, i n the case of interest payable i n respect of a
Flexible Segment, only upon presentation of such Bond (ff such Bond is not a Book
Entty Bond) at the Prindpal Office o f t h e Trustee for exchange or transfer as provided
i n the Indenture. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, for so long as this Bond
is restricted to being registered on the registration books of the Issuer kept by the
Trustee i n the ncune of a Securities Depositoty, the provisions of the Indenture
governing Book Entry Bonds shaU govem the manner o f t h e payment o f t h e prindpal
and purchase price of, and premium, ff any, and interest on, this Bond.
This Bond is one of an authorized issue of bonds Umited i n aggregate prindpal
amount to $
(the "Bonds") issued pursuant to Section 6 of Article VII of
the Illinois Constitution of 1970, and an ordinance adopted by the City CouncU o f t h e
Issuer on
, 2002 (the "Bond Ordinance") and is issued pursuant to and
secured under an Indenture of Trust (the "Indenture"), dated as of
, 2002,
between the Issuer and the Trustee.
This bond is a direct and genered obfigation of the Issuer. Reference to the Indenture
and the Bond Ordinance is made for a descripti'on of the nature and extent of the
security for this Bond, the revenues and monies pledged, the nature and extent arid
manner of enforcement of the pledge and the rights and remedies of the registered
owners of Bonds with respect thereto. In no event shaU the Issuer be obUgated to levy
any separate ad valorem or other tax i n addition to other City taxes or any spedal ad
valorem or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to pay the principal of, redemption
premiuio on or interest on this bond.

 83232

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

This Bond may be transferred or exchanged by the registered owner hereof in person
or by his attorney duly authorized i n writing at the Prindpal Office o f t h e Trustee but
only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment of the charges
provided i n the Indenmre, and upon surrender and canceUation of this Bond. Upon
such transfer or exchange a new registered Bond or Bonds, of authorized denomination
or denominations, for the same aggregate principed amount wiU be issued to the
transferee in exchange herefor.
In The Manner Provided And Subject To The Provisions Of The Indenture, The Term
Of The Bonds WiU Be Divided Into Consecutive Rate Periods During Each Of Which The
Bonds ShaU Bear Interest At Either A DaUy Rate, A Weekly Rate, A Term Rate, Flexible
Rates Or Auction Rates, Each Of Which ShaU Be Determined I n The Manner Provided
In The Indenture. In No Eivent ShaU The Interest Rate On Any Bond Elxceed The Lesser
Of (Eighteen (18)} Percent Per Annum And The Maximum Rate Per Annum Then
Permitted By Applicable Law.
Interest on this Bond shaU be payable on each.Interest Payment Date for the period
commencing on the next preceding Interest Payment Date (or.ffno interest has been
paid hereon, commencing on the Dated Date) and ending on the day next preceding
such Interest Payment Date; provided, however, that ff, as shown by the records o f t h e
Trustee, interest on the Bonds shall be i n default. Bonds shall bear interest from the
last date to which interest has been paid i n fuU or duly provided for on the Bonds, or
ff no interest has been paid or duly provided for on the Bonds, from the Dated Date.
Interest shaU be computed (1) i n the case of aTermRate Period, on the basis of a three
hundred sixty (360) day year consisting of twelve (12) thirty (30) day months, (2) i n the
case of a DaUy Rate Period, Weekly Rate Period or Flexible Rate Period on the basis of
a three hundred sixty-five (365) or three hundred sixty-six (366) day year, as
appropriate, and the actual number of days elapsed and (3) i n the case of an Auction
Rate Period, on the basis of a three hundred sixty (360) day year and the actual number
of days elapsed.
The term "Interest Payment Date' means (1) with respect to any DaUy Rate Period or
Weekly Rate Period, the first (1") Business Day of each calendar month, (2) with respect
to any Term Rate Period, the first (1") day of the sixth (6"') calendar month foUowing the
effective date of such Term Rate Period, and the first (1'") day of each successive sixth
calendar month, i f any, of such Term Rate Period, (3) with respect to any Flexible
Segment, the Business Day next succeeding the last day thereof, (4) with respect to the
Auction Rate Period (i) for an Auction Period nominally of less than seven (7) days, the
first (1") Business Day of the first (1") calendar month commencing after the end of
such Auction Period, (ii) for an Auction Period of ninety-one (91) days or less (other
than an Auction Period described in clause (i)), the Business Day next succeeding the
last day of such Auction Period and (ui) for an Auction Period of more than ninety-one
(91) days, on each thirteenth (13"") Thursday after the first ( ] " ) day of such Auction
Period (or if such Thursday shcUl not be a Business Day, the next succeeding Business
Day) and on the Business Day next succeeding the last day of such Auction Period, and
(5) with respect to each Rate Period, the Business Day next succeeding the last day

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83233

thereof.
The term "Record Date" means with respect to any Interest Payment Date i n respect
of a DaUy Rate Period, a Weekly Rate Period, a Flexible Segment or an Auction Period,
the Business Day next preceding such Interest Payment Date and, with respect to any
Interest Payment Date i n resi>ect of a Term Rate Period, the fffteenth (15*^) day of the
calendar month next preceding such Interest Pa3mient Date.
The Bonds shaU be deliverable i n the form of registered Bonds without coupons in the
denominations of Five Thousand DoUars ($5,000) and any integral multiple thereof
during any Term Rate Period; i n the denominations of One Hundred Thousand DoUars
($100,000) and any mtegral multiple of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000) excess thereof
during any DaUy Rate Period or Weekly. Rate Period; i n the denominations of One
Hundred Thousand DoUars ($100,000) and any integral multiple of Five Thousand
DoUars. ($5,000) i n excess thereof during any Flexible Rate Period; and i n . t h e
denominations. of Twenty-five Thousand DoUars ($25,000) and integral multiples
thereof diiring any Auction Rate Period.
The Bonds Are Subject To Optional And Mandatory Tender And Purchase As Provided
In the Indenture.
The Bonds Are Subject To Optional [And Mandatory) Redemption A s Provided I n The
Indenmre.
The owner of this Bond shaU have no right to enforce the provisions of the Indenture
or to institute action to enforce the coveucints therein, or to take any action with
respect to any event of default under the Indenture, or to institute, appear i n or defend
any suit or other proceedings with respect thereto, except as provided i n the Indenture.
The Issuer, the Trustee, the Paying Agent, the Tender Agent, the Registrar, the
Remarketing Agent, the Bond Insurer, the Auction Agent and any other agent of the
Issuer or the Trustee may treat the person in whose name this Bond is registered as
the owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment as herein provided and for aU
other purposes, whether or not this Bond be overdue, and neither the Issuer, the
Trustee, the Paying Agent, the Tender Agent, the Registrar, the Reracu-ketiiig Agent, the
Bond Insurer, the Auction Agent nor any such agent shaU be affected by notice to the
contrary.
The Indenture prescribes the manner in which it may be discharged and after which
the Bonds shaU no longer be secured by or entitled to the benefits of the Indenture,
except for the purposes of payment, registration, transfer or exchange of Bonds,
including a provision that under certain circumstances the Bonds shaU be deemed to
be paid if Government Obfigations, mamring as to principal and interest i n such
amounts and at such times as to insure the avaUabUity of suffident monies to pay the
principal of and premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds and cdl necessary and
proper fees, compensation and expenses ofthe Trustee shall have been deposited with

 83234

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

the Trustee.
Modifications or alterations of the Indenture, or any supplements thereto, may be
made only to the extent and in the circumstances pennitted by the Indentxire.
Terms which are used herein as defined terms and which are not otherwise defined
shedl have the meanings assigned to them'in the Indenture.
This Bond shaU not be vafid or become obfigatory for any purpose or be entitied to
any security or benefit under the Indenmre unless and untU the certificate of
authentication hereon shaU have been duly executed by the Trustee.
It Is Hereby Certified, Recited And Declcured that aU ofthe conditions, things and acts
required to exist, to have happened and to have been performed precedent to and in the
issuance of this Bond do exist, have happened and have been performed in due time,
form and manner as required by the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois and
that the.amount of this Bond, together with aU other indebtedness of the Issuer, does
not exceed any limit prescribed by the Constitution or laws of the State of Illinois.
In Wimess Whereof, The City of Chicago has caused this Bond to be executed in its
name by the m£tnuad or facsinule signature of its Mayor its corporate seal to be impressed
or imprinted hereon and attested by the manual or facsimile signature of its City Clerk,
aU as of the Dated Date.
City of Chicago
By:

;
Mayor

(Seal)
Attest:

City Clerk

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83235

[Form Of Trustee's Certificate Of Authentication]
This Bond is one of the Bonds described i n the within-mentioned Indenture of Tmst.
[Ncime of Trustee], as Trustee

By:

Date of Authentication:

:
Authorized Signatoty

• ••

[Form Of Assignment]

. .

Assignment.
For

value received the undersigned sells, assigns and fransfers unto
:
the within bond and hereby irrevocably
constitutes and appoints
•
, attorney, to transfer
the said bond on the books kept for regisfration thereof, with fuU power of substitution
in the premises.
Dated

Signamre Guarantee:

[End Of Form Of Bond]

 83236

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Appendvc "B".
(To Indenture Of Trust)

Auction

Procedures.

Section 1. Definitions.
Each of the terms defined i n Article I of the Indenture' shaU have the meaning
specified therein. In addition, each of the foUowing terms shaU have the meaning
specified below, unless the context requires otherwise.
"Agent Member' means a member of, or a direct participant i n , D.T.C. or any
successor Securities Depository under the Indenmre.
"After-Tax Equivalent Rate" means, as of any date of detennination, the interest rate
per annum equal to the product of (x) the commerdal paper/treasuty rate on such
date and (y) an amount equal to 1.00 minus the statutory corporate tax rate on such
date.
"AppUcable Percentage' means, as of any date of determination, the percentage
determined as set forth below (as such percentage may be adjusted pursuant to
Section 5 of these auction procedures) based on the prevaUing rating of the Bonds i n
effect at the dose of business on the Business Day immediately preceding such date
of detennination:
Prevailing Rating

Appficable Percentage

"AAA"/'Aaa"

175%

"AA"/"Aa"

175%

"A"/"A"

175%

"BBB"/"Baa"

200%

Bdow "BBB"/"Baa"

265%

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83237

For purposes of this definition, the "prevailing-rating" o f t h e Bonds vriU be:
(a) "AAA"/"Aaa", ff the Bonds have a rating of "AAA" or better by Fitch and a rating
of "Aaa" by Moody's, or the equivalent of such ratings by a substimte rating agency
or agendes selected as provided below;
(b) ff not "AAA"/-Aaa", tiien "AA'/'Aa" if the Bonds have a rating of "AA-" or better
by Fitch and a rating of "Aa3" or better by Moody's, or the equivcdent of such ratings
by a substitute rating agency or agendes selected as provided below,
(c) ff not "AAA"/"Aaa' or "AA"/"Aa", then "A"/"A" ff the Bonds have a rating of "A-"
or better by Fitch and a rating of "A3" or better by Moody's, or the cquivEdent of
such ratings by a substitute rating agency or agencies selected as provided below,
(d) if not "AAA"/"Aaa", "AA"/"Aa" or-A"/-A-, then "BBB"/"Baa", ff the.Bonds have
a rating of "BBB-" or better by Fitch and a rating of "Baa3" or better by Moody's, or
the equivalent of such ratings by a substitute rating agency or agendes selected as
provided below, and
(e) if not "AAA"/"Aaa". "AA"/"Aa", "A"/"A" or -BBB°/«Baa", then below "BBB"/
"Baa", whether or not the Bonds during an Auction Rate Period are rated by any
securities rating agency.
ff (x) the Bonds are rated by a rating agency or agencies other than Moody's or Fitch
and (y) the Issuer has defivered to the Triistee and the Auction Agent an instrument
designating one or two of such rating agendes to replace Moody's or Fitch, or both,
then for purposes ofthe definition of "prevailing rating" Moody's or Fitch, or-both, wiU
be deemed to have been replaced i n accordance with such instrument; provided,
however, that such instrument must be accompanied by the consent of the market
agent.
For purposes of this defirution of "Appficable Percentage," Fitch's rating categories
of AAA, AA-, A- and BBB- and Moody's rating categories of "Aaa", "Aa3", "A3" and
"Baa3," refer to and include the respective rating categories correlative thereto in the
event that either or both of such rating agencies have changed or modified their
generic rating categories. If the prevaifing ratings for the Bonds are spfit between the
categories set forth above, the lower rating wiU determine the prevaUing rating.
"Auction" means each periodic implementation of these Auction Procedures with
respect to the Bonds.
"Auction Agent" means any entity appointed as such pursuant to Section 2.03(e)(iv)
of the Indenture and its successors in such capacity.

 83238

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5 / 1 / 2002

"Auction Date" means, with respect to each auction period during an auction rate
period, the last Wednesday of the immediately preceding auction period, ff any;
provided, however, that i l such day is not a Business Day, the auction date with
respect to such auction period shaU be the next preceding Business Day; and
provided, further, that i n the case of an auction period nominally of less than seven
(7) days, the auction date in respect thereof shaU be the first (1°*) day of such auction
period.
"Auction Period" means a period within an auction rate period (i) during which the
Bonds bear interest at a single auction rate and (U) which is estabUshed as provided
i n Section 2.03(e) of the Indenmre; it being understood that
(x) each auction period shaU commence on, and indude, (1) the first (1°') Business
Day foUowing the end ofthe next preceding auction period or (2) i n the case o f t h e
first (1") auction period i n any auction rate period, the date of the initial
authentication and deUvery ofthe Bonds (ff an auction rate period shaU be specified
as the first (1") rate period upon such initial authentication and defiveiy) or the
effective date of an adjustment to an auction rate period, as the case may be;
(y) each auction period shaU end on, and include, the date estabfished as the last
day of such auction period as provided i n Section 2.03(e) o f t h e Indenture, whether
or not such day shall be a Business Day; provided, however, that ff such day shaU
not be immediately foUowed by a Business Day, then the last day of such auction
period shaU be the next succeeding day that is immediately foUowed by a Business
Day; and
(z) any auction period may consist of any number of days from one (I) to three
hundred sixty-five (365) or three hundred sixty-six (366) ff the date of
February 29 is induded in such auction period.
"Auction Procedures" means the procedures set forth i n this Appendix B to the
Indenture.
"Auction Rate" means the rate of interest per annum determined for the Bonds
pursuant to Section 2.03 (e)(i) of the Indenmre and these Auction Procedures.
"Auction Rate Period" shaU mean any period during which the Bonds bear interest
at an Auction Rate.
"Authorized Auction Denomination" shaU mean, during an Auction Rate Period,
Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000) or any integral multiple thereof.
"AvaUable Bonds" has the meaning set forth i n Section 4 of these Auction
fVocedures.

 ^/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83239

"Bid" has the meaning set forth i n Section 2 of these Auction Procedures.
"Bidder" has the meaning set forth i n Section 2 of these Auction Procedures.
"BMA Index" means the Bond Market Assodation Municipal Swap Index as of the
most recent date for which such index was pubfished or such other weekly, highgrade index comprised of seven (7) day, tax-exempt variable rate demand notes as
may be produced by Munidpal Market Data, or its successor, or as otherwise
designated by the Bond Market Association.
"Broker-Dealer" means any entity permitted by law to perform the functions
required of a broker-dealer set forth i n these Auction F*rocedures (i) that is am Agent
Member (or an affifiate of an Agent Member), (ii) that has been selected by the Issuer
and (iu) that has entered into a broker-dealer agreement w i t h the Auction Agent that
remains effective.
"Broker-Dealer Agreement" means each agreement between a Broker-Dealer and the
Auction Agent pursuaiit to which the Broker-Dealer, among other things, agrees to
participate i n Auctions as set forth i n these Auction Procedures, as from time to time
amended and supplemented.
"Change of Preference Law" means any amendment to the Code or other existing
stamte enacted by the Congress of the United States, or the enactment by the
Congress of a new statute, or the promulgation by the United States Treasuty of any
temporary, proposed or final regulation, after the date of the initial authentication and
defivety of the Bonds which (a) changes or would change any deduction, credit or
other allowance aUowable i n computing fiabifity for any federal tax with respect to or
(b) imposes, or would impose, reduces or would reduce, or increases or would
increase any federal tax (including, but not limited to, preference or exdse taxes)
upon, any interest earned by any holder of Bonds the interest on which is exduded
from federal gross income under Section 103 of the Code.
"Commercial Paper Dealer" means
,
or any other
commerdal paper dealer appointed i n writing by the Issuer, provided that any such
entity is a commercial paper dealer.
"Commerdal Paper/Treasuty Rate" means, as of any date of detennination (i) i n the
case of any Auction Period of less than forty-nine (49) days, the interest equivalent
ofthe thirty (30) day rate, (ii) in the case of any Auction Period of forty-nine (49) days
or more but less than seventy (70) days, the interest equivalent of the sixty (60) day
rate, (iii) in the case of any Auction Period of seventy (70) days or more but less than
eighty-five (85) days, the arithmetic average ofthe interest equivalents ofthe sixty (50)
day and ninety (90) day rates, (iv) in the case of any Auction Period of eighty-five (85)
days or more but less than ninety-nine (99) days, the interest equivalent ofthe ninety
(90) dayrate, (v) in the case of any Auction Period of ninety-nine (99) days or more but
less than one hundred twenty (120) days, the arithmetic average of the interest

 83240

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

equivalents ofthe ninety (90) day and one hundred twenty (120) day rates, (vi) i n the
case of any Auction Period of one hundred twenty (120) days or more but less than
one hundred forty-one (141) days, the interest, equivalent o f t h e one hundred twenty
(120) day rate, (vu) in the case of any Auction Period of one hundred forty-one (141)
days or more but less than one hundred sixty-two (162) days, the arithmetic.average
o f t h e interest equivalents of the one hundred twenty (120) day and one hundred
eighty (180) day rates, (viu) i n the case of any Auction Period of one hundred sixty-two
(162) days or more but less than one hundred eighty-three (183) days, the interest
equivalent ofthe one hundred eight (180) day rate, and (ix) i n the case of any Auction
Period of one hundred eighty-three (183) days or more, the Treasuty Rate with respect
to such Auction Period. The foregoing rates (other than the Treasuty Rate) shall i n
aU cases be rates on commercial paper placed on behaff of issuers whose corporate
bonds are rated "AA" by Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, or the equivalent of such
rating by Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, as made avaUable on a discount basis
or otherwise by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for the Business Day
immediately preceding such date of detennination, or i n the event that the Federsd
Reserve Bank of New York does not make avaUable any such rate, then the arithmetic
average of such rates, as quoted on a discount basis or otheiTvise, by the Commerdal
Paper Dealer, to the Auction Agent for the close of business on the Business Day
immediately preceding such date of determination.
ff the Commercial Piaper Dealer does not quote a commercial paper rate required to
determine the Commerdal Paper/Treasury Rate, the Commerdal Paper/Treasuty
Rate shaU be determined on the basis of such quotation or quotations furnished by
any substitute commerdal paper dealer selected by the Issuer to provide .such
quotation or quotations not being suppfied by the Coinmercial Paper Dealer. For
purposes of this definition, the "interest equivalent" of a rate stated on a discount
basis (a "discount rate") for coinmercial paper of a given day's maturity shaU be equal
to the product of (A) 100 and (B) the quotient (rounded upwards to the next h i ^ e r
one-thousandth (.001) of one percent (1%) of (x) the discount rate (expressed i n
decimals) divided by (y) the difference between (1) one and zero hundredths (1.00) and
(2) a fraction the numerator of which shaU be the product of the discount rate
(expressed in decimals) times the number of days i n which such commerdal paper
mamres and the denominator of which shall be three hundred sixty-five (365).
"Existing Holder" means a person who is listed as the beneficial owner of Bonds i n
the records of the Auction Agent.
"Hold Order" has the meaning set forth in Section 2 of these Auction Procedures.
"Index" means, as of any date of determination (i) the tax-exempt money market rate
index for thirty (30) day variable rate obligations prepared by the Market Agent
provided through Bloomberg Financial Markets of Bloomberg L.P., oi- on Dalcomp
system on such date of determination or (ii) ff such rate is not pubfished by 9:00 A.M.
(New York City time) on such date of determination, the interest index pubfished by
the market agent representing the weighted average of the yield on tax-exempt

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83241

coinmercial paper, or tax-exempt bonds bearing interest at a commercial paper rate
or pursuant to a commercial paper mode, having a range of maturities or mandatory
purchase dates between twenty-five (25) and thirty-six (36) days traded during the
immediately precedingfive Business Days or (iii) ff no such interest index is published
by the market agent, then the BMA Index.
"Market Agent" means any entity appointed as such under Section 2.03(e)(v) ofthe
Indenture and its successors in such capacity.
"Maximum Auction Rate" means, as of any date of detennination (i) if such
determination is in respect of an Auction with respect to a standard auction period
and is made during a stemdard auction "period, the interest rate per annum equal to
the lesser of (A) [eighteen (18)] percent and (B) the AppUcable Percentage of the
greater of (a) the After-Tax Equivalent Rate, as determined as of such date wdth
respect, to a standard auction period and (b) the Index as of such date or (u) ff
otherwise, the interest rate per annum equal to the lesser of (A) (eighteen (18)] percent
and (B) the Appficable Percentage of the greatest of (a) the After-Tax Equivalent Rate,
as determined as of such date with respect to a standard auction period, (b) the AfterTax Equivalent Rate, as determined as of such date with respect to the Auction
Period, ff any, which is proposed to be estabfished, (c) the After-Tax Equivalent Rate,
ais determined as of such date with respect to the Auction Period then ending and (d)
the Index as of such date.
"Minimum Auction Rate" means, as of any date of determination, the rate per
annum equal to the lesser of (i) ninety percent (90%) (as such percentage may be
adjusted pursuant to Section 6 of these Auction Procedures) of the After-Tax
Equivalent Rate, as.determined as of such date with respect to the Auction Period in
respect of which such determination is made and (u) ninety percent (90%) ofthe Index
as of such date.
"No Auction Rate" means, as of any date of determination, the appficable
Conunercial Paper/Treasury Rate for the Auction Period multipfied by the appUcable
percentage set forth in the foUowing table:
Prevaifing Rating

Applicable Percentage

-AAA"/-Aaa"

65%

-AA"/"Aa"

70%

"AV-A"

85%

Below "A"/"A"

100%

 83242

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

.

5/1/2002

For the purposes of this definition, the term "prevaifing rating" shaU have the
meaning ascribed to such term i n the defined term "Applicable Percentage".
"Potential Holder" means any person, including any Existing Holder, who may be
interested i n acquiring the benefidal ownership of Bonds during an Auction Rate
Period or, in the case of an Existing Holder thereof, the beneficial ownership of an
additional prindpal amount of Bonds during an Auction Rate Period.
"Sell Order" has the meaning set forth i n Section 2 of these Auction Procedures.
"Standard Auction Period" initiaUy means an Auction Period of thirty-five (35) days
and, after the estabUshment of a different Auction Period pursuant to Section
2.03(e)(i) ofthe Indenmre, means such different Auction Period; provided that, so long
as the standard auction period is thirty-five (35) days and ends initiaUy on a
Wednesday, in the event the last Wednesday of the Auction Period is not immediately
foUowed by a Business Day, with the result that the last day of such Auction Period
is the next succeeding day that is immediately foUowed by a Business Day, the
standard auction period foUowing such Auction Period shaU be reduced to a shorter
number of days so that the last day of the Auction Period foUowing such Auction
Period is the fifth (S"") Wednesday following such Auction Period, aU subject, however,
to the provisions contained i n the definition of the term Auction Period.
"Statutory Corporate Tax Rate" means, as of any date of determination, the highest
tax rate bracket (expressed i n decimals and currently thirty-five percent (35%)) now
or hereafter appficable i n the then cunent taxable year on the taxable income of eveiy
corporation as set forth i n Section 11 of the Code or any successor section without
regard to any minimum additional tax provision or provisions regarding changes i n
rates during such taxable year.
"Submission Deadfine" means 1:00 P.M., New York City time, on any Auction Date
or such other time on any Auction Date by which Broker-Dealers are required to
submit Orders to the Auction Agent as specified by the Auction Agent from time to
time.
"Submitted Bid" has the meaning set forth in Section 4 of these Auction Procedures.
"Submitted Hold Order" has the meaning set forth i n Section 4 of these Auction
Procedures.
"Submitted Order" has the meaning set forth in Section 4 of these Auction
Procedures.
"Submitted Sell Order" has the meaning set forth in Section 4 of these Auction
Procedures.

 5/ 1 / 2 0 0 2

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83243

"Substitute Commercial Paper Dealer" means a Commerdal Paper Deader appointed
in writing by the Issuer, or its successors and their respective assigns, provided that
neither such entity nor any of its affdiates shaU be the Corhmerdal Paper Dealer.
"Sufficient Clearing Bids" has the meaning set forth i n Section 4 of these Auction
Procedures.
"Treasury Rate" shaU mean on any date of determination for any Auction Period, (i)
the bond equivalent yield calculated i n accordance with prevaifing industry
convention ofthe rate on the most recently auctioned direct obUgations o f t h e United
States Govemment having a maturity at the time of issuance of three hundred sixtyfour (364) days or less with a remaining mamrity closest to the length of such Auction
Period as quoted in The Wall Street Journal on such date for the Business Day next
preceding such date; or (u) in the event that any such rate is not pubUshed by The
Wall Street Journal, then the bond equivalent yield calculated i n accordance with
prevailing industry convention as calculated by reference to the arithmetic average
of the bid price quotations of the most recentiy auctioned direct obUgations of the
United States Govemment having a maturity at the time oflssuance of three hundred
sixty-four (364) days or less with a remaining maturity closest to the length of such
Auction Period, based on bid price quotations on such date obtained by the Auction
Agent from the United States govemment securities dealer; provided, that, ff the
United States govemment securities dealer does not provide a bid price quotation
required to determine the treasury rate, the treasury rate shaU be determined on the
basis of the quotation or quotations furnished by a substitute United States
Govemment securities dealer selected by the Issuer to provide such rate or rates not
being suppfied by the United States Govemment securities dealer.
"United

States

Govemment

Securities Dealer" shaU meein
, or any other United States Govemment
securities dealer appointed i n writing by the Issuer, its successors and their
respective assigns, provided that any such entity is a United States Govemment
securities dealer.
"Winning Bid Rate" has the meaning set forth i n Section 4 of these Auction
Procedures.
Section 2. Orders By Existing Holders And Potential Holders.
(a) Auctions shaU be conducted on each Auction Date i n the manner described i n this
Section 2 and in Sections 3, 4 and 5 of these Auction Procedures. Prior to the
Submission Deadline on each Auction Date during an Auction Rate Period:
(i) each Existing Holder may submit to the Broker-Dealer information as to:

 83244

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(A) the principal amount of Bonds, i f any, held by such Existing Holder which
such Elxisting Holder desires to continue to hold without regard to the Auction Rate
for the next succeeding Auction Period;
..
(B) the prindpal amount of Bonds, i f any, held by such Ebdsting Holder which
such Existing Holder (1) offers to continue to hold ff the Auction Rate for the next
succeeding Auction Period shall not be less than the rate per annum specified by
such Existing Holder and (2) if such offer to hold shaU not be accepted i n whole,
offers to seU as and to the extent provided i n subsection (b)(i) of this Section 2;
and/or
(C) the principal amount of Bonds, ff any, held by such Existing Holder which
such Existing Holder offers to seU without regard to the Auction Rate for the next
succeeding Auction Period;
[ii] one (1) or more Broker-Dealers may contact Potential Holders to determine the
prindpal amount of Bonds which each such Potential Holder offers to purchase i f the
Auction Rate for the next succeeding Auction Period shaU not be less than the
. interest rate per annum specified by such Potential Holder.
For the purixises hereof, the communication to a Broker-Dealer of information referred
to i n clause (i)(A), (i){B) or (i)(C) or clause (u) above is hereinjffter referred to as an
"Order" and each Existing Holder and Potential Holder placing an Order is hereinafter
refened to as a "Bidder" an Order containing the information refened to i n clause (i)(A)
above is hereinafter refened to as a "Hold Order"; an Order containing the infonnation
refened to in clause (i)(B) or clause (u) above is hereinafter refened to as a "Bid"; and
cui Order containing the infonnation refened to.in clause (i)(C) above is hereinafter
refened to as a "SeU Order".
(b) (i) Subject to the provisions of Section 3 of these Auction Procedures, a Bid by an
Existing Holder, to the extent not accepted under subsection (a)(i)(B)(l) above, shaU be
deemed to have been rejected and, thereupon, to constimte an irrevocable offer to seU:
(A) the principal amount of Bonds specified in such Bid ff the Auction Rate
determined pursuant to these Auction F*rocedures on such Auction Date shaU be less
than the interest rate per annum specified therein; or
(B) such principal amount or a lesser principal amount of Bonds to be determined
as set forth in subsection (a)(iv) of Section 5 of these Auction Procedures ff the
Auction Rate determined pursuant to these Auction Procedures on such Auction Date
shall be equal to the interest rate per annum specified therein; or

 5/ 1 / 2 0 0 2

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83245

(C) such principal amount ff the interest rate per annum specified therein shaU be
higher than the Maximum Auction Rate or such principal amount or a lesser principal
amount of Bonds to be detennined as set forth i n subsection {b)(tii) of Section 5 of
these Auction Procedures ff such specified rate shall be higher than the Maximum
Auction Rate .and Sufficient Clearing Bids do not exist.
(ii) Subject to the provisions of Section 3 of these Auction Procedures, a SeU Order
by an Existing Holder shall constitute an inevocable offer to sell:
(A) the principal amount of Bonds spedfied i n such Sell Order; or
(B) such prindpal amount or a lesser principal amount of Bonds as set forth i n
subsection (b)(iu) of Section 5 of these Auction Procedures ff Sufficient Clearing Bids
do not exist.
{iiiy Subject to the provisions of Section 3 of these Auction Procedures, a Bid by. a
Potential Holder shedl constimte an inevocable offer to purchase:
(A) the prindpal amount of Bonds specified i n such Bid ff the Auction Rate
detennined on such Auction Date shaU be higher than the rate spedfied therein; or
(B) such principal amount or a lesser principal amount of Bonds as set forth i r i
subsection (a)(v) of Section 5 of these Auction Procedures ff the Auction Rate
determined on such Auction Date shall be equal to such specified rate.
Section 3. Submission Of Orders By Broker-Dealers To Auction-Agent.
(a) During an Auction Rate Period, each Broker-Dealer shaU submit i n writing to the
Auction Agent prior to the Submission Deadline on each Auction Date during the
Auction Rate Period, aU Orders obtained by such Broker-Dealer and shaU specify with
respect to each such Order:
(i) the aggregate principal amount of Auction Bonds that are subject to such Order;
(ii) to the extent that such Bidder is an Elxisting Holder:
(A) the principal amount of Bonds, i f any, subject to any Hold Order placed by
such Existing Holder;
(B) the principal amount of Bonds, i f any, subject to any Bid placed by such
Existing Holder and the rate specffied in such Bid; and

 83246

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(C) the principal amount of Bonds, ff any, subject to any SeU Order placed by
such Existing Holder.
(iu) to the extent such Bidder is a Potential Holder, the rate specified i n such
Potential Holder's Bid.
(b) I f a n y rate specified i n any Bid contains more than three (3) figures to the right
o f t h e decimal point, the Auction Agent shaU round such rate u p to the next highest
one thousandth (.001) of one percent (1%).
(c) ff an Order or Orders covering aU Bonds held by an Existing Holder is not
submitted to the Auction Agent prior to the Submission Deadfine, the Auction Agent
shaU deem a Hold Order to have been submitted on behalf of such Ebdsting Holder
covering the prindpal amount of Bonds held by such Existing Holder and not subject
to Orders submitted to the Auction Agent. None of the Issuer, the Trustee and the
Auction Agent shaU be responsible for any failure of a Broker-Dealer to submit an
Order to the Auction Agent on behaff of any Existing Holder or Potential Holder.
(d) ff.cuiy Existing Holder submits through a Broker-Dealer to the Auction Agent one
(1) or more Orders covering i n the aggregate more than the principal amount of Bonds
held by such Existing Holder, such Orders shaU be considered vafid as foUows and i n
the following order of priority:
(i) ail Hold Orders shall be considered valid, but only up to and including the
principal amount of Bonds held by such Existing Holder, and, ff the aggregate
principal amount of Bonds subject to such Hold Orders exceeds the aggregate
principal amount of Bonds held by such Existing Holder, the aggregate principal
amount of Bonds subject to each such Hold Order shaU be reduced pro rata to cover
the aggregate principal amount of Bonds held by such Existing Holder;
(u)(A) any Bid shaU be considered valid up to and including the excess of the
prindpal amount of Bonds held by such Existing Holder over the aggregate principal
amount of Bonds subject to any Hold Orders refened to i n paragraph (i) above;
(B) subject to clause (A) above, ff more than one (1) Bid with the same rate is
submitted on behalf of such Existing Holder and the aggregate principal amount of
Bonds subject to such Bids is greater than such excess, such Bids shaU be
considered vafid up to and including the amount of such excess, and, the principal
amount of Bonds subject to each Bid with the same rate shaU be reduced pro rata to
cover the principal amount of Bonds equal to such excess;
(C) subject to clauses (A) and (B) above, ff more than one (1) Bid with different
rates is submitted on beh£iff of such Existing Holder, such Bids shaU be considered
valid in the ascending order of their respective rates until the highest rate is reached

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83247

at which such excess exists and then at such rate up to and including the amount
of such excess; and
(D) i n any such event, the aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds, ff any, subject to
Bids not vafid under this paragraph (u) shall be treated as subject to a Bid by a
Potential Holder at the rate therein specified; and
(ui) aU SeU Orders shaU be considered vaUd up to and including a principal amount
of Bonds equal to the excess of (A) the principal amount of Bonds held by such
Existing Holder over (B) the sum of the principal amount of Bonds subject to vaUd
Hold Orders refened to i n paragraph (i) above arid the piincipal amount of Bonds
subject to vafid Bids refened to i n paragraph (u) above.
(e) If more than one (1) Bid for Bonds is submitted on behaff of any Potential Holder,
each Bid submitted shaU be a separate Bid for Bonds with the rate and principal
£unount therein specified.
(i) Any Bid or SeU Order submitted by an Ebdsting Holder covering an aggregate
prindpal amount of Bonds not equal to an Authorized Auction Denomination shaU be
rejected and shaU be deemed a Hold Order. Any Bid submitted by a Potential Holder
covering an aggregate principal amount of Bonds not equal to an Authorized Auction
Denomination shaU be rejected.
(g) Any Bid submitted by an Existing Holder or Potential Holder specifying a rate
lower than the Minimum Auction Rate shaU be treated as a Bid specifying the Minimum
Auction Rate:
(h) Any Order submitted by a Broker-Dealer to the Auction Agent prior to the
Submission Deadline on any Auction Date shaU be inevocable.
Section 4. Detennination Of Sufficient Cleeiring Bids, Winning Bid Rate And
Auction Rate.
(a) Not earfier than the Submission Deadline on each Auction Date during the
Auction Rate Period, the Auction Agent shall assemble aU vafid Orders submitted or
deemed submitted to it by the Broker-Dealers (each such Order as submitted or
deemed submitted by a Broker-Dealer being hereinafter refened to as a "Submitted
Hold Order", a "Submitted Bid" or a -Submitted SeU Order", as the case may be or as
a "Submitted Order") and shaU determine:
(i) the excess, if any, of the total principal amount of Bonds over the aggregate
principal ainount of Bonds subject to Submitted Hold Orders (such excess being
hereinafter refened to as the "Available Bonds"); and

 83248

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(ii) from tiie Submitted Orders whether or not the aggregate prindpjd amount of
Bonds subject to Submitted Bids by Potential Holders specifying one (1) or more rates
not higher than the Maximum Auction Rate exceeds or is equal to the sum of:
(A) the aggregate principal amount of Bonds subject to Submitted Bids by
Existing Holders specifying one (1) or more rates higher than the Maximum Auction
Rate; and
(B) the aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds .subject to Submitted SeU Orders
(it being understood that, i n the event of such excess or such equafity (other t h a n
because the sum of the principal amounts of Bonds i n clauses (A) and (B) above is
zero (0) because aU o f t h e Bonds are subject to Submitted Hold Orders), there shaU
be deemed to exist, and such Submitted Bids by Potential Holders shaU be hereinafter
caUed, coUectively, "Suffident Clearing Bids"); and
(in) if Sufficient Cleeiring Bids exist, the lowest rate specified i n the Submitted Bids
(the "Winning.Bid Rate") which ff:
(A) (I) each Submitted Bid from Existing Holders spedfying such lowest rate and
(U) aU other Submitted Bids from Existing Holders specifying lower rates were
accepted, thus entitling such Existing Holders to continue to hold the Bonds that
are the subject of such Submitted Bids; and
(B) (1) each Submitted Bid from Potential Holders spedfying such lowest rate and
(II) aU other Submitted Bids from.Potential Holders specifying lower rates were
accepted, thus entitfing and requiring such Potential Holders to purchase the Bonds
that are the subject of such Submitted Bids,
would result in such Existing Holders described in clause (A) above continuing to hold
an aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds which, when added to the aggregate principal
amount of Bonds to be purchased by such Potential Holders described i n clause (B)
above, would equal not less than the Available Bonds.
. (b) Promptiy after the Auction Agent has made the determinations pursuant to
subsection (a) of this Section 4 of these Auction Procedures, the Auction Agent by
facsimile or electronic trcinsinission, or by telephone (promptiy confirmed by such
means), shall advise the Issuer and the Trustee o f t h e Maximum Auction Rate and the
Minimum Auction Rate and the components thereof on the Auction Date and, based
on such determinations, the Auction Rate for the next succeeding Auction Period as
follows:
(i) if Suffident Clearing Bids exist, that the Auction Rate for the next succeeding
Auction Period therefor shaU be equad to the Winning Bid Rate so determined;

 5 / 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83249

(ii) ff Sufficient Clearing Bids do not exist (other than because aU of the Bonds are
the subject of Submitted Hold Orders), that the Auction Rate for the next succeeding
Auction Period therefor shall be equal to the Meiximum Auction Rate; and
(iu) ff all ofthe Bonds txre subject to Submitted Hold Orders, that the Auction Rate
for the next succeeding Auction Period therefor shaU be equal to the Minimum
Auction Rate.

Section 5. Acceptance And Rejection Of Submitted Bids And Submitted SeU
Orders And AUocation Of Auction Bonds.
Existing Holders shaU continue to hold the prindpal amounts of Bonds that -are
subject to Submitted Hold Orders, and; based on the determinations made pursuant
to subsection (a) of Section 4 of these Auction Procedures, the Submitted Bids and
Submitted SeU Orders shall be accepted or rejected, and the Auction Agent shaU take
such other actions, as set forth below:
,
. (a) ff Suffident Clearing Bids have been made, all Submitted SeU Orders shaU be
accepted and, subject to the provisions of paragraphs (e) and (f) of this Section 5 of
these Auction Procedures, Submitted Bids shaU be accepted or rejected as foUows i n
the foUowing order of priority and aU other Submitted Bids shaU be rejected:
(i) existing Holders' Submitted Bids specifying any rate that is higher than the
Winning Bid Rate shaU be rejected, thus requiring each such Ebdsting Holder to seU
the aggregate principal amount of Bonds subject to such Submitted Bids;
(U) existing Holders' Submitted Bids spedfying any rate that is lower than the
Winning Bid Rate shaU be accepted, thus entitling each such Existing Holder to
continue to hold, the aggregate prindped amount of Bonds subject to such
Submitted Bids;
(Ui) potential Holders' Submitted Bids specifying any rate that is lower than the
Winning Bid Rate shall be accepted, thus entitling and requiring each such
Potential Holder to purchase the aggregate principal amount of Bonds subject to
such Submitted Bids;
(iv) each Existing Holder's Submitted Bid specifying a rate that is equal to the
Winning Bid Rate shaU be accepted, thus entitling such Existi'ng Holder to continue
to hold the aggregate principal amount of Bonds subject to such Submitted Bid,
unless the aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds subject to aU such Submitted Bids
shaU be greater than the principal amount of Bonds (the "Remaining Principal
Amount") equal to the excess of the Available Bonds over the aggregate principal
amount of the Bonds subject to Submitted Bids described i n paragraphs (u) and (iii)
of this subsection (a), in which event such Submitted Bid of such Existing Holder
shall, be accepted in part only, and such Existing Holder shaU be entitled to

 83250

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

continue to hold the Bonds subject to such Submitted Bid only i n the principal
amount obtained by multiplying the Remaining Principal Amount by a fraction, the
numerator of which shaU be the principal amount of Bonds held by such Existing
Holder subject to such Submitted Bid and the denominator of which shaU be the
sum o f t h e principal amounts of Bonds subject to such Submitted Bids made by cdl
such Existing Holders that specified a rate equal to the Winm'ng Bid Rate; and the
remainder of such Submitted Bid shaU be rejected, thus requiring such Existing
Holder to seU the excess principal amount of Bonds as to which such Submitted Bid
shaU not have been accepted as aforesaid; and
(v) each Potential Holder's Submitted Bid.specifying a rate that is equal to the
Winning Bid Rate shaU be accepted but only i n an amount equal to the p r i n d p a l
amount of Bonds obtained by multiplying the excess ofthe Available Bonds over the
aggregate principal amount of Bonds subject to Submitted Bids described i n
paragraphs (U), (iu) and (iv) of this subsection (a) by a fraction the numerator of
which shaU be the aggregate principal amount of Bonds subject to such Submitted
Bid of such Potential Holder and the denominator of which shall be the. sum o f t h e
principal amount of Auction Bonds subject to Submitted Bids made by aU such
Potential Holders that specified a rate equal to the Winning Bid Rate; and the
remainder of such Submitted Bid shaU be rejected; eind
(vi) each Potential Holder's Submitted Bid specifying a rate that is higher than the
Winning Bid Rate shaU be rejected.
(b) If Sufficient Clearing Bids have not been made (other than because aU of the
Bonds are subject to Submitted Hold Orders), subject to the provisions of subsection
(e) of this Section 5 of these Auction Procedures, Submitted Orders shedl be accepted
or rejected as foUows in the foUowing order of priority and aU other Submitted Bids
shaU be rejected:
(i) Existing Holders' Submitted Bids specifying any rate that is equal to or lower
than the Maximum Auction Rate shall be accepted, thus entitfing each such
Existing Holder to continue to hold the aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds subject
to such Submitted Bids;
(u) Potential Holders" Submitted Bids specifying any rate that is equal to or lower
than the Maximum Auction Rate shaU be accepted,, thus entitfing and requiring
each such Potential Holder to purchase the aggregate principed amount of Bonds
subject to such Submitted Bids;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83251

(iu) each Existing Holder's Submitted Bid specifying any rate that is higher than
the Maximum Auction Rate shall be rejected, and each Existing Holder's Submitted
SeU Order shall be accepted, thus requiring each.Existing Holder that submitted
any such Submitted Bid and/or Submitted SeU Order to seU the Bonds subject to
such Submitted Bid and/or Submitted SeU Order, but i n both.cases.only in an
amount equal to the aggregate principal amount of Bonds obtained by multiplying
the aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds subject to Submitted Bids described i n
paragraph (ii) of this subsection (b) by a fraction, the numerator of which shaU be
the aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds held by such Existing Holder subject to
such Submitted Bid and/or.Submitted SeU Order and the denominator of which
shall be the aggregate principal amount of Bonds subject to aU such Submitted Bids
and Submitted Sell Orders; and the remainder of such Existing Holder's Submitted
Bid and/or Submitted SeU Order shall be deemed to be, and shaU be deemed to be
accepted as, a Hold Order thus entitfing such Existing Holder to continue to hold
such excess prindpal amount of Bonds as to which such Submitted Bid shaU not
have been rejected, and/or such Submitted SeU Order shaU not have been accepted,
as aforesaid; and
(iv) each Potential Holder's Submitted Bid specifying a rate that is higher than the
Maximum Auction Rate shaU be rejected.
(c) ff£iU Bonds are subject to Submitted Hold Orders, aU Submitted Bids shaU be
rejected.
(d) If, as a result of the procedures described i n subsection (a) or (b) of this
Section 5 of these Auction Procedures, any Existing Holder would be required to seU,.
or any Potential Holder would be required to purchase, a principal amount of Bonds
that is not equal to an Authorized Auction Denomination, the Auction Agent shaU, i n
such manner as, i n its sole discretion, it shaU determine, r o u n d u p or down the
principal amount of such Bonds to be purchased or sold by any Existing Holder or
Poteritial Holder so that the prindpal amount purchased or sold by each Existing
Holder or Potential Holder shaU be equal to an Authorized Auction Denomination.
(e) If, as a result o f t h e procedures described i n subsection (a) of this Secti'on 5 of
these Auction Procedures, any Potential Holder would be required to purchase less
than Twenty-five Thouscind DoUars ($25,000) in aggregate principal eimount of Bonds,
the Auction Agent shaU, in such manner as, in its sole discretion, i t shaU determine,
allocate Bonds for purchase among Potential Holders so that only Bonds i n prindpal
amounts equal to an Authorized Auction Denomination are purchased by any
Potential Holder, even iS such aUocation results in one (1) or more of such Potential
Holders not purchasing any Bonds.
(f) Based on the results of each Auction, the Auction Agent shaU determine the
aggregate prindpal amounts of Bonds to be purchased and the aggregate principed
amounts of Bonds to be sold by Potential Holders and Existing Holders on whose

 83252

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

behaff each Broker-Dealer submitted Bids or Sell Orders and, with respect to each
Broker-Dealer, to the extent that such amounts differ, determine to which other
Broker-Dealer or Broker-Dealers acting for one (1) or more purchasers of Bonds such
Broker-Dealer shaU deUver, or from which other Broker-Dealer or Broker-Deeders
acting for one (1) or more sellers of Bonds such Broker-Dealer shall receive, as the
case may be. Bonds. .
(g) The Issuer may not siibmit an Order in any Auction.
Section 6. Adjustment In Percentage.
(a) The Market Agent may with the prior written consent of the Bond Insurer from
time to time adjust the percentages set forth in the defiiutions of the Appficable
Percentage, the No Auction Rate, the Maximum Auction Rate and/or the Minimum
Auction Rate ff any such adjustment is necessary, i n the judgment o f t h e Market Agent,
to reflect the effect of any Change of Preference Law. I n making any such adjustment,
the Market Agent shaU take the foUowing factors, as i n existence both before and after
such Change of Preference Law: (i) short-term taxable and tax-exempt market rates
and indices of such short-term rates, [ii] the market supply and demand for short-term
tax-exempt securities, (iu) yield curves for short-term and long-term tax-exempt
securities or obUgations having a credit rating that is comparable to the Bonds, (iv)
general economic conditions and (v) economic and finandal factors present i n the
securities industry that may affect or that may be relevant to the Bonds.
(b) The Market Agent shaU communicate its detennination to adjust any of such
percentages pursuant to subsection 1 hereof by means of a written notice defivered at
least ten (10) days prior to the Auction Date on which the Market Agent desires to effect
the change to the Issuer, the Tmstee and the Auction Agent. Such notice shaU be
effective only ff it is accompanied by the form of opinion that Bond Coiinsel expects to
be able to give on such Auction Date to the effect that such adjustment is authorized
by the Indenmre and wiU not have an adverse effect on the exclusion of interest on
such Bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes.
(c) Any such adjustment shaU take effect on an Auction Date only ff (A) the Trustee
and the Auction Agentreccive, by 11:00 A.M. (New York City time) on the Business Day
iinmediately preceding such Auction Date, a certificate from the Market Agent by
telecopy or similar means, (i) authorizing such adjustment which shaU be specified i n
such authorization, and (ii) confirming that Bond Counsel expects to be able to give an
opinion on such Auction Date to tlie effect that such adjustment is authorized by the
Indenmre, is permitted under the Act and wUl not have an adverse effect on the
exclusion of interest on the Bonds from gross income for federed income tax purposes,
and (B) the Tmstee and the Auction Agent receive by 9:30 A.M. (New York City time)
on such Auction Date, an opinion of Bond Counsel to such effect. If the condition
referred to in (A) above is not met, the existing percentages used i n the definitions of
Applicable Percentage and Minimum Auction Rate shall remain in effect and the

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83253

Auction Rate for the next succeeding Auction Period shaU be determined pursuemt to
these Auction Procedures. If the condition refened to in (B) above is not met, such
percentages shaU remain i n effect and the Auction Rate for the next succeeding Auction
Period shall equal the Maximum Auction Rate as determined on such Auction Date.
Section 7. Modificati'on.
If there shaU have been defivered to the Tmstee an instmment, executed by the
Issuer, the Auction Agent, each Broker-Dealer and the Bond Insurer, setting forth one
or more modifications to these Auction Procedures, together with a certificate of the
Market Agent to the effect that such modifications are desirable i n order to minimize
the effective interest cost ofthe Bonds i n fight of prevaifing financial market conditions,
then these Auction Procedures shaU be deemed, without further action, to have been
modified and amended to the extent, and as of the effective date, set forth i n such
instmment; provided, however, that no such certificate shaU be required ff such
niodification is solely for the purpose of curing or conecting any ambiguity, omission
or defective provision; and provided, further, that there shaU also have been delivered
to the Tmstee an opiruon of Bond Counsel to the effect that such modification is
permitted by appUcable law and wiU not have an adverse effect on the exclusion o f t h e
interest on the Bonds from the gross income ofthe owners or beneficial owners thereof
for federal income tax purposes.

Exhibit 'E".
(To Ordinance)
City Of Chicago, Illinois
$
Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
_.

Auction

Agreement.

This auction agreement, dated as of
, 2002, between the City of Chicago,
a municipal corporation and a home mle unit of the State of Illinois (the "City^) and
[Name of Auction Agent], a banking corporation orgemized and existing under and by
virtue of the laws of the State of New York (together with its successors emd assigns,
the "Auction Agent"), is entered into pursuant to an Indenture of Tmst, dated as of

 83254

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

2002 (the "Indenmre"), between the City and
tmstee (the "Tmstee").

5/1/2002

, as

Whereas; The City proposes to issue $
aggregate principal amount of
its Auction Rate Bonds, Series
(hereinafter refened to as the "Bonds") pursuant
to the Indenture;
Now, Therefore, In consideration ofthe premises and the mutual covenants contained
herein, the City and the Auction Agent agree as follows:

J.

Definitions And Rules

Of

Construction.

1.1 Terras Defined By Reference To The Indenture.
Capitafized terms not defmed herein shaU have the respective meanings assigned
thereto i n the Indenture (induding Appendix B thereto).
1.2 Terms Defined Herein.
As used herein eind in the Settiement Procedures (as defined below), the following
terms shall have the foUowing meanings, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "Agent Member" shall mean a member of, or peirticipant i n . The Depository T m s t
Company ("D.T.C").
(b) "Auction" shall have the meeoiing specified in Section 2.1 hereof.
(c) "Auction Agent Acceptance Fee" means an acceptemce fee as set forth in a
written agreement signed by the Auction Agent and the City.
(d) "Auction Procedures" shall meem the auction procedures that are set forth i n
Appendix B to the Indenture.
(e) "Authorized Officer' shaU mean each vice president, assistant vice president and
assistant treasurer of the Auction Agent assigned to its Dealing and Trading Group
and every other officer or employee ofthe Auction Agent designated as an "Autiiorized
Officer" for purposes hereof i n a cornraunicaLion to the City.

 5/ 1 / 2 0 0 2

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83255

(f) "Authorized City Representative" shaU mean the
emd every other
officer or employee o f t h e City designated as em "Authorized City Representative" for
purposes hereofin a communication to the Auction Agent.
(g) "Broker-Dealer Agreement" shaU meem each agreement between the Auction
Agent eUid a Broker-Dealer substantiaUy i n the form attached hereto as (Sub)Ebdubit
A. .
(h) "D.T.C. Letter" shaU mean the letter agreement relating to the Bonds among the
. City, the Tmstee and the Remarketing Agent, and accepted by D.T.C, entered into
in connection with D.T.C.'s book-entty-only system.
(i) "Existing Holder Registry" shaU meeui the register maintained by the Auction
Agent pursuant to Section 2.2 hereof.
(j) "Issue Date" shaU mean the date of original issuance of the Bonds.
(k) "Settiement Procedures" shaU mean the Settiement Procedures attached to the
Broker-Dealer Agreement as (Sub)Exhibit A thereto.
1.3

Rules Of Constmction.

Unless the context or use indicates another or different meaning or intent, the
foUowing mles shaU apply to the constmction of this agreement:
(a) words importing the singular number shaU include the plural number and vice
versa;
(b) the captions emd headings herein are solely for convenience of reference and
shaU not constitute a part of this agreement nor shaU they eiffect its meaning,
constmction or effect;
(c) the words "hereor, "herein", "hereto" and other words of similar import refer to
this agreement as a whole; and
(d) aU references herein to a particular time of day shaU be to New York City time.

 83256

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1 /2002

2.
•• •
2.1

Purpose; Incorporation
Settiement Procedures.

The Auction.
By

Reference

Of

Auction

Procedures

And

(a) The Indenmre provides that the interest rate on the Bonds for each Auction Period
after the initial Auction Period, except as provided i n Section 2.03(e) thereof, shaU equed
the interest rate per annum that an Auction Agent appointed by the City advises
results from implementation ofthe Auction Procedures; provided that such interest rate
shaU not exceed [eighteen (18)] percent per annum. The City has duly appointed [Name
of Auction Agent], as Auction Agent for purposes of the Auction Procedures and to
perform such other obfigations emd duties as are herein set forth. The Auction Agent
hereby accepts such appointment and agrees that, on each Auction Date, it wiU foUow
the procedures set forth i n this Section 2 and the Auction Procedures for the purpose
of, among other things, determining the Auction Rates for each Auction Period (other
than the initial Auction Period). Each periodic operation of such procedures is
hereinafter refened to as an "Auction".
(b) AU of the provisions contained i n the Auction Procedures and the Settlement
Procedures are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety and shaU be deemed
to be a part hereof to the same extent as ff such provisions were fuUy set forth herein.
2.2

Preparation
' Holders.

For Each Auction;

Maintenance

Of Registty

Of Existing

(a) (i) The Auction Agent shedl maintain a cunent registry of persons, compUed as
described below, that own Bonds that accme interest at em Auction Rate (such registry
being herein caUed the "Existing Holder Registry"). Such persons shedl constitute the
Existing Holders for purposes of each Auction. The Auction Agent shaU indicate i n the
Existing Holder Registry the identity of the respective Broker-Dealer of each Existing
Holder, ifany, on whose behalf such Broker-Deeder submitted the most recent Order
in einy Auction which resulted in such Existing Holder continuing to hold or purchasing
a Bond.
;
, as an initial Broker-Dealer, sheiU provide or
cause to be provided to the Auction Agent on the Issue Date a fist o f t h e initial Existing
Holders. The Auction Agent may conclusively rely upon, as evidence of the identities
of the Existing Holders, such list, the results of each Auction and notices from any
Existing Holder, the Agent Member of any Existing Holder or the Broker-Dealer of any
Existing Holder as described in the first ( 1 " ) sentence of Section 2.2(a)(iu) hereof, and
notices from the Broker-Dealers as described Ln Section 2-2(a)(iii).
(u) The City shedl notffy Uie Auction Agent in writing when any notice of redemption

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83257

or memdatory tender is sent to D.T.C. as Holder of Bonds not later thein 11:00 A.M. on
the date such notice is sent. In the event the Auction Agent receives from the City
written notice of emy partial redemption or memdatory tender of any Bonds, the Auction
Agent shall, at least three (3) Business Days prior to the redemption date or tender date
with respect to such Bonds, request D.T.C. to notify the Auction Agent o f t h e identities
of the Agent Members (and the respective prindpal amounts) from the accounts of
which Bonds have been caUed for redemption or memdatoty tender emd the person or
department at such Agent Member to contact regarding such redemption or memdatory
tender and, at least two (2) Business Days prior to the redemption date or tender date
with respect to Bonds being partiaUy redeemed or ceiUed for tender, the Auction Agent
shall request each Agent Member so identified to disclose to the Auction Agent (upon
selection by such Agent Member of the Existing Holders whose Bonds are to be
redeemed or tendered) the aggregate principal amount of such Bonds of each such
Existing Holder, ifany, to be redeemed by the City or tendered; provided the Auction
Agent has been furnished with the name emd telephone number of a person or
depEutment at such Agent Member from which i t is to request such infonnation. I n the
absence of receiving emy such information with respect to em Existing Holder, from
such Existing Holder's Agent Member or otherwise, the Auction Agent may continue
to freat such Existing Holder as the beneficial owner o f t h e p r i n d p a l amount of Bonds
shown i n the Ebdsting Holder Registry.
(ui) The Auction Agent shall register in the Existing Holder Registry a transfer of
Bonds only if (A) such transfer is pursuant to an Auction or (B) ff such transfer is made
other than pursuant to an Auction, the Auction Agent has been notified i n writing i n
a notice substantiaUy i n the form-of (Sub)Exhibit C to the Broker-Dealer Agreement,
by the Ebdstiiig Holder that is the tremsferor, the Agent Member of such Existing Holder
or the Broker-Dealer of such Existing Holder, of such transfer.. The Auction Agent shaU
rescind a transfer made on the Existing Holder Registry if the Auction Agent has been
notified i n writing in a notice substantiedly in the form of (Sub)E?diibit D to the BrokerDealer Agreement, by the Agent Member or the Broker-Deeder of any person that (i)
purchased any Bonds and the seUer feuled to defiver such Bonds or (U) sold any Bonds
and the purchaser faded to malce payment to such person upon defivery to the
purchaser of such Bonds. The Auction Agent is not requfred to accept any notice of
transfer defivered prior to ein Auction unless it is received by the Auction Agent by 3:00
P.M. on the Business Day next preceding the appficable Auction Date.
(iv) Not later theun 12:00 Noon on the Business Day preceding each Auction Date, the
Auction Agent shaU notify the Broker-Dealers of the aggregate principal amount of
Bonds by telecopy or other simUar meems; provided that the Auction Agent shedl not
be requfred to defiver such notice i f there is no cheingc in the eimount of such Bonds
from the immediately preceding notice.
(v) The Auction Agent may request that the Broker-Deeders, as set forth in the
Broker-Dealer Agreement, provide the Auction Agent with a list of their respective
customers that such Broker-Dealers believe eu-e Existing Holders of Bonds. The Auction
Agent shall keep confidential any such information emd shedl not disclose emy such

 83258

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

information so provided to any person other than the relevemt Broker-Deeder and the
City, provided that the Auction Agent reserves the right to disclose any such
information ff it is advised by its counsel that its faUure to do so would be unlawful or
would impose upon the Auction Agent any actued or potential loss, claim, damage,
fiabifity or expense for which it has not received indemnity satisfactory to i t .
(vi) In the event that any day that is scheduled to be an Auction Date shaU be
chemged after the Auction Agent shedl have given the notice refened to i n clause (vu)
of paragraph (a) ofthe Settiement Procedures, the Auction Agent, by such means as the
Auction Agent deems practicable; shaU ^ve notice of such change to the Broker-Dealer
not later than 9:15 A.M. on the earfier o f t h e new Auction Date or the old Auction Date.
2.3 Minimum And Maximum Auction Rates.
(a) On the date hereof, the Appficable Percentage is
% emd the ratings assigned
to the Bonds by Moody's and Fitch are
and
, respectively, ff there is emy
chemge i n the ratings assigned to the Bonds by Moody's or Fitch (or substitute or
successor rating agencies) which results i n a chemge to the Appficable Percentage effter
the date of this Agreement or ff the AppUcable Percentage is adjusted by the Market
Agent in accordance with Section 6 of the Auction Procedures, the Market Agent shaU
notify the Auction Agent in writing of such change i n the Appficable Percentage prior
to 9:00 A.M. on the Auction Date next succeeding such change. I n determining the
Maximum Auction Rate on any Auction Date eis set forth In Section 2.3 (b)(i) hereof, the
Auction Agent shaU be entitied to conclusively rely on the AppUcable Percentage of
which it has most recentiy received notice from the Market Agent (or, i n the absence
of such notice, the AppUcable Percentage set forth i n the first (1*') sentence of this
paragraph (a)).
(b) (i) On each Auction Date, the Auction Agent shall determine the Coinmercial
Paper/Treasuty Rate, the Minimum Auction Rate and the Maximum Auction Rate.
Pursuant to the Indenture, not later than 9:00 A.M. on each Auction Date, the
Remarketing Agent shaU notify the Auction Agent by telephone o f t h e Index for use by
the Auction Agent in connection with such determination. Not later than 9:30 A.M. on
each Auction Date, the Auction Agent shaU notify the City and the Broker-Dealers of
the Minimum Auction Rate and the Maximum Auction Rate so detennined and the
Commerdal Paper Rate/Treasury Rate or the Index, as the case may be, used to make
such detennination.
(ii) If the ownership of the Borids is no longer maintained i n book-entry form by
D.T.C, no further Auctions wiU be held eind the mterest rate on the Bonds for each
subsequent Auction Period commencing after delivery of Bond certificates wiU equed the
Maximum Auction Rate as deternuned by the City on the Business Day iinmediately
preceding the first (1") day of such Auction Period as provided in the Indenture.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83259

(iu) If the Commercied Paper/Treasury Rate is not quoted on an interest basis but is
quoted on a discount basis, the Auction Agent shall convert the quoted rate to an
interest equivalent, as set forth i n the defmition of Commercied Paper/Treasury Rate
in Appendix B to the Indenture; or, ff the rate obtained by the Auction Agent is not
quoted on an interest or discount basis, the Auction Agent shaU convert the quoted rate
to em interest rate eifter consultation with the City as to the method of such conversion.
(iv) ff the Commerdal Paper/Treasuiy Rate is to be based on rates supplied by the
Coinmercial Paper Dealer and the Commercial Paper Dealer shaU not provide a
quotation for the determination o f t h e Commerdal Paper/Treasury Rate, the Auction
Agent shaU immediately notify the City so that the City cem deteiimine whether to select
the Substitute Commercied Paper Dealer to provide the quotation or quotations not
being suppfied by the Coinmercial Paper Dealer. The City shall promptiy advise the
Auction Agent of any such selection.
2.4 Auction Schedule.
The Auction Agent shaU conduct Auctions i n accordance with the schedule set forth
below. Such schedule may be changed by the Auction Agent with the consent o f t h e
City, which consent shaU not be umeasonably vrithheld or delayed. The Auction Agent
shaU give notice of emy such change to each Broker-Dealer. Such notice shedl be
received prior to the fimt (1") Auction Date on which any such change shedl be effective.
Time

Event

By 9:00 A.M.

Market Agent provides the Auction Agent
with the Index.

By 9:30 A.M.

Auction Agent advises the City emd the
Broker-Deeders of the Maximum Auction
Rate, the Minimum Auction Rate and the
Commerdal Paper/Treasury Rate or the
Index, as the case may be, used i n
determining the Meiximum Auction Rate and
the Minimum Auction Rate as set forth i n
Section 2.3(b)(i) hereof.

 83260

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

Time

5/1/2002

Event

9:30 A.M. - 1:00 P.M.

A u c t i o n Agent assembles i n f o r m a t i o n
communicated to it by Broker-Dealers as
provided i n Section 3 of the Auction
Procedures. Submission Deadfine is 1:00
P.M.

Not earfier than 1:00 P.M.

Auction Agent makes d e t e r m i n a t i o n
pursuant, to Section 4(a) of the Auction
Procedures.

By approximately 3:00 P.M.

Auction Agent advises City o f t h e results of
Auction and the Auction Rate for the next
Auction Period, as provided i n Section 4(b)
of the Auction Procedures. Submitted Bids
and Submitted SeU Orders eire accepted and
rejected i n whole or i n part emd prindpal
amounts of Bonds are aUocated as provided
in Section 5 of the Auction Procedures.
Auction Agent gives notice of Auction results
as set forth i n paragraph (a) of the
Settiement Procedures.

The Auction Agent shaU foUow the notification procedures set forth i n paragraph (a)
of the Settiement Procedures.

2.5

Changes In Appficable Percentages
Auction Procedures.

Pursuant

To

Section

6

Of The

(a) Auction Agent shedl maU any notice deUvered to it pursuemt to the Indenture to
the Existing Holders within two (2) Business Days of its receipt thereof.
(b) The Auction Agent shaU defiver any such notice defivered to i l pursuant to Section
6 of the Auction Procedures to the Broker-Deeders not later them 3:00 P.M. on the
Business Day on which it receives such certificate.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83261

2.6 [Reserved].
2.7

Notices To Existing Holders.

The Auction Agent shaU be entitied to conclusively rely upon the address of each
Existing Holder as such address is deUvered by such Existing Holder or such Existing
Holder's Broker-Deeder or Agent Member i n connection with emy notice to Existing
Holders required to be given by the Auction Agent pursuant to this Section 2 . '
2.8

Events Of Default.

(a) If the Auction Agent shaU have received a notice froni the Tmstee that em EVent
of Default shaU have occuned, the Auction Agent shaU defiver a notice of such event
to the Broker-Deeders on the Business Day i t receives the same by telecopy or other
simUar means.
(b) The Auction Agent shaU deUver a copy of any notice received by i t from the
Tmstee to the effect that em Event of Default has been cured or waived to the BrokerDeeders on the Business Day foUowing its receipt thereof by telecopy or other sinular
meems.

2.9

Broker-Dealers.

(a) The Auction Agent, on the Issue Date, shaU enter into a Broker-Dealer Agreement
with
, as initial Broker-Deeder. The Auction
Agent may, thereeffter, with , the consent of the City, enter into a Broker-Dealer
Agreement with any person who requests to be selected to act as a Broker-Dealer i n
accordemce with the provisions ofthe Indenture. The Auction Agent shedl have entered
into a Broker-Dealer Agreement vrith each Broker-Dealer prior to the partidpation of
any such Broker-Dealer i n einy Auction. The Auction Agent shall not be requfred to
enter into a Broker-Dealer Agreement with any Broker-Dealer within seven (7) days of
euiy Auction Date unless prior thereto it shaU have received a manuaUy executed
Broker-Dealer Agreement from a Broker-Dealer reasonably acceptable to the Auction
Agent.
(b) The Auction Agent shaU terrriinate any Broker-Dealer Agreement as set forth
therein if so dfrected by the City.

2.10 Access To And Meiintenemcc Of Auction Records.
The Auction Agent shall afford to the City, its agents, independent pubfic accountemts
and counsel, access at reasonable times during normal business hours to review and

 83262

JOURNAL-CITY

COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

make extracts or copies (at the City's sole cost and expense) of edl books, records,
documents and other information conceming the conduct emd results of Auctions,
provided that any such agent, accountemt, or counsel shaU furnish the Auction Agent
with a letter from the City requesting that the Auction Agent eifford such person access.
The Auction Agent shall maintain records relating to any Auction for a period of two (2)
years after such Auction (unless requested by the City to maintain such records for
such longer period not i n excess of four (4) years, then for such longer period), and
such records shaU, i n reasonable deteiU, accurately and feifrly reUect the actions taken
by the Auction Agent hereunder. The City agrees to keep any information regarding the
customers of any Broker-Dealer received from the Auction Agent i n connection with
this Agreement or any Auction confidentied and shaU not disclose such information or
permit the disclosure of such information without the prior , written consent of the
appUcable Broker-Dealer to anyone except such agent, accountant or counsel engaged
to audit or review the results of Auctions as permitted by this Section 2.10. Any such
agent, accountant or counsel, before having access to such information, shaU agree to
keep such information confidential and not to disclose such infonnation or permit
disclosure of such information without the prior written consent of the appUcable
Broker-Dealer, except as may otherwise be requfred by law. The Auction Agent shaU
not be responsible or fiable for any actions of the City or its respective agents,
accountants or counsel for disclosure of confidential infonnation as a result of such
access.

3.
Membership

In D.T.C.

As ofthe date hereof, the Auction Agent is a member of, or participant i n , D.T.C. The
Auction Agent wiU provide the City with notice at least ninety (90) days prior to the
date, ifany, on which it shall resign as a member of, or peiiticipemt i n , D.T.C.

4.
Representations

And

Warranties.

The City represents and weurants that:
(i) this Agreement has been duly and veifidly authorized, executed emd deUvered by
the City and constitutes the legal, vafid and binding obligation of the City;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83263

(u) neither the execution and defivety of this Agreement, the consummation of the
fransactions contemplated hereby nor the fulfillment of or compfiance with the terms
and conditions of this Agreement wUl conflict with, violate or result i n a breach of, the
terms, conditions or provisions-of, or constitute a default under any law or regulation,
any order or decree of any court or pubfic authority having jurisdiction over the City,
or, to the knowledge ofthe officer executing this Agreement, any mortgage, indenture,
contract, agreement or undertaking to which the City is a party or by which i t is bound;
and
(iu) all approvals, consents and orders of any govemmented authority, legislative
body, board, agency or commission having jurisdiction over the City that would
constimte a condition precedent to or the absence of which would materiaUy adversely
eiffect the due pcrforinance by the City of its obUgations under this Agreement have
been obtained.

5.
The Auction

Agent.

5.1 Duties And Responsibifities.
(a) The Auction Agent is acting solely as agent for the City hereunder and owes no
fiduciary duties to any person by reason of this Agreement and no impfied duties,
fiducieuy or otherwise, shaU be read into this Agreement against the Auction Agent.
(b) The Auction Agent undertakes to perform such duties and only such duties as eire
specificaUy set forth i n this Agreement and the Indenmre, and no impfied covenants
or obUgations shedl be read into this Agreement or the Indenture against the Auction
Agent by reason of any offering materials used in connection with the sede of the Bonds
or otherwise.
(c) In tiie absence of bad faith or negligence on its part, the Auction Agent shall not
be liable for any action taken, suffered or omitted or for any enor of judgment made by
it i n the performemce of its duties under this Agreemerit. The Auction Agent shedl not
be liable for any enor of judgment made i n good faith unless the Auction Agent shedl
have been negfigent i n ascertaining (or feiiling to ascerteiin) the pertinent facts. In no
event shall the Auction Agent be fiable for specied, indfrect or consequential loss or
deimage of emy kind whatsoever (including but not limited to lost profit), even ff the
Auction Agent has been advised ofthe likelihood of such loss or damage and regardless
of the form of action.

 83264

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

(d) The Auction Agent shaU: (i) not be required to and shaU make no representations
emd have no responsibifities as to the vedidity, accuracy, vedue or genuineness of etny
signaturcis or endorsements, other than its own; (u) not be obligated to take any leged
action hereunder that might, in its judgment, involve emy expense or fiabifity, unless
it has been fiimished with reasonable indenmity; and (iu) not be responsible for or
fiable in any respect on account of identity, authority or rights of any person executing
or delivering or purporting to execute or deliver any document under this Agreement
unless the Authorized Officer of the Auction agent had acmal knowledge that such
person was not authorized or entitied to execute or deliver such document.
5.2 Rights Of The Auction Agent.
(a) The Auction Agent may conclusively rely and shaU be fuUy protected i n acting or
refreiining from acting upon any communication authorized hereby emd upon any
written instmction, notice, request, dfrection, consent, report, certificate, bond
certificate or other instmment, paper or document reasonably befieved by it to be
genuine. The Auction Agent shall not be Uable for acting upon any telephone
communication authorized hereby which the Auction Agent believes i n good faith to
have been given by the City or by a Broker-Dealer. The Auction Agent may record
telephone communications with the City or with the Broker-Dealers or both.
(b) The Auction Agent may consult with counsel of its choice, and the advice of such
counsel shaU be fuU and complete authorization and protection i n respect of any action
teiken, suffered or omitted by it hereunder i n good faith and i n refiance thereon.
(c) The Auction Agent shaU not be requfred to advance, expend or risk its own funds
or otherwise incur or become exposed to finandal fiabifity in the performance of itsduties hereunder.
(d) The Auction Agent may perform its duties auid exercise its rights hereunder either
dfrectiy or by or through agents or attorneys emd shedl not be responsible for emy
misconduct or negUgence on the part of any agent or attorney appointed by it with duecare hereunder.
(e) The Auction Agent shafi have no obligation or fiabifity in respect of the registration
or exemption therefrom o f t h e Bonds under federal or state securities laws i n respect
of the sufficiency or the conformity of emy transfer of the Bonds to the terms of the
Auction Agreement, the Broker-Dealer Agreement, the Indenture or any other
document contemplated thereby.
5.3

Auction Agent's Disclaimer.

The Auction Agent makes no representation as to the validity or adequacy of the
Bonds, the Indenmre or any offering materials used in connection with the sale o f t h e

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83265

Bonds.
5.4

Compensation, Expenses And Indemnification Of The Auction Agent.

The City shall pay (i) the Auction Agent Acceptance Fee on the date of payment for
emd delivery ofthe Bonds, (u) the Auction Agent Fee for the Bonds on the initial Interest
Payment Date and annuaUy thereeffter, emd (Ui) upon request of the Auction Agent,
reasonable expenses, disbursements and advances incuned or made by the Auction
Agent in accordance with this Agreement emd any Broker-Dealer Agreement (including
the reasonable compensation, expenses and disbursements of its agents and counsel).
The Auction Agent Fee repriesents compensation for the services o f t h e Auction Agent
in conducting Auctions for the benefit of the beneficial owners of the Bonds. The
Auction Agent Fee may be adjusted from time to time with the approved of the City
upon a written request ofthe Auction Agent defivered to the City. To the extent, ff emy,
that a court of competent jurisdiction would enforce such agreement as not contrary
to law or pubfic policy, the City agrees that it shaU indemnify the Auction Agent for,
and hold it harmless against any loss, fiabifity or expense i n c u n e d without negfigence
or bad feuth on its part arising out of or i n connection with its agency under the Auction
Agreement and Broker-Dealer Agreement, including the costs emd expenses of
defending itseff against any claim of fiabifity i n connection with its exercise or
performance of any of its duties thereunder, except such as may result from its
negfigence or bad faith.

5.5

Compensation Of The Broker-Deeders.

(a) On the initial Interest Payment Date, the Broker-Dealers shaU be entitied to
receive a fee i n an amount equal to the product of (i)
of one percent (1%) per
eumum times (u) a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of days i n the initied
Auction Period and the denominator of which is [three hundred sixty (360)], times (iU)
the aggregate principal eunount of Outstanding Bonds on the Closing Date. This fee
shedl be payable by the City solely out of amounts received by the Auction Agent i n
accordance with Section 5.5(c) hereof.
(b) After the initial Interest Payment Date, on the Interest Payment Date iinmediately
foUowing each Auction Date with respect to the immediately preceding Auction Period,
the Broker-Dealers sheiU be entitied to receive a fee for aU services rendered by them
under the Broker-Deeder Agreements with respect to the Auction held on such Auction
Date in an amount equal to the product of (i) the Broker-Deeder Fee Rate times (u) a
fraction, the numerator of which is the number of days in the Auction Period
immediatdy following such Auction Date emd the denominator of which is [three
hundred sixty (360)], times (iii) the aggregate principed amount of Outstanding Bonds
at the close of business on the Regular Record Date immediately preceding such
Auction Date (the "Broker-Dealer Fee. The Broker-Dealer Fee shedl be payable by the
City solely out of amounts received by the Auction Agent i n accordance w i l h Section

 83266

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

5.5(d) hereof The Broker-Dealer Fee Rate shedl be the prevaUing rate received by
broker-dealers for rendering comparable services to others. If the then cunent BrokerDealer Fee Rate is not, i n the opinion ofthe Auction Agent, the prevaUing rate, the City
shaU change the Broker-Deeder Fee Rate so that it equeds such prevailing rate. The
initial Broker-Deeder Fee Rate sheiU be
of one percent (1%) per annum. If the City
changes the Broker-Dealer Fee Rate pursuemt to the terms hereof, the City shaU notify
the Auction Agent thereof. Any chemge in the Broker-Deeder Fee Rate shall be effective
on the Auction Date next succeeding such change.
(c) On the iiutial Interest Payment Date, the City shall pay to the Auction Agent an
aggregate amount equal to the amounts payable to the Broker-Dealers pursuant to
Section 5.5(a) hereof. The Auction Agent shaU pay to the Broker-Dealers the amount
payable to each Broker-Deeder as set forth i n Section 2..5(a) of any Broker-Dealer
Agreement. The City agrees to take such actions as the Auction Agent may reasonably
request to give effect to this Section 5.5(cj.
(d) After the initial Interest Payment Date, on the Interest Payment Date immediately
foUowing each Auction Date with respect to the immediately preceding Auction Period,
the City shedl pay to the Auction Agent an amount equal to the Broker-Dealer Fee
payable with respect to such Auction Date. The Auction Agent shaU pay to the BrokerDealers the Broker-Dealer Fee appficable to any Broker-Dealer as set forth i n Section
2.5(b) of each Broker-Dealer Agreement. The City agrees to take such actions as the
Auction Agent may reasonably request to give effect to this Section 5.5(d).

6.
Miscellaneous.
6.1 Term Of Agreement.
(a) This Agreement shaU terminate on the earfier of (i) the date when the Bonds are
no longer Outstanding and [ii] the date on which this Agreement is terminated i n
accordance with this Section 6.1. The City may terminate this Agreement i n
accordemce with Section 2.03(e)(iv) ofthe Indenture. The Auction Agent may terminate
this Agreement upon written notice to the City, the Tmstee, the Remarketing Agent and
the Market Agent on the date specified in such notice, which date shaU be no earfier
than forty-five (45) days effter the date of deUvery of such notice. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the provisions of Section 2 shaU terminate if the certificates representing the
Bonds shaU no longer be held by a Securities Depository.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83267

(b) Except as otherwise provided i n this Section 6.1(b), the respective rights and
duties of the City and the Auction Agent under this Agreement shedl cease upon
termination of this Agreement. The representations, wanantics, covenants and
obUgations of the City to the Auction Agent under Article 4 and Section 5.4 shaU
survive the termination of this Agreement. Upon termination of this Agreement, the
Auction Agent shaU at the City's request, (i) promptiy deUver to the City copies of aU
books and records medntained by it i n connection wdth its duties hereunder emd (U)
promptiy transfer to the City or any successor auction agent any funds deposited by
the City with the Auction Agent pursuant to this Agreement which have not previously
been distributed by the Auction Agent i n accordance with this Agreement.

6.2

Communications.

Ebccept for (i) communications authorized to be made by telephone pursuemt to this
Agreement or the Auction Procedures and (U) communications i n cormection with
Auctions (other than those expressly requfred to be in writing), all notices, requests emd
other communications to any party hereunder shaU be in.^yriting (including facsinule
or simUeir writing) and shaU be given to such peirty addressed to it at its address or
facsimUe number set forth below:
IfTo The City, Addressed:

City of Chicago, Ulinois
33 North LaSaUe Sfreet, 6* Floor
Chicago; lUinois 60602
Attention:
Telephone:
FacsimUe:

IfTo The Auction Agent,
Addressed:

Attention:
Telephone:
FacsimUe:

 83268

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

or such other address or facsimile number as such party may hereafter specify for such
purpose by notice to the other party. Each such notice, request or communication
shedl be effective when delivered at the address specified herein. Communications shedl
be given on behaff of the City by an Authorized City Representative and on behaff o f t h e
Auction Agent by an Authorized Officer.

6.3 Entfre Agreement.
This Agreement contains the entire agreement between the parties relating to the
subject matter hereof, and there are no other representations, endorsements, promises,
agreements or understandings, ored, written or infened between the parties relating to
the subject matter hereof.
6.4 Benefits.
Nothing herein, express or impUed, shall give to any person, other them the City, the
Auction Agent and thefr respective successors emd assigns, any benefit of any leged or
equitable right, remedy or claim hereunder.
6.5 Amendment; Waiver.
(a) This Agreement shaU not be deemed or constmed to be modified, amended,
rescinded, canceled or waived, i n whole or Ln part, except by a written instmment
signed by a duly authorized representative of the party to be charged.
(b) FeiUure of either party hereto to exercise any right or remedy hereunder i n the
event of a breach hereof by the other party sheiU not constitute a waiver of any such
right or remedy with respect to any subsequent breach.
6.6 Successor And Assigns.
This Agreement shaU be binding upon, inure to the benefit of, emd be enforceable by,
the respective successors and pennitted assigns of each of the City eind the Auction
Agent. This Agreement may not be assigned by either party hereto absent the prior
written consent ofthe other party, which consent shedl not be unreasonably withheld.
6.7 Severabifity.
ff any clause, provision or section hereof shedl be mled invafid or unenforceable by
emy court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity or unenforceabifity of such clause,
provision or section shedl not affect any of the remeuning clauses, provisions or sections

 5/ 1 / 2 0 0 2

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83269

hereof.
6.8 Execution In Counterpeirts.
This Agreement may be executed in several counterparts, each of which shaU be an
original and aU of which shaU constitute but one and the same instmment.
6.9 Governing Law.
This Agreement shedl be governed by emd constmed in accordance with the laws of
the State of Illinois without regard to the confficts of laws prindples thereof.
In Witness Whereof, The parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly executed
and defivered by thefr proper and duly authorized officers as of the date ffrst above
written.

City of Chicago, lUinois

By:
Name:
Titie:

[Neune of Auction Agent],
Auction Agent
By:
Name:
Title:
(Sub)Exhibit "A" refened to Ln this Auction Agreement reads as foUows:

 83270

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(Sub)Exhibit "A".
(To Auction Agreement)

City Of Chicago, Illinois
$
Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
.

Form Of Broker-Dealer

Agreement.

This Broker-Dealer Agreement, dated as of
•
, between [Name of Auction
Agent], a banking corporation organized and existing under and by virtue o f t h e laws
of the State of New York, as auction agent (the "Auction Agent") under the Auction
Agreement with respect to the above-captioned bonds, dated as of
,
2002 (the "Auction Agreement"), between the City of Chicago, lUinois (the "City"), the
Auction Agent and
(the "BD").
Whereas, The City has issued $
aggregate principal amount of its
Auction Rate Bonds, Series
(the "Bonds") pursuemt to an Indenture of Tmst, dated
as of
, 2002, between the City and
, as tmstee
(the "Indenmre");
Whereas, The Indenture provides that the interest rate on the Bonds for each Auction
Period cifter the initial Auction Period shaU, except under certain conditions emd subject
to a maximum interest rate of [eighteen (18)] percent per annum, equal the rate per
annum that the Auction Agent advises results from implementation of the Auction
Procedures and pursuemt to Section 2.9(a) of the Auction Agreement, the City has
requested and directed the Auction Agent to execute and defiver this Broker-Dealer
Agreement; and
Whereas, The Auction Procedures require the participation of one (1) or more BrokerDealers;
Now, Therefore, In consideration ofthe raumal covenants conteiined herein and other
good and veduable consideration, the receipt emd sufficiency of which is hereby
acknowledged, the Auction Agent, as agent o f t h e City, and BD agree as follows:

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83271

Section 1.
Definitions And Rules Of

Construction.

1.1 Terms Defined By Reference To The Indenture.
Capitalized terms not defined herein shaU have the respective meanings assigned
thereto i n the Indenture or the Auction Agreement (as defined below), as appficable.
1.2

Terms Defined Herein.

As used herein and in the Settiement Procedures (as defined below), the foUowing
terms shall have the foUowing meanings, unless the context otherwise requfres:
(a) "Auction" shaU have the meaning specified i n Section 2.1 hereof.
(b)

"Auction Agreement" shall mean the Auction Agreement dated as of
, 2002 between the City .and the Auction Agent relating to the Bonds.

(c) "Auction Procedures" shaU mean the Auction Procedures that are set forth i n
Appendix B to the Indenture.
(d) "Authorized Oflicer" shaU mean each Senior Vice President, Vice President,
Assistant Vice President and Assistemt Treasurer of the Auction Agent assigned to its
Capital Markets Fidudary Services Group and every other officer or employee o f t h e
Auction Agent designated as an "Authorized Officer" for purposes of this Agreement
i n a communication to BD.
(e) "BD Officer" shall meem each officer or employee of BD designated as a "BD
Officer" for purposes of this Agreement i n a communication to the Auction Agent.
(f) "Broker-Dealer Agreement" or "Agreement" shaU mean this Agreement and emy
substantiedly similar agreement between the Auction Agent and a Broker-Dealer.
(g) "Settlement Procedures" shall mean the Settiement Procedures attached hereto
as (Sub)Exhibit A.

1.3

Rules Of Constmction.

Unless the context or use indicates emother or different meaning or intent, the
following mles sheiU apply to the constmction of this Agreement:

 83272

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

(a) Words importing the singular number shaU include the plural number and vice
versa.
(b) The captions and headings herein are solely for convenience of reference and
shall not constimte a part of this Agreement nor sheiU they eiffect its meeming,
constmction or effect.
(c) The words "hereor, "herein", "hereto" and other words of simUar import refer to
this Agreement as a whole.
(d) AU references herein to a peurticuleir time of day shedl be to New York City time.

Section 2.
The
2.1

Purpose; Incorporation By
Settiement Procedures.

Auction.

Reference

Of

Auction

Procedures

And

(a) On each Auction Date, the Auction Procedures wiU be foUowed by the Auction
Agent for the purpose: of determining the Auction Rate for the next Auction Period.
Each periodic implementation of such procedures is hereinafter refened to as em
"Auction".
(b) The Auction Procedures and the Settiement Procedures eire incorporated herein
by reference in thefr entirety and shaU be deemed to be a part of this Agreement to the
same extent as ff such provisions were friUy set forth herein.
(c) BD agrees to act as, and assumes the obfigations of and limitations and
restrictions placed upon, a Broker-Dealer under this Agreement. BD understands that
other persons meeting the requfrements spedfied i n the definition of "Broker-Dealer"
conteiined in the Auction Procedures may execute a Broker-Dealer Agreement emd
participate as Broker-Dealers i n Auctions.
(d) BD emd other Broker-Dealers may peirticipate in Auctions for thefr own accounts.
However, the City may, by notice to BD and aU other Broker-Dealers, prohibit aU
Broker-Dealers from submitting Bids i n Auctions for thefr own accounts, provided that
Broker-Dealers may continue to submit Hold Orders and SeU Orders. If BD is
BD also agrees to act as, and assumes the obfigations of and
limitations and restrictions placed upon, the initial Market Agent under the Indenture.

 5/ 1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83273

2.2 Preparation For Each Auction.
(a) Not later than 9:30 A.M. on each Auction Date for the Bonds, the Auction Agent
. shall advise BDby telephone of the Minimum Auction Rate, the Meiximum Auction Rate
emd the Commercial Paper/Treasury Rate or the Index, as the case may be, used i n
determining such rates.
(b) In the event that the Auction Date for any Auction shaU be changed after the
Auction Agent has given the notice refened to i n clause (vu) of paragraph (a) of the
Settiement Procedures, the Auction Agent, by such means as the Auction Agent deems
practi'cable, shaU give notice of such change to BD not later them the eeufier of 9:15
A.M. on the new Auction Date and 9:15 A.M. on the old Auction Date. Thereafter, BD
shaU promptiy notify customers of BD that BD believes are Existing Holders of such
change i n the Auction Date.
(c) The Auction Agent from time to time may request BD to provide it with a fist of the
respective customers BD befieves eire Existing Holders. BD shall comply with any such
request, emd the Auction Agent shedl keep confidential any such iifformation, including
iifformation received as to the identity of Bidders in any Auction, emd shedl not disclose
any such information so provided to emy person other than the City and BD.
2.3 Auction Schedule; Method Of Subnussion Of Orders.
(a) The Auction Agent shaU conduct Auctions for the Bonds i n accordance with the
schedule set forth below. Such schedule may be changed at emy time by the Auction
Agent with the consent o f t h e City, which consent shaU not be unreasonably withheld
or delayed. The Auction Agent shedl give notice of any such cheinge to BD. Such notice
sheiU be received prior to the ffrst (1*') Aucti'on Date on which emy such change shall be
effective.

Time

Event

By 9:00 A.M.

Market Agent provides Auction Agent with
the Index.

By 9:30 A.M.

Auction Agent advises the City and the
Broker-Deeders of the Mmimum Auction
Rate, the Maximum Auction Rate emd the
Commercial Paper/Treasury Rate or Index,
as the case may be, used in determining
such rates as set forth in Section 2.2(a)
hereof.

 JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

83274

Time

5/1/2002

Event

9:30 A.M. - 1:00 P.M.

A u c t i o n Agent assembles i n f o r m a t i o n
communicated to it by Broker-Dealers as
provided i n Section 3 of the Auction
Procedures. Subnussion Deadline is 1:00
P.M.

Not earfier than 1:00 P : M .

A u c t i o n Agent m a k e s d e t e r m i n a t i o n s
pursuant to Section 4(a) of the Auction
Procedures.

By approximately 3:00 P.M.

Auction Agent advises the City o f t h e results
of the Auction emd of the Auction Rate for
the next Auction Period, as provided i n
Section 4(b) of the Auction Procedures.
Submitted Bids and Submitted Sell Orders
eire accepted and rejected i n whole or i n part
and Bonds are edlocated as provided i n
Section 5 of the Auction Procedures. Auction
Agent gives notice of Auction results as set
forth in Section 2.4(a) hereof.

(b) BD shaU submit Orders to the Auction Agent i n writing substantiedly i n the form
attached hereto as (Sub)Exhibit B. BD shedl submit separate Orders to the Auction
Agent for each Potential Holder or Ebdsting Holder on whose behaff BD is submitting
an Order and shedl not net or aggregate the Orders of Potentied Holders or Existing
Holders on whose behaff BD is submitting Orders.
(c) BD sheiU deliver to the Auction Agent (i) a written notice, substantiedly in the form
attached hereto as (Sub)Exhibit C, of transfers of Bonds, made through BD by em
Existing Holder to another person other than pursuant to an Auction, and (U) a written
notice, substemtiaUy in the form attached Hereto as (Sub)Exhibit D, ofthe feulure of any
Bonds to be transfened to or by any person that purchased or sold Bonds through BD
pursuant to em Auction. The Auction Agent is not requfred to accept emy notice
delivered pursuant to the terms of the foregoing sentence with respect to an Auction
unless it is received by the Auction Agent by 3:00 P.M. on the Business Day next
preceding the appficable Auction Date.
(d) BD agrees to hemdle its customers" Orders in accordemce with its duties under
appficable securities laws and mles.

 5/1/2002

REPORTSOF. COMMITTEES

83275

2.4 Notices.
(a) On each Auction Date, the Auction Agent shaU notify BD by telephone of the
results o f t h e Auction as set forth i n paragraph (a) ofthe Settiement Procedures. The
Auction Agent shaU as promptiy as reasonably practicable thereafter notify BD i n
writing of the disposition of all Orders submitted by BD i n the Auction held on such
Auction Date.
(b) BD shall notify each Existing Holder or Potentied Holder o n whose behedf BD has
submitted an Order as set forth i n paragraph (b) ofthe Settiement Procedures and take
such other action as is requfred of BD pursuant to the Settlement Procedures.
(c) The Auction Agent shaU defiver to BD after receipt of edl notices and certificates
which the Auction Agent is required to deUver to BD pursuant to Section 2 of the
Auction Agreement at the times and in the memner set forth i n the Auction Agent
Agreement.
2.5

Service Charge To Be Paid To BD.

(a) On the initial Interest Payment Date, the Auction Agent shedl pay to BD from
monies received from the City pursuant to Section 5.5(c) of the Auction Agreement an
amount equal to the product of (i) a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of
days i n the initial Auction Period and the denominator of which is three hundred sixty
[360], times (ii)
of one percent (1%) per annum times (in) the aggregate prindpal
eunount of the Bonds placed by BD on the Issue Date as set forth i n the fist of the
initied Existing Holders defivered to the Auction Agent pursuant to Section 2.2 (a)(i) of
the Auction Agreement.
(b) After the initial Interest Payment Date, on the Interest Payment Date immediately
foUowing each Auction Date with respect to the immediately preceding Auction Period,
.the Auction Agent shaU pay to BD from monies received from the City pursuant to
Section 5.5(d) ofthe Auction Agreement an amount equal to the product of (i) a fraction,
the numerator of which is the number of days i n the Auction Period next succeeding
such Auction Date and the denominator of which is three hundred sixty [360] times (u)
the Broker-Dealer Fee Rate times (iu) (A) ff em Auction was held on such Auction Date,
the sum of (x) the aggregate principal amount of the Bonds placed by BD i n such
Auction that were (1) the subject of Submitted Bids of Existing Holders submitted by
BD and continued to be held as a result of such submission and (2) the subject of
Submitted Bids of Potential Holders submitted by BD and purchased as a result of
such submission, (y) the aggregate principal amount ofthe Bonds subject to veilid Hold
Orders (determined in accordemce with Section 3 of the Auction Procedures) submitted
to the Auction Agent by BD and (z) the aggregate principal eimount of the Bonds
deemed to be subject to Hold Orders by Existing Holders pursuant to Section 3 o f t h e
Auction Procedures that were acqufred by such Existing Holders through BD, or (B) if
an Auction was not held on such Auction Date, the aggregate prindped amount of the

 83276

J O U R N A L - C I T Y COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

Bonds that were acqufred by Existing Holders through BD. For purposes of subclauses
(ui)(A)(z) and (iu)(B) of the foregoing sentence, if any Existing Holder who acquired
Bonds through BD transfers those Bonds to another person other than pursuant to an
Auction, then the Broker-Dealer for the Bonds so transfened shaU.continue to be BD;
provided, however, that ff the transfer was effected by, or if the transferee is, a BrokerDealer other than BD, then such Broker-Deeder shall be the Broker-Dealer for such
Bonds.

2.6

Settiement.

(a) If any Existing Holder on whose behaff BD has submitted a Bid or SeU Order for
Bonds that was accepted i n whole or in part fails to instmct its Agent Member to
deUver the Bonds subject to such Bid or SeU Order against payment therefor, BD shaU
instmct such Agent Member to deUver such Bonds against pa)rment therefor and BD
may defiver to the Potentied Holder on whose behalf BD submitted a Bid that was
accepted in- whole or i n part a prindpal amount of the Bonds that is less than the
principed amount ofthe Bonds specified i n such Bid to be purchased by such Potential
Holder. Notwithstanding the foregoing terms of this section, any defivety or nondefivety of Bonds which represents any depeuture from the results of an Auction, as
determined by the Auction Agent, shaU be of no effect unless and until the Auction
Agent shall have been notified of such defivery or non-defiveiy i n accordance with the
terms of Section 2.3(c) hereof. The Auction Agent shaU have no duty or fiabifity with
respect to enforcement of this Section 2.6(a).
(b) Neither the Auction Agent or the City shaU have any responsibiUty or fiabifity with
respect to the faUure of an Existing Holder, a Potential Holder or an Agent Member or
any of them to defiver Bonds or to pay for Bonds sold or purchased pursuant to the
Auction Procedures or otherwise.

Section 3.
The Auction
3.1

Agent.

Duties And Responsibifities.

(a) The Auction Agent is acting solely as agent for the City hereunder and owes no
fiduciary duties to any other Person by reason of this Agreement.
(b) The Auction Agent underteikes to perform such duties and only such duties as are
spedficaUy set forth in this Agreement, emd no impfied covenemts or obfigations shedl
be read into this Agreement ageiinst the Auction Agent.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83277

(c) In the absence of bad faith or negfigence on its peut, the Auction Agent shall
not be fiable for any action tedcen, suffered, or omitted or for any enor of judgment
made by it in the performemce of its duties under this Agreement. The Auction
Agent shedl not be liable for any enor of judgment made i n good feiith unless the
Auction Agent shedl have been negfigent i n ascerteiining (or failing to ascertain) the
pertinent facts.
3.2

Rights Of The Auction Agent.

(a) The Auction Agent may conclusively rely emd shaU be protected in acting or
refraining from acting upon any communication authorized by this Agreement and
upon any written instmction, notice, request, dfrection, consent, report, certificate,
share certificate or other instmment,. paper or document befieved by it. to be
genuine. The Auction Agent shedl not be fiable for acting upon any telephone
communication authorized by this Agreement which the Auction Agent believes i n
good faith to have been given by the City or by a Broker-Dealer. The Auction Agent
may record telephone communications with the Broker-Dealers emd may consult
with counsel of its own choice.
(b) The Auction Agent shall not be requfred to advance, expend or risk its own
funds or otherwise incur or become exposed to finandal Uabifity in the performance
of its duties hereunder.
(c) The Auction Agent may perform its duties emd exercise its rights hereunder
cither direcUy or by or through agents or attomeys.

Section

4.

Miscellaneous.
4.1 Termination.
Any party may tenninate this Agreement at any time upon five (5) days prior notice
to the other party; provided, however, that ff BD is
.
, neither
BD nor the Auction Agent may tenninate this Agreement without first obteiining
prior written consent of the City of such termination, which consent sheiU not be
unreasonably withheld. This Agreement shall automaticaUy terminate upon the
termination o f t h e Auction Agreement.

 83278

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

4.2 Agent Member. .
BD is, and shaU remain for the term of this Agreement, a member of, or
participant i n , D.T.C (or an eiffiUate of such a member or partidpant). BD shall
promptiy notify the Auction Agent and the City ff BD ceases to be a member of, or
participant in, D.T.C. (or an affiliate of such a member or participant).
4.3

Communications.

Except for (i) communications authorized to be made by telephone pursuemt to
this Agreement or the Auction Procedures and (u) communications i n connection
with the Auctions (other them those expressly requfred to be in writing), edl notices,
requests and other communications to any peirty hereunder shaU be i n writing
(uicluding facsimile or simUeir writing) emd shaU be given to such peirty, addressed
to it, at its address or facsimile number set forth below:

IfTo BD, Addressed:

[
Attention: [
FacsimUe Number: [
Telephone Number: [

IfTo The Auction Agent,
Addressed:

Attention:
Facsimile Number:.
Telephone Number:
ff To The City, Addressed:

City of Chicago, Illinois
33 North LaSaUe Street, Sixth (6"") Floor
Chicago, lUinois 60602
Attention:
.
Facsimile Number:.
Telephone Number:

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83279

or such other address or facsimile number as such party may hereeifter specify for
such purpose by notice to the other party. Each such notice, request or
communication shall be effective when delivered at the address specffied herein.
Communications shall be given on behaff of BD by a BD Officer and on behaff of the
Auction Agent by an Authorized Officer. BD may record telephone communications
with the Auction Agent.

4.4

Entfre Agreement.

This Agreement contains the entire agreement between the parties relating to the
subject matter hereof, and there eire no other representations, endorsements,
promises, agreements or understandings, oral, written or infened, between the
parties relating to the subject matter hereof.
4.5 Benefits.
Nothing i n this Agreement, express or implied, shaU give to any person, other than
the City, the Auction Agent and BD and thefr respective successors emd assigns,
any benefit of any legal or equitable right, remedy or claim under this Agreement.
4-6 Amendment; Weiiver.
(a) This Agreement shedl not be deemed or constmed to be modified, amended,
rescinded, cemceled or waived, i n whole or i n part, except by a written instmment
signed by a duly authorized representative o f t h e party to be charged.
(b) FaUure of either party to this Agreement to exercise any right or remedy
hereunder in the event of a breach of this Agreement by the other party shedl not
constimte a waiver of any such right or remedy with respect to emy subsequent
breach.
4.7

Successors And Assigns.

This Agreement shaU be binding upon, inure to the benefit of, emd be enforceable
by, the respective successors emd permitted assigns of each of BD and the Auction
Agent. This Agreement may not be assigned by either party hereto absent the prior
written consent of the other party; provided, however, tliat this Agreement may be
assigned by the Auction Agent to a successor Auction Agent selected by the City
without the consent of BD.

 83280

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

4.8 Severabifity.
If any clause, provision or section of this Agreement shaU be ruled invalid or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, the invedidity or
unenforceabifity of such dause, provision or section shaU not eiffect any remaining
clause, provision or section hereof.
4.9

Execution In Counterparts!

This Agreement may be executed in severed counterpeirts, each of which shaU be
an original and aU of which shedl constitute but one and the sanie instmment.

Section 5.
Governing

Law.

This Agreement shaU be governed by and constmed i n accordance with the laws
o f t h e State of [New York] without regard to the conflicts of laws principles thereof.
In Wimess Whereof, The parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly
executed and deUvered by thefr proper emd duly authorized officers as ofthe date ffrst
above written.
[Name of Auction Agent),
as Auction Agent

By:

By:
Name:
Title:

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83281

(Sub)Exhibits "A"^, "B", "C" and "D" refened to i n this Broker-Dealer Agreement read
as follows:

(Sub)Exhibit "A".
(To Broker-Dealer Agreement)

City Of Chicago,

Illinois

$
Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
.

Settlement

Procedures.

(a) Not later them 3:00 P.M., New York City time, on each Auction Date, the
Auction Agent shaU notify by telephone each Broker-Deeder that participated in the
Auction held on such Auction Date and submitted an Order on behedf of an Existing
Holder or Potential Holder of:
(i) the Auction Rate fixed for the next Auction Period or, in the case of Bonds in
an Auction Period nominaUy of less than seven (7) days, the Auction Rate for the
cunent Auction Period;
(ii) whether there were Suflicient Clearing Bids in such Auction;
(iu) ff such Broker-Dealer (a "SeUer's Broker-Dealer") submitted a Bid or a ScU
Order on behalf of an Existing Holder, whether such Bid or SeU Order was
accepted or rejected, in whole or in part, and the principed eimount of Bonds, i f
any, to be sold by such Existing Holder;
(iv) if such Broker-Dealer (a "Buyer's Broker-Dealer") submitted a Bid on behaff
of a Potentied Holder, whether such Bid was accepted or rejected, in whole or in
part, and the principal eunount of Bonds, if emy, to be purchased by such Potentied
Holder;

 83282

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(v) if the aggregate prindpal amount of Bonds, to be sold by edl Existing Holders
on whose behedf such Broker-Dealer submitted a Bid or a Sell Order exceeds the
aggregate principal eimount of Bonds to be purchased by edl Potentied Holders on
whose behaff such Broker-Deeder submitted a Bid, the neime or names of one (1)
or more Buyer's Broker-Deeders (and the name of the Agent Member, ff any, of
each such Buyer's Broker-Dealer) acting for one (1) or more purchasers of such
excess principal eimount of Bonds and the prindpal eimount of Bonds to be
purchased from one (1) or more Existing Holders on whose behedf such BrokerDealer acted by one (1) or more Potential Holders on whose behedf each of such
Buyer's Broker-Dealers acted;
(vi) ff the prindped amount of Bonds to be purchased by all Potential Holders on
whose behaff such Broker-Dealer submitted a Bid exceeds the principal amount
of Bonds to be sold by edl Existing Holders on whose behalf such Broker-Dealer
submitted a Bid or a SeU Order, the name or neimes of one (1) or more SeUer's
Broker-Dealers (and the name ofthe Agent Member, ff any, of each such Seller's
Broker-Deeder) acting for one (1) or more seUers of such excess principal amount
of Bonds emd the principal amount of Bonds to be sold to one (1) or more Potentied
Holders on whose behaff such Broker-Dealer acted by one (I) or more Existing
Holders on whose behaff each of such SeUer's Broker-Dealers acted; and
(vu) the Auction Date for the next succeeding Auction.
(b) On each Auction Date, each Broker-Deeder that submitted an Order on behaff
of any Existing Holder or Potential Holder shaU:
(i) advise each Existing Holder and Potential Holder on whose behedf such
Broker-Deeder submitted a Bid or SeU Order in the Auction on such Auction Date
whether such Bid or SeU Order was accepted or rejected, in whole or i n part;
(ii) in the case of a Broker-Dealer that is a Buyer's Broker-Dealer, advise each
Potential Holder on whose behaff such Broker-Dealer submitted a Bid that was
accepted, in whole or in part, to instmct such Potential Holder's Agent Member
to pay to such Broker-Dealer (or its Agent Member) through the Securities
Depository the eimount necessary to purchase the principal eunount of Bonds to
be purchased pursuant to such Bid (including, with respect to Bonds i n an
Auction Period nominaUy of less than seven (7) days, accmed interest ff the
purchase date is not an Interest Payment Date) ageiinst receipt of such Bonds;
(iii) in the case of a Broker-Dealer that is a Seller's Broker-Dealer, instmct each
Existing Holder on whose behaff such Broker-Dealer submitted a SeU Order that
was accepted, in whole or m peirt, or a Bid that was rejected, in whole or in part,
to instmct such Existing Holder's Agent Member to deliver to such Broker-Dealer
(or its Agent Member) through the Securities Depository the principed eimount of
Bonds to be sold pursuemt to such Order against payment therefor;

 5/ 1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83283

(iv) advise each Existing Holder on whose behaff such Broker-Dealer submitted
an Order emd each Potential Holder on whose behaff such Broker-Dealer
submitted a Bid of the Auction Rate for the next Auction Period or, in the case of
Bonds i n an Auction Period nominaUy of less them seven (7) days, the Auction
Rate for the cunent Auction Period;
(v) advise each Existing Holder on whose behaff such Broker-Dealer submitted
em Order of the next Auction Date; and
(vi) advise each Potentied Holder on whose behedf such Broker-Dealer submitted
a Bid that was accepted, in whole or i n part, o f t h e next Auction Date.
(c) On the basis of the information provided to it pursuant to.paragraph (a) above,
each Broker-Dealer that submitted a Bid or SeU Order i n an Auction is requfred to
aUocate any funds received by it i n connection with such Auction pursuant to
paragraph (b)(u) above, and any Bonds received by it i n connection with such
Auction pursuant to paragraph (b)(iU) above among the Potential Holders, i f emy, on
whose behedf such Broker-Deeder submitted Bids, the Existing Holders, ff any, on
whose behalf such Broker-Deeder submitted Bids or SeU Orders i n such Auction,
and any Broker-Dealer identified to it by the Auction Agent foUowing such Auction
pursuant to paragraph (a)(v) or (a)(vi) above.
(d) On each Auction Date:
(i) each Potential Holder and Existing Holder with an Order i n the Auction on
such Auction Date shaU instmct its Agent Member as provided in peiragraph (b)(u)
or (iu) above, as the case may be;
(u) each SeUer's Broker-Dealer that is not an Agent Member of D.T.C. shaU
instmct its Agent Member to (A) pay through D.T.C. to the Agent Member o f t h e
Existing Holder delivering Bonds to such Broker-Dealer foUowing such Auction
pursuant to peiragraph (b)(iu) above the amount necessary to purchase such
Bonds against receipt of such Bonds, and (B) deUver such Bonds through D.T.C.
to a Buyer's Broker-Dealer (or its Agent Member) identified to such SeUer's
Broker-Dealer pursuant to paragraph (a)(v) above against payment therefor; and
(in) each Buyer's Broker-Deeder that is not an Agent Member of D.T.C. sheiU
instmct its Agent Member lo (A) pay through D.T.C. to a SeUer's Broker-Deeder (or
its Agent Member) identified following such Auction pursuant to paragraph (a)(vi)
above the eunount necessary to purchase the Bonds to be purchased pursuant to
peiragraph (b)(ii) above against receipt of such Borids, and (B) deliver such Bonds
through D.T.C. to the Agent Member of the purchaser thereof ageunst payment
therefor.

 83284

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(e) On the Business Day foUowing each Auction Date:
(i) each Agent Member for a Bidder in the Auction on such Auction Date refened
to in paragraph (d)(i) above shaU instmct D.T.C. to execute the transactions
described under paragraph (b)(u) or (iU).above for such Auction, and D.T.C. shaU
execute such transactions;
(u) each Seller's Broker-Dealer or its Agent Member shall instmct.D.T.C to
execute the transactions described in paragraph (d)(u) above for such Auction, and
D.T.C. shedl execute such fransactions; and
(iu) each Buyer's Broker-Dealer or its Agent Member shedl instmct D.T.C. to
execute the transactions described in paragraph (d)(iii) above for such Auction,
and D.T.C sheiU execute such transactions.
(1) If an Ebdsting Holder selling Bonds ui ein Auction faUs to deUver such Bonds (by
authorized book-entry), a Broker-Dealer may deUvcr to the Potential Holder on
behaff of which it submitted a Bid that was accepted a principal amount of Bonds
that is less them the prindpal amount of Bonds that otherwise was to be purchased
by such Potential Holder. I n such event, the principal eunount of Bonds to be
delivered shaU be determined solely by such Broker-Dealer. Defivety of such lesser
prindpal amount of Bonds shall constitute good deUvery.
Notwithstanding the foregoing terms of this paragraph (f), any defivery or nondelivery of Bonds which shall represent any departure from the results of an
Auction, as determined by the Auction Agent, shedl be of no effect unless and u n t i l
the Auction Agent shedl have been notified of such defivery or non-defivery i n
accordance with the provisions of the Auction Agreement and the Broker-Dealer
Agreements.

(Sub)Exhibit "B".
(To Broker-Dealer Agreement)

City Of Chicago, Illinois
$
"
Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
.

Order Form.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83285

(Submit Only One Order On t h i s Order Form)

To:
Date of Auction:
The undersigned Broker-Dealer submits the foUowing Order on behaff of the
Bidder listed below: •
Name of Bidder:
Bidder placed the Order fisted below covering the p r i n d p a l amount indicated
(complete only one blank):
$

.

prindpal amount now held by Bidder (an Existing Holder) and

the Order is a (check one):
•

Hold Order; or

•

Bid at a rate of

•

SeU Order;

%; or

or
principal amount not now held by Bidder (a Potential Holder),

Name of Broker-Deeder:

By:

 83286

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Notes:
(1) If submitting more than one (1) Order for one (1) Bidder, use additioned Order
Forms.
(2) ff one (1) or more orders covering in the aggregate more than the outstanding
prindped amount ofthe Bonds held by any Existing Holder are submitted, such
Orders shaU be considered valid i n the order of priority set forth i n the Auction
Procedures.
(3) A Hold Order may be placed only by em Existing Holder covering a p i i n d p a l
eimount of the Bonds not greater than the principal amount cunenUy-held by
such Existing Holder.
(4) Potenti'al Holders may make Bids only, each of which must specify a rate, ff
more than one (1) Bid is submitted on behaff of any Potential Holder, each Bid
submitted shaU be a separate Bid with the rate specified.
(5) Bids may contain no more than three (3) figures to the right ofthe decimal point
(.001 of 1%).
(6) An Order must be submitted i n whole units of Twenty-five Thousand DoUeirs
($25,000).

(Sub)Exhibit " C .
(To Broker-Dealer Agreement)

City Of Chicago, Illinois
$
Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
.

Transfer

Form.

(To Be Used Only for Tremsfers Made Other
Them Pursuant To An Auction)

 5/1/2002

• REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83287

We are (check one):
•

the Existing Holder named below; or

•

the Broker-Deeder for such Existing Holder; or

•

the Agent Member for such Existing Holder.

We hereby notify you that such Existing Holder has
$

fransfened

* of Bonds to .

(Name of Existing Holder)

(Name of Broker-Deeder)

(Name of Agent Member)
By:

:
Neirae:
Titie:

• Bonds may only be transferred in units of Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000).

 83288

J O U R N A L - C I T Y COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(Sub)Exhibit "D".
(To Broker-Dealer Agreement)

City Of Chicago, IlKnois
$
Auction Rate Bonds,
Series
.
Notice Of A Failure To Deliver.

.

(To Be Used Only For Failures To DeUver
Bonds Sold Pursuant To An Auction)
We hereby notify you that (check one):
Complete either I or III. We are a Broker-Dealer for
.(the "Purchaser"),
which purchased $
of the Bonds** i n the Auction held on
from the seller of such Bonds, who faUed to defiver such Bonds to
the Purchaser.
II. We are a Broker-Dealer for
(the "SeUer"),
which sold $
to the purchaser of such Bonds, who feuled to
make payment to the SeUer upon delivery of such Bonds.

By:.
Name:
Titie:

Bonds may only be transferred in units of Twenry-five Thousand DoUars ($25,000).

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83289

Exhibit "F".
(To Ordinance)
City Of Chicago
To
(Name, Of Trusteej,
As Trustee
Trust Indenture.
Securing
City of Chicago Varicdjle Rate Bonds,
Series
.
Dated As Of

, 2002.

THIS TRUST INDENTURE, made and entered into as of
, 2002
(tiiis "Indenture"), from the CITY OF CHICAGO (Uie "City"), a municipal coipoiation and home
mle unit of local government duly organized and existing under the Constitution and laws of the
State of Illinois, to [NAME OF TRUSTEE] (the "Tmstee"), a national banking association duly
organized, existing and authorized to accept and execute tmsts of the character heiein set out
under and by virtue of the laws of the United States of America, with its principal corporate tmst
office located al
,
,
"
, as Tmstee,

 83290

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, by viime of Article VII'of die Ilfinois Constimtion of 1970 and
pursuant to an ordinance diUy adopted by the City CouncU of the City on
, 2002, tbe
City is authorized to enter into this Indenture and to do or cause to be done aU the acts and things
heiein provided or required to be done; and
WHEREAS, the execution and delivety of this Indenture have been in all respects
duly and validly authorized by the City CouncU; and
WHEREAS, in order to provide the fimds for the puipose of (i) paying the costs
of certain capital projects of the City, and (u) paying the expenses of issuance of the Bonds, the
City has duly authorized the issuance and sale of its Variable Rate Bonds, Series
(the
"Bonds"); and
WHEREAS, the execution and delivety of the Bonds and of this Indenture have in
all respects been duly authorized and all things necessaty to make such Bonds, when executed by
tbe City and authenticated by the Trustee, the vafid and binding legal obligations of the Cify and
to make this Indenture a valid and binding agieement, have been done; and
WHEREAS, the Bonds, and Ihe Trustee's Ceitilicate of Authentication to be
endorsed on such Bonds, shall be substantiaUy ui the form attached hereto as Exhibit A. with
necessaty and appropriate variations, omissions and insertions as pennitted or required by this
Indenture;
NOW, THEREFORE, THIS TRUST INDENTURE WITNESSETH:
GRANTING CLAUSES
That the City, in consideration of the premises and ihe acceptance by the Trustee
ofthe tmsts.hereby created, and of the purchase and acceptance of the Bonds by the registered
owners thereof, and of the sum of one dollar, lawful money of the United States of America, to
it duly paid by the Tnistee at or before the execution and delivery of these presents, and for other
good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83291

to secure the payment of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds according
to diefr. tenor and effect, to secure therightsof die Bank (as hereinafter defined) to the satisfaction
ofthe Bank Obligations (as hereinafter defined), and for payment of the purchase price of Bonds
as provided herein, and to secure die performance and observance by tbe City of aU the covenants
expressed or impUed herein, in die Bonds, in the Credit Agreement (as herefriafler defined), docs
hereby assign and grant a securify ihteiest in and to the following to the Trustee, and its
successors in trust and assigns forever, for the securing ofthe perfonnance ofthe obligations of
the City hereinafter set foith (the "Trust Estate"):
GRANTING CLAUSE FIRST
AU moneys and securitiesfromtime to time held by the Trustee under the tenns
of this Indenture, except for moneys deposited with or paid to the Tmstee and held in trust
hereunder for the redemption of Bonds, notice of the redemption of which has been duly given;
and
GRANTING CLAUSE SECOND
Any and aU odier property,rightsand interests of evety kind and naturefromtime
to time hereafter by defivety or by writing of any kind granted, bargained, sold, alienated,
demised, released, conveyed, assigned, transferred, mortgaged, pledged, hypothecated or
otherwise subjected hereto, as and for additional security hereunder by the City or by any other
person on its behalf or with its written consent to the Trustee, and the Tmstee is hereby authorized
to receive any and aU such propcity at any and all times and lo hold and apply the same subject
to the tenns hereof;
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD aU and smgular the Tmst Estate, whetiier now owned
or hereafter acqufred, unto the Tnistee and its successors in said trust and assigns forever;
IN TRUST, NEVERTHELESS, iipon the terms and tmsts herem set forth for the
equal and proportionate benefit, securify and protection of all present and future registered owners
of die Bonds and the Bank (to. die extent of unsatisfied Bank Obligations), without privUege,
priority or distinction as to the lien or otherwise of any of the foregoing over any other of the
foregoing, except to the extent herein or in the Indenture otherwise specificaUy provided;
PROVIDED, HOWEVER, dial if the City, its successors or assigns shall well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid, the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds, and
shaU well and truly satisfy, or cause to be satisfied, the Bank Obligations, at the times and in the
maimer set forth therein according to the tme intent and meaning thereof, and shall cause the
payments to be made on the Bonds, the Bank Obligations asrequfredherein, or shall provide, as
permitted hereby, for the payinent thereof, and shall well andffulycause to be kept, performed
and observed all of its covenants and conditions pursuant to the terms of this Indenture and the
Credit Agreemem and shall pay or cause to be paid to die Trustee and the Bank all sums of money

 83292

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

^/1/2002

due or to become due to them in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof and of the
Credit Agreement, then upon the fmal payment thereof this Indenture and therightshereby
granted shaU cease, determine and be void; otherwise this Indenture shaU remain m fiiU foice and
effect.
THIS INDENTURE FURTHER WTTNESSErH, and U is expressly declared, that
all Bonds issued and secured hereunder are to be issued, audienticated and delivered, and aU said
property,rightsand imerests and any other amounts hereby assigned and pledged are to be dealt
with and disposed of, under, upon and subject to the terms, conditions, stipulations, covenants,
agreements, tmsts, uses and purposes as herein expressed, and tbe City has agreed and
covenanted, and does hereby agree and covenant, with the Tnistee, therespectiveowners ofthe
Bonds and the Bank as foUow^:

ARTICLE I
Definitions
Section 1.01. Dellnitipns. AU capitalized terms used herein unless otherwise
defined shaU have the same meaning as used in Article I of the Indenture. In addition, the
foUowing words and phrases shaU have the foUowing meanings for puiposes of this Indenture:
"Adjustable Long Mode" means any Adjustment Period during which the Rate
Determination Date and Rate Change Date, for each Rate Period therem (which shaU have a
duration of 367 days or more and less than or equal to the remaining term of the Bonds) shall be
designated by the Remarketing Agent upon the request ofthe Cify pursuant to Section4.01 hereof,
and during which the Bonds which bear imerest during such Adjustment Period bear interest at
the Adjustable Long Rale.
"Adjustable Long Rate" means, for each Rate Period within an Adjustable Long
Mode applicable to a Bond, a fixed per annum interest rate borne by such Bond estabfished
pursuant to Section 2.02(e), 4.01(c) or 4.02(b) hereof equal to the lowest interest rate which, in
the judgment ofthe Remarketing Agent, would enable such Bond to beremarketedat the principal
amount thereof, plus accrued interest thereon, if any, on the Rale Change Date for such Rate
Period.
"Adjustment Date" means (a) the Date of Issuance, (b) any date which is the first
day of an Adjustment Period designated in the manner set forth in Section 4.01 heieof, (c) any
Substitute Adjustment Dale designated in the manner set forth in Section 4.02 hereof, and (d) any
proposed Fixed Rate Conversion Date designated in the manner set forth in Section 4.03 hereof.
"Adjustment Period" means, with respect to each Bond, each period commencing
on an Adjustment Date for such Bond to and including the day immediately preceding the
immediately succeeding Adjustment Date for such Bond (or the Mamrity Date thereof), during
which period such Bond shall operate in one type of Interest Mode.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83293

"Alternate Bank Rate" means, with respect to any Bank Bond, such interest rate
or sequence ofrates(which may be stated as a formula and may be determined by reference to
a specified index or indices) as is specified in the Substimte Credit Agreement or Substitute Letter
of Credit then in effect pursuant to which such Bank Bond was pmchased. and which has been
approved in writing by the Cify in accordance with the Indenture.
"Authorized Denomination" means, prior to the Fixed Rate Conversion Date with
respect to a particular Bond. $100,000 and any multiple of $5,000 in excess thereof, and, after
the Fixed Rate Conversion Date withrespectto a particular Bond, $5,000 and any integral
multiple theieof.
"Bank" means the Initial Bank for the period during which the initial Letter of
Credit and Initial Credit Agreement are in effea or any Bank Bontls .are outstanding, and
thereafter shaU mean the Substimte Bank then obligated under the Substitute Letter of Credit at
Ihe time in effect.
. "Bank Approval" means the written appioval of the Bank, which approval wiU not
be unreasonably widiheld.
"Bank Bonds" means Tendered Bonds pmchased with moneys drawn under the
Letter of Credit puisuant to Section 3.09(c) hereof, which are owned by the Bank or its pennitted
assigns in accordance with the Credit Agreement or the Custody Agreement, if any, uniU such
Bonds are remarketed by the Remarketing Agent pursuant to the Remaiketing Agreement or such
Bonds lose thefr characterization as Bank Bonds pursuant to the Credit Agreement.
"Bank Obligations" means the Cify's obligations under the Credit Agreement.
'Bank Rate" means (a) when the Initial Letter of Credit is in effea under the Initial
Credk Agreement, ihe Bank Rate as defined in the Initial Credit Agreemeni, and (b) when any
Substimte Letter of Credit is m effect, die then current Alternate Bank Rate. The foregoing
notwithstanding, at no time shaU ihe Bank Rate be higher than the Maximum Interest Rate.
"Bank Variable Rate" means sucb portion of the then appUcable Bank Rate as is
determined by the Remaiketing Agent to equal dierateof interest Bank Bonds bearing such Bank
Rate would have home had they not been tendered and purchased by die Bank under the Credit
Agreement.
"BMA Mum'cipal Index" means The Bond Market Association Municipal Swap
Index as of the most lecenl date for which such mdex was published or such other weekly, highgrade index comprised of seven-day. tax-exempt variable rate demand noies produced by
Municipal Market Data, Inc. or its successor, or as otherwise designated by The Bond Market
Association; provided, however, that if such index is no longer produced by Municipal Market
Data, Inc. or its successor, then "BMA Municipal Index" means such other reasonably
comparable index selected by the City.

 83294

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Bondholder." "holder." "owner of the Bonds" or "registered owner" means the
Registered Owner of any Bond.
"Bond Purchase Date" has the meaning assigned to such term in the Credit
Agreement.
"Bond Purehase Fund" means tbe tmst fimd so designated which is created and
established pursuant to Section 5.02 hereof.
"Bond Register" means theregistrationbooks of the Cify kept by the Tnistee (in
its capacity as Bond Registrar) to evidence the registration and transfer of Bonds.
"Bond Registrar" means the Tmstee.
"Bonds" means the City of Chicago Variable Rate Bonds. Series
to be issued pursuant to Section 2.01 hereof.

aulhorized

"Bond Sale Date" has the meaning assigned to such tenn in the Credit Agreement:
"Business Day" means a day which is not (a) a Saturday. Sunday or legal holiday
on which banking instimtions in tbe State of Illinois, the State of New York or the state in which
the office of the Bank is. located are authorized by law to close, or (b) a day on which the New
•York Stock-Exchange is closed.
"Capitalized Interest Account" means the account of that name established in the
Proceeds Fund as described in Section 5.02 hereof.
"City" means the City of Chicago, a municipal coiporation and home mle unit of
local government, organized and existing under the Constimtion and laws of the State.
"Code" means ihc United States Intemal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
References to the Code and to Sections of the Code shall includerelevantfinal, temporary or
proposed regulations thereunder as in effectfromtimeto time and as appficable to obUgations
issued on the Date of Issuance.
"Costs of Issuance Account" means the account of that name established in the
Pioceeds Fund as described in Section 5.02 hereof.
"Credit Agreement" means the Initial Credit Agreement and any Substitute Credit
Agreement.
"Custody Agreement" means a custody agreemeni or a pledge and security
agreement (which may also be the Credit Agreement), if any, entered into by the Tmstee, as
custodian, and the Bank, and any and all amendments and supplements thereto, relating to Bank
Bonds.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83295

"DTC" means The Depositoty Tmst Company, New York, New York, or its
nominee, and its successors and assigns, or any other depository pcrfoiming simUar functions.
"Daily Mode" means any Adjustment Period during which Rate Determination
Dates and Rate Change Dates occur on each Business Day in Ihe manner set forth in
Section 2.02(b) hereof, and during which the Bonds which bear interest during such Adjustment
Period bear interest at the Daily Rate.
"Daily Rate" means, for each Rate Period within a DaUy Mode applicable to a
Bond, a fixed per annum interestrateborne by such Bond established pursuant to Section 2.02(a),
2.Q2(b), 4.01(c) or 4.02(b) hereof equal to the lowest interestratewhich, in the judgment of the
Remarketing Agent, would enable such Bond to be remarketed at the principal amount thereof,
plus accmed uiterest diereon, if any, on the Rate Change Date for such Rate Period.
"Date of Issuance" means the date of original issuance and delivety of the Bonds
hereunder.
"Debt Service Fund' means the fund of that name established and described in
Section 5.02 hereof.
"Defaulted Interest" means uiterest on any Bond which is payable but not duly paid
on tbe date due.
"Delivery Office" shaU mean the foUowing offices of the Remarketing Agent and
the Tmstee, respectively;
Remarketing Agent:

Attention:
Tmstee:

"Demand Date" means (i) with respea to any Bond during a DaUy Mode, the
Business Day on which the Trustee's Agent and the Remarketing Agent receive notice prior to
10:00 a.m., Chicago time, from the Registered Owner thereof demandmg to have such Bond (or
any portion thereof in an Authorized Denomination) purchased (or the succeeding Business Day
if such notice is received after 10:00 a.m., Chicagotime),all as provided in Section 3.01 hereof,
and (ii) with respect to any Bond during a Weekly Mode, die Business Day specified in the notice
received by die Trustee's Agent upon which the Registered Owner of such Bond intends to tender
such Bond (or any portion thereof in an Aulhorized Denomination) for purchase as provided in
Section 3.01 hereof, which Business Day shall be not less than seven calendar days after the date
such notice is received.

 83296

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Differential Interest Amount" means an amotmt equal to the excess of (a) interest
which has accmed and could actuaUy be paid on Bank Bonds at the Bank Rate up to but excluding
the Bond Sale Date, less (b) the interest accmed on such Bank Bonds at the Bank Variable Rate
received by the Bankfiromthe purchaser or purchaseis of such Bank Bonds on the Bond Sale Date
as part of the purchase price thereof.
"Eligible Moneys" means (a) moneys (i) paid or deposited by the City to or with
the Tnistee, (ii) continuously held inany fiind, account or subaccount established hereunder which
is subject to the Uen of the Indenture and in which no . other moneys which arc not Efigible
Moneys are held, and (iii).wbich have so been on deposit wiUi the Trustee for at least 91 days
firom their receipt by the Tmstee, during and prior to which period no Event of Bankmptcy shall
have occurred, together with investment earnings on such moneys; (b) moneys received by the
Tnistee pursuant to the Letter of Credit whicb are held in any fimd, account or subaccount
established hereunder in which no other moneys which are not Eligible Moneys are held, together
witb investment earnings on such moneys; (c) proceeds from theremarketingof any Bonds
pursuant to the provisions of the Indenture to any person other than the Cify; (d) proceeds firom
the issuance and sale ofrefundingbonds, together with the investment earnings on such proceeds,
if there is defivered to the Trustee at the time of issuance and sale .of suchrefundingbonds an
opinion of bankmptcy counsel acceptable to the Trustee and to eachratingagency then
maintaining aratingon the Bonds bearing interest at a Shon Rate or an Adjustable Long Rate to
the effea that the use of such proceeds and investinent earnings to pay the principal of, premium,
if any, or interest on the Bonds would not be avoidable as preferential payments under Section 547
(as mcorporated into Chapter 9) of die United States Bankruptcy Code should an Event of
Bankmptcy occur; and (e) moneys which are derived firom any other source, together with the
investment earnings on such moneys, if the Tmstee has received an opinion of bankmptcy counsel
acceptable to the Trustee and to eachratingagency then mair^raining aratingon the Bonds bearing
interest at a Short Rate or an Adjustable Long Rate to the effea that payment of such amounts to
Bondholders would not be avoidable as preferential payments under Section 547 (as incoiporated
into Chapter 9) of the United States Bankruptcy Code should an Event of Bankmptcy occur;
provided, however, that (a) through (e) notwithstanding, such proceeds, moneys or income shaU
not be deemed to be Eligible Moneys or available for payment of the Bonds if. among other
things, an injunction, restraining order or stay is in effect preventing such proceeds, moneys or
incomefrombeing appfied to make such payment. For the purposes of this definition, the tenn
"moneys" shaU include cash and any investment securities, including, without limiution. Federal
Obligations.
"Evem of Bankruptcy" means the fUing of a petition in bankmptcy or the
commencement of a proceeding under the United Slates Bankmptcy Code or any other applicable
law concerning insolvency,reorganizationor bankruptcy by or against the City as debtor, other
than any involuntary proceeding that has beenfinaUydismissed without entry of an order for relief
or similar order and as to which aU appeal periods have expired.
"Fixed Mode" means the Adjustment Period commencing on the Fixed Rate
Conversion Date for a Bond and ending on the Maturity Date thereof, as established pursuant to

 5/1 / 2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83297

Section 4.03 hereof, during which the Bonds which bear interest during such Adjustment Period
bear interest at tbe Fixed Rate.
"Fixed Rate" means, for the Fixed Mode applicable to a Bond, afixedper annum
interestratehome by such Bond established pursuant to Section 2.02(f) hereof equal to the lowest
interestratewhich, in the judgment of tbe Remarketing Agent, would enable such Bond to be
remaiketed at the principal amount thereof on the Fbced Rate Conversion Date for sucb Fixed
Mode.
"Fixed Rate Conversion" means the conveision of the interestrateto be home by
aU or any portion of the Bonds to a Fuced Rate pursuant to Sections 2.02 and 4.03 hereof.
"Fixed Rate Conversion Date" means an Adjustment Date for any Bond on which
it begins to bear interest at a Fixed Rate.
"Flexible Mode" means any Adjustment Period during which the Rate
Detennination Date and the Rate Change Date for each Rate Period therein (which shaU have a
duration which is not less than seven days nor more than 270 days) shaU occur on the first day
of such Rate Period which shall be designated by tbe Remarketing Agent pursuant to
Section 2.02(d), 4.01(c) or 4.02(b) hereof, and during which the Bonds which bear interest during
sucb Adjustment Period bear interest at tbe Flexible Rate.
"Flexible Rate" means, for each Rate Period within a Flexible Mode applicable to
a Bond, a fixed per annum interest rate borne by such .Bond established pursuant to
Section 2.02(d), 4.01(c) or 4.02(b) hereof equal to the lowest interestratewhich, in the judgment
of tbe Remarketing Agent, would enable such Bond to be remarketed at the principal amount
thereof on the Rate Change Date for such Rate Period.
"Indenture" means this Trust Indenture, dated as of
,
from the
Cify to the Tmstee, pursuant to which Bonds are authorized to be issued, and any amendments
and supplements ihereto. References to Articles and Sections of the Indenture shaU be deemed
toreferto Articles and Sections of the Indenture as amended.
"Immediate Notice" means notice by telephone, telex or telecopier to such address
as the addressee shall have directed in writing, promptiy followed by written notice byfirstclass
mail, postage prepaid; provided, however, that if any person required to give an Immediate Notice
shaU not have been provided with the necessaiy information as to the telephone, telex or telecopier
number of an addressee. Immediate Notice shall mean written notice by first class maU, postage
prepaid.
"Initial Bank" means
assigns, as provider of the imtial Letter of Credii.

_ , its successors and

 83298

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Initial Credit Agreement" means the Reimbursement Agreement, dated as of
2002. among the City and the Initial Bank, as it may be supplemented and
amended from time to time.
"Interest Coverage Rate" means therateused in die Letter of Credit to calculate
the maximum amoimt (as reduced and restated from time to time in accordance with the terms
thereof) whicb is available for the payment ofthe portion of the purchase price of Tendered Bonds
coiresponding to interest accmed on the Tendered Bonds, initiaUy percent per annum for
Bonds in the DaUy Mode and the Weekly Mode entitied to the benefit of the initial Letter of
Credit.
"Interest Mode" means a period of time relating to the frequency with which the
interestrateon the Bonds is detennined puisuant to Sections 2.01 and 2.02 heieof. An Interest
Mode may be a DaUy Mode, a Weekly Mode, a Flexible Mode, an Adjustable Long Mode or a
Fixed Mode.
"Interest Payment Date" means (a) for each Bond, each Adjustment Date
(including, without limitation, a proposed Fuced Rate Conveision Date) therefor, <b) for any Bond
in a Daily Mode,, thefirstBusiness Day of each calendar month, (c) for any Bond in the Weekly
Mode, the first Business Day of each calendar month, (d) for any Bond in an Adjustable Long
Mode, tbe first day of the sixth calendar month following-the month in which the applicable Rate
Period commences, the first day of each sixth month thereafter and each Rate Change Date
therefor, (e) for any Bond in a Flexible Mode, each Rate Change Date therefor, (f) for any Bond
. in a Fixed Mode, each January 1 and July 1, commencuig as provided in Section 4.03 hereof,
(g) for any Bank Bond, such dates as are specified in the Credit Agreement, and (h) for each
Bond, the Maturify Date thereof; provided that, except with respea to Interest Payment Dates
withrespeato remarketed Bank Bonds under (g). in no event shaU more than one Interest
Payment Date for the Bonds occur in any one calendar month (and the City shall not undertake
any modification of any Interest Mode applicable to the Bonds which might cause such to result).
"Letter of Credh" means the obligation of the Bank to provide fiinds for the
purpose of purchasing Tendered Bonds, which Letter of Credit may be in the form of a line of
credit, bond purchase agreement or letter of credit.
"Letter ofCredit Account" means the account of that name established in the Debt
Service Fund as described in Section 5.02 hereof.
"Letter of Credit Cancellation Date" has the meaning attributed to it in
Section 6.02(b) hereof.
"Mamriry Date" means January 1, 2017.
"Maximum Interest Rate" means [18] percent per annum.

 5/1/2002

R E P O R T S O F COMMITTEES

83299

"Mocxlv's" means Moody's Investors Service, Inc.. a corporation organized and
existing under the laws of the State of Delaware, its successors and. assigns, and, if such
coiporation shaU be dissolved or liquidated or shaU no longer perform the fimctions of a securities
rating agenty, "Mcxxly's" shaU be deemed to refer to any other nationaUy recognized securities
rating agency designated by the City by notice to the Tmstec.
"Opim'on of Bond Counsel" means a written opinion of Bond Counsel in fonn and
substance acceptable to the Cify, the Baiik and the Tmstee, which opinion may be based on a
ruling or rulings of the Internal Revenue Service.
"Ordinance" means the oidinance duly adopted and approved by the City CouncU
of the City on
, 2002 which authorizes the issuance and sale of the Bonds aind the
execution and defivety of this Indenture.
"Participant." when used with respect to any Securuies Depositoty, means any
participant of such Securities Depositoty.
"Paying Agent" means any Paying Agent designated by the Tnistee puisuant to
Section 10.06 hereof, and any successor thereto.
"Principal and Interest Account" means the account of that name established in the
Debt Service Fund as described in Section 5.02 hereof.
"Princinal and Interest Account Requirement" means (a) on the third Business Day
iinmediately preceding each Interest Payment Date for as long as any Bonds bear interest at a Short
Rate, an amount equal to (i) the interest coming due on such Bonds on such Interest Payment Date,
and to the extent there is a Rate Change Date between such third Business Day and such Interest
Payment Date, such interest amounl shaU include mterest on the Outstanding principal amount of
Bonds at the Interest Coverage Rate (if a Letter of Credit is in effect) or the Maximum Interest Rale
(if there is no Letter ofCredit in effect) for the number of daysfi^omsuch Rate Change Date to the
Interest Payment Date, plus (ii) on the third Business Day prior to each Januaty 1, commenciug .
Januaty 1,
, the principal installment coming due on such Bonds on each such Januaty 1
(including any mandatotyredemptionof the Bonds asrequiredby Secfion 3.11 hereof), and (b)
during such lime as any Bonds bear interest at a Fixed Rate or Adjustable Long Rate, an amount,
equal to the total principal installment and interest due on such Bonds as of each January 1 and July
1, which amount shaU be deposited in the Principal and Interest Account three Business Days prior
to such Januaiy 1 and July 1.
"Prcx:e€ds Fund" means the fund of that name established and described in Section
5.02 heieof.
"Project Account" means the account of that name established in the Proceeds Fund
as described in Section 5.02 hereof.

 83300

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Pro^m Fee Account" means the account of that name established in the Proceeds
Fund as described in Section 5.02 hereof.
"Program Fees" means:
(a)
the fees, expenses and other charges payable to eachfiduciaty.including
the...Tiustec, the Trustee's Agent and any Paying Agent, pursuant to the provisions of this
Indenture;
(b)
the fees, expenses and other charges payable hereunder or under Uie
Remarketing Agreement to the Remarketing Agent;
(c)
tbe fees, e;q>enses and other charges (constituting Bank Obligations) payable
heieunder or under the Credit Agreement to the Bank; and
(D)
any other fees, expenses and other charges of a simUar naure payable by
the Cify to any person heieunder or otherwise with respect to the Bonds.
"Rate Chanpe Date" means for each Rate Period (a) during any DaUy Mode, each
Busmess Day. (b) during any Weekly Mode, Wednesday or such other day of tbe week designated
as such by the Remarketing Agentfi^omtime to time, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 2.02(c)(u) hereof, (c) during any Adjustable Long Mode, the Busmess Day(s) specified
in the notice deUvered to the Tmstee in accordance widi Section 4.01(b) or 4.02(b) hereof,
(d) during any Flexible Mode, the Business Day(s) specified in the notice delivered to the Trustee
in accordance with Section 2.02(d), 4.01(c) or 4.02(b) hereof, and (e) each Adjusnnent Date.
"Rate Determination Date" means for (a)each Rate Period during any DaUy Mode,
the Rate" Change Date for such Rate Period, (b) each Rate Period during any Weekly Mode,
Tuesday or such other day of the week designated as such by the Remarketing Agent from time
to time, in accordance with die provisions of Section 2.Q2(c)(ii) hereof, next precedmg the Rate
Change Date for such Rate Period (unless such day is not a Busmess Day, in which case the Rale
Determination Date shall be the iinmediately preceding Business Day), (c) each Rate Period
during any Adjustable Long Mode, the Business Day(s) specified in the nonce delivered to the
Trustee in accordance with Section 4.01(b) or Section 4.02(b) hereof, which Business Day(s) shaU
not be less than one calendar day or more than 30 calendar days prior to the first day of such Rate
Period, (d) each Rate Period during any Flexible Mode, the Rate Change Date for such Rate
Period specified in the notice delivered to the Trustee in accordance with Section 2.02(d),
4.01(c) or 4.02(b) hereof, (e) Uie Rate Period during a Fixed Mode, die date of the firm
underwriting or purchase contractrefenedto in Section 4.03 hereof, (0 the Rate Period foUowing
a proposed Fixed Rate Conversion Date in the event of a faded conversion, such proposed Fixed
Rate Conversion Date, and (g) the Rate Period foUowLng a failed Interest Mode conversion
pursuant to Seciion 4.01(e), the proposed Adjustment Date.
"Rate Period" means, withrespeato each Bond, each period commencing on a
Rate Change Date for such Bond to and including the day iinmediately precedmg the immediately

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83301

succeeding Rate Change Date for such Bond (or the Maturify Date or date of redemption thereof),
during which period such Bond shall bear interest at one specific interest rate.
"Record Date" means (a) with respect to any Bond during a DaUy Mode, the
Business Day immediately preceding each Interest Payment Date for such Bond, (b) with respect
to any Bond during a Flexible Mode or Weekly Mcxle, the Business Day immediately preceding
each Interest Payinent Date for sucb Bond, (c) with respect to any Bond during an Adjusuble
Long Mode, the fifteenth calendar day iinmediately preceding each Interest Payment Date
(whether or not a Business Day) for such Bond, and (d) with respea to any Bond during a Fixed
Mode, December 15 and June 15 (whether or not a Business Day); provided, however, that if the
Fixed Rate Conversion Date shaU occur on or after December 15 but prior to Januaty 1, or on
or after June 15 but prior to July 1, the Record Date shaU be the Fixed Rate Conversion Date.
"Registered Owner" or "Ovmej" means the person or persons in whose name or
names a Bond shall beregisteredin the Bond Register.
"Remaiketing Apent" means the placement or remarketing agent at thetimeserving
as such undei the Remarketing Agreement and designated by the City as the Remarketing Agent
for purposes of the Indenture. The initial Remarketing Agent is
;
,
and its successors and assigns in such capacity.
"Remarketing Agreement" means the Remarketing Agreement dated as of
, 2002 between the City and the Remarketing Agent, as the same may be amended.
supplemented or assigned fromtimeto time, or any smular agreement as may be substituted
therefor.
"Securities Depository" means DTC and any other securities depositoty registered
as a clearing agenty with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to Section 17A of
the Securities Exchange Aa of 1934, as amended, and appointed as the securities depositoty for
the Bonds. .
.
"Short Mode" means a Flexible Mode, a Daily Mode or a Weekly Mode.
"Short Rate" means a Flexible Rate, a Daily Rate or a Weekly Rate.
"Special Record Date" means tbe date fixed by the. Trustee pursuant to
Section 2.02(g) hereof for the payment of Defaulted Interest.
"S&P" means Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, a division of McGraw-HiU,
Inc., its successors and assigns, and, if S&P shall be dissolved or liquidated or shaU no longer
perform the functions of a securifiesratingagency, "S&P" shall be deemed lo refer to any other
nationallyrecognizedsecurities rating agency designated by the City by notice to the Tmstee.
"Stale" means the State of Ulinois.

 83302

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

"Stated Termination Date" means the stated date upon which the Leder of Credit
by its term expires, as the same may be extendedfiomtime to lime and, wilh respea to the Initial
Letter of Credit means the Expiration Date as defined therein.
"Substimte Adjustment Date" means (i) any Business Day duriiig any Adjustment
Period for Bank Bonds, and (ii) any Business Day for any Bonds in an Adjustable Long Mode on
which sucb Bonds can be optionaUy redeemed at a price of par plus accmed interest as set forth
in Section 3.11(a)(ii) hereof, in each case designated by the Cify in accordance with Section 4.02
hereof as the first day of a new Adjustment Period.
"Substitute Bank" means one or more commercial banks, trust companies or
financial instimtions selected by the Cify that are obUgated under any Substitute Letter of Credit.
"Substimte Credit Agreement" means any agreemem (other than the Initial Credit
Agreement) between the Cify and any Substimte Bank as it mayfromtime to time be amended
or supplemented, pursuant to which a Substimte Letter of Credit shaU be in effect.
"Substimte Lener of Credit" means a Letter of Credit provided by a Substimte
Bank other than the Bank providing the Letter of Credit on or prior to the Substitution Date;
provided, however, that none of the following shaU be deemed a Substimte Letter of Credit: a
change in the Credit Agreement pursuant to which the Letter of Credit is issued; a change in the
number of days of interest or interestratecovered by the Letter of Credit; and a renewal of the
tenn of the existing Letter of Credit.
"Substitution Date" means the day on which a Substimte Lener of Credit becomes
effective.
"Tendered Bonds" means Bonds tendered or deemed tendered for purchase
pursuant to Section 3.01, 3.02, 3.03, 3.04. 3.05 or 3.06 hereof.
"TrustEstaie" means the property conveyed to the Trustee pursuant to the Granting
Clauses hereof.
"Tmstee" means [Name ofTrustee], a national banking association organized and
existing under the laws ofthe United States of America, and its successors and any entify resulting
from or surviving any consofidafion or merger to which it or its successor may be a party, and
any successor Trustee at the time serving as successor trustee hereunder.
"Tmstee's Agent" means any agent designated as Tmsiee's Agent by the Trustee
and at the time serving in dial capacity. Any agent so designated by the Tmstee shall execute a
written agreement with the Tnistee assuming aU obligations of the Trustee hereunder wilh respect
to those duties of the Trustee such agent agrees to perform on behalf of the Tmstee.
"Weekly Mode" means an Interest Mode during which the rate of interest home
by the Bonds is determined on a weekly basis as set forth in Section 2.02(c) hereof.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83303

"Weekly Rale" means, for each Rate Period during any Weekly Mode, the rate of
interest esublished pursuant to Section 2.02(c) hereof equal to the lowest interestratewhich, in
the judgment of the Remarketing Agent, would enable such Bond to be remarketed at the principal
amount thereof, plus accmed interest thereon, if any. on. the Rate Change Date for such Rate
Period.

ARTICLE U
The Bonds
Section 2.01. Authority for and Issuance of Bonds, (a) No Bonds may be issued
under the provisions of dus Indenture except in accordance with this Article. The Bonds are bemg
issued to provide fimds to provide interimfinancingfor capital projects of the City, for the short
term financing of the working capital needs of the City, and to pay Costs of Issuance of the
Bonds.' Except as provided in Section 2.07 hereof, the total principal ainount of Bonds that may
be issued and be outstanding heieunder is expressly limited to $200,000,000 less the principal
amount of other Authorized Debt (as defmed in the Ordinance) then issued and outstanding under
the Ordinance.
(b)
TheBondsshaUbedesignated "City of Chicago VariableRateBonds, Series
." The Bonds shall be issuable as fiilly registered bonds, without coupons, in Authorized
Denomination, substantiaUy in the form atuched as Exhibit A hereto. Unless the City shall
otherwise duect, the Bonds shall be lettered and numbered from R-1 and upwards. The Bonds,
as initially issued, shall be dated the Date of Issuance and shall mamre, subject to prior
reden^tion as provided in Article ID hereof and further subject to the designation of additional
mamrity dates in connection with a Fixed Rate Conversion Date, on the Maturify Date.
(c)
Each Bond authenticated prior to the fust Interest Payment Date thereon
shall bear interestfromthe Date oflssuance and thereafter interest shall accme as set forth in the
next paragraph except that if, as shown by die records of the Trustee, interest on such Bond shall
be in default, any Bond issued in exchange for or upon the registration of transfer of such Bond
shall bear interest from the date to which interest has been paid in full on such Bond or, if no
ihterest has been paid on such Bond, the Date of Issuance. Each Bond shall bear interest on
overdue principal and, to the extent pennitted by law, on overdue premium, if any. and interest
at therateborne by such Bond on the date on which such principal, premium or interest came due
and payable.
(d)
Interest on Bonds in a Daily Mode or Weekly Mode shall be payable on
each Interest Payment Date for the period from the later of (i) the first Business Day of each
calendar month, or (ii) the Adjustment Date for such Daily Mode or Weekly Mode to, but not
including, the earlier of (a) the first Business Day of the next calendar mondi, or (b) the
Adjustment Date for the Interest Mode which succeeds such Daily Mode or Weekly Mode, as the
case may be. Interest on Bonds m a Flexible Mode shall be payable on each Interest Payment
Date for the period from die Rate Change Date for such Bonds to, but noi including, the next

 83304

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

succeeding Rate Change Date. Interest on Bonds in an Adjusuble Long Mode shaU be payable
on each Interest Payment Date for the period to, but not including, such Interest Payment Dale
from the later of (i) the Rate Change Date for such Bonds, or. (ii) the preceding Interest Payment
Date occurring during the Rate Period to which interest has been paid. Interest on Bonds which
are Bank Bonds shaU be payable on each Interest Payment Date for the period to, but not
including, sucb Interest Payinent Datefromthe preceding Interest Payment Date to which interest
has been paid. Interest on Bonds in a Fixed Mode shall be payable on each Interest Payment Date
for the period from the Fixed Rate Conversion Date to, but not iucluding, the next succeeding
Januaty 1 or July 1, andfromeach succeeding Januaty 1 or July 1, as the case may be, to, but
not including, tbe next succeeding Januaty 1 or July 1. The foregoing notwithstanding, no interest
shaU accme on any Bonds prior to the Date oflssuance or after the Maturify Date thereof, after
the redemption or mandatoiy or optional purchase date for such Bond (provided the redemption
or purchase price is paid or provided for in accordance with the provisions of the Indenture), or
after the date to which such Bond is accelerated and paid.
(e)
The principal and purchase price of, premium, if any, and interest on the
Bonds shaU be payable in any coin or currency of the United Sutes of America which, at the
respective dates of payment thereof, is legal tender for the payment of pubUc and private debts.
(f)
The principal of and premium, if any. on Bonds bearing interest at a Bank
Rate, a Short Rate or an Adjustable Long. Rate shaU be payable at the principal coiporate tmst
office of the Trastee, upon presenution and surrender of such Bonds. The principal of and
premium, if any, on Bonds bearing, interest at a Fixed Rate shaU be payable at the principal
coiporate tnisi office of the Tmstee or, at the option of the Registered Owners, at the principal
coiporate trust office of any Paying Agem named in such Bonds, upon presenution and surrender
of such Bonds. Any payment of the purchase price of a Tendered Bond shaU be payable at the
principal coiporate trust office of the Trustee's Agent (or at such other office as inay be
designated by the Trustee), upon presenution and surrender of such Tendered Bond, as provided
in Section 3.07 hereof.
(g)
Payment of interest on Bonds bearing ioterest at a DaUy Rate, a Weekly
Rate, an Adjusuble Long Rate or a Fuced Rate shaU be paid by check maUed on the Interest
Payment Date to the person appearing on the Bond Register as the Registered Owneis thereof as
of ihe close of business of the Trustee on tbe Recoid Date at the addresses of such Registered
Owners as they appear on the Bond Register, or at such other addresses as are fiimished to the
Trustee in writing by the Registered Owners not later than the Retard Date. Payment of interest
on Bonds bearing interest at a Flexible Rate shall be madetothe person appearing on the Bond
Register as the Registered Owner thereof as of the close of business of the Trustee on the Record
Date, upon presenution and sunender of such Bond at the principal corporate nrust office of the
Trustee on the applicable Interest Payment Date. Payment of interest on any Bond shall be made
to the Registered Owner of $1,000,000 or more in aggregate principal amount of Bonds as of the
close of business of the Trustee on the Record Date for a particular Interest Payment Date by wire
transfer to such Registered Owner on such Interest Payment Date upon wrinen noficefromsuch
Registered Owner conuining the wire transfer address within the United Sutes to which such
Registered Owner wishes to have such'wire directed, which written notice is received not later

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83305

than the Business Day next pieceding the Record Date; provided that such wire transfer shaU only
be made for Bonds bearing interest at a Flexible Rate upon presenution and surrender of such
Bonds at the principal coiporate mist office of the Trustee on the applicable Interest Paymem
Date. Payment of interest on.Bank Bonds shaU be made to the Bank by wire transfer on each
Interest Payment Date at the wire transfer address specified in the Credit Agreement (or such
other wire transfer address as is specified by the Bank in writingfromtime to time).
Section 2.02. Interest on Bonds, (a) General. The Bonds shall bear interest from
and including the Date oflssuance untU payinent of the principal or redemption price thereof shaU
have been made or provided for in accoidance with the provisions hereof, whether at the Maturify
Date, upon redemption or acceleration, or otherwise. Interest accmed on the Bonds during each
Rate Period shall be paid in arrears on each Interest Payment Date. Interest on the Bonds shaU
be computed (i) during any Short Mode upon the basis of a 365- or 366-day year, as applicable,
for the number of days actuaUy elapsed, (u) during any Adjusuble Long Mcxic.or during a Fixed
Mode, upon the basis of a 360-<iay year consisting of iweive.30-day inonths, and (iii) with respect
to Bank Bonds, upon the basis of a 360^y year and the actual number of days elapsed..
Notwithstanding anything to the contraty herein, the Bonds shall initiaUy bear interest for the
periodfromthe Closing Date to tbe next Business Day at the interestrateper anniim of four
percent (the "Initial Rate"). The Bonds shall continue to bear interest at a DaUy Rate until and
unless any portion thereof is converted to a different Interest Mode as provided in Section 4.01,
4.02 or 4.03 hereof. Each Bank Bond shaU bear interest at the Bank Rate. At no time shaU the
Bonds (including Bank Bonds) bear interest at aratehigher than the Maximumi Interest Rate and
at no time shaU Bonds entided to the benefit of the Letter of Credit bear interest at a rate higher
than tbe Interest Coverage Rate. No Rate Period shaU be esublished during an Adjustable Long
Mode or a Flexible Mode which extends beyond the' Business Day preceding the Suted
Termination Date.
(b)
Daily Mode. For each Rate Period during any DaUy Mode. Bonds m such
Interest Mode shaU bear interest beginning on the Rate Change Date at the Daily Rate determined
on the Rate Detennination Date in the foUowing manner for each such Rate Period. No later than
8:30 a.m., Chicago time, on die Rate Detennination Date for each such Rate Period, the
Remarketing Agent wiU determine, and isrequiredto give telephonic notice (confinned by
telecopy) to the Trustee of, the DaUy Rate. Except on an Adjustment Date, in the event that the
DaUy Rate is not determined by the Remarketing Agent, therateof interest borne by the Bonds
bearing interest at a DaUy Rate shall be equal to die BMA Municipal Index until the Remarketing
Agem next determines the DaUy Rate as required hereunder.
(c)

Weekly. Mode.

(i)
For each Rate Period during any Weekly Mode, Bonds in such Interest
Mode shall bear interest beginning on the Rate Change Date al the Weekly Rate
determined on the Rate Determination Date in the following manner for each such Rate
Period. No later than 3:00 p.m., Chicago lime, on the Rate Determination Date for each
such Rate Period, the Remarketing Agent will determine the Weekly Rate and will give
telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the Tmsiee of the Weekly Rate by 1:00 p.m.,

 83306

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Chicago time, on the following Rate Change Dale. Except on an Adjustment Date, in the
event that the Weekly Rate is not detennined by the Remarketing Agent on a Rate
Detenmnation Date, the raie of interest home by die Bonds bearing intaest at a Weekly
Rate shaU be equal to the BMA Municipal Index until the Remarketing Agent next
determines the Weekly Rate as required hereunder.
(u)
If at any time the Remarketing Agent shaU determine that, in its judgment,
tbe scheduled Rate Detennination Dates or Rate Change Dates during a Weekly Mode
have become inappropriate (taking into account general market practice withrespectto
periodic adjustment of rates on instniments comparabletothe Bonds bearing interest at the
Weekly Rate, whether based upon the time of compOation or reporting of any interest rate
or financial index or indicator or otherwise), die Remarketing • Agent may, after
consultation with the Cify, designate new scheduled Rate Detennination Dates and/or Rate
Change Dates, toremamin effect until another ledeteimination of scheduled Rate
Determination Dates or Rate Change Dates in accordance with this subparagraph. The
Remarketing Agent shaU give wrinen notice of any change in scheduled Rate
Detennination Dates and/or Rate Change Dates during a Weekly Mode to the City, the
Trustee, the Trustee's Agent and tbe Bank, and such change shaU become effective on the
first scheduled Rate Determination Date or Rale Change Date, as the case may be, so
designated occnirring not less than 14 days following the giving of such notice. Promptiy
upon receipt of such notice, the Tmstee shaU notify or cause the Remarketing Agent to
notify each affected Bondholder of such cbange in writing.
(d)

Flexible Mode.

(i)
For each Rale Period during any Flexible Mode, each Bond which wiU bear
interest at a Flexible Rate for such Rate Period shaU bear interest beginning on the Rate
Change Date at the Flexible Rate detennined on the Rate Detennination Date m the
foUowing manner for each such Rate Period. No later than 11:00 a.m., Chicago time, on
the Rate Determination Dale for a Bond bearing inteiest at the Flexible Rate, the
Remarketing Agent will determine, and is required to give telephonic notice (confirmed
by telecopy) to die Trustee of, (a) the duration of the Rate Period for sucb Bond by
spea"fying die succeeding Rate Change Date (which shaU also be the succeeding Rate
Determination Dale) for such Bond whicb Rate Change Date shaU be no later than the
Business Day priortothe Suted Termination Date, if a Letter of Ciedit is lequiredtobe
in place, and (b) the Flexible Rate applicable to such Bonds bearing interest at the Flexible
Rale during such Rate Pericxl. The last day of such Rate Period must be a Business Day
and the day next succeeding such Business Day must also be a Business Day. Except on
an Adjustment Date, in the event that the Flexible Rate for any Bond is not detennined by
the Remarketiiig Agent on any Rate Determination Date, such Bond shall bear interest at

a Flexible Rate equal to the BMA Municipal Index for a Rate Period of the shortest
possible duration until the Remarketing Agent next detennines the Flexible Rate, as
required hereunder.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83307

(u)
The Remarketing Agent shaU determine the duration of Rate Periods during
a Flexible Mode as wUl, in the judgment of the Remarketing Agent, result in the lowest
aggregate cost being payable by the Cify withrespeato the Bonds bearing interest at
Flexible Rales, taking into account interest and any other determinable fees and expenses.
The Remarketing Agent may esublish different Rate Periods on the same Rate Change
Date for Bonds in tbe Flexible Mode in order to achieve an average duration of Rate
Periods, that, in the judgment of the Remarketing Agent, is most likely to achieve the
lowest total aggregate cost being payable by the Cify with respect to such Bonds, taking
into account interest and any other determinable fees and expenses. The. Remarketing
Agent's detennination sbaU be based upon tbe market for, and therelativeyields of, the
Bonds and other securities that bear interest at a variablerateor at fixedratesthat, in the
judgment of the Remarketing Agent, are otherwise comparable to tbe Bonds, or any faa
or circumstancerelatingtothe Bonds, affecting the market for the Bonds or affecting such
other comparable securities in a manner that, in the judgment of the Remarketing Agent,
wiU affea the market for the Bonds. The Remarketing. Agent's deteiminatioh shall be
conclusive and binding upon aU parties. Except on an Adjustment Date, in the event that
the Rate Period for any Bond in a Flexible Mode is not detennined by the Remarketing
Agent as provided in this clause, the Rate Period for such Bond shaU be a Rate Period of
the shortest possible duration.
(e)

Adjusuble Long Mode.

(i)
For each Rate Period during any Adjusuble Long Mode each Bond which
wiU bear interest at an Adjustable Long Rate for such Rate Period shall bear interest
beginning on the Rate Change Date at the Adjusuble Long Rate detennined on the Rate
Detennination Date in the following manner for such Rate Period.. No later than 11:00
a.m., Chicago time, on die Rate Detennination Date for each Rate Period during an
Adjusuble Long Mode applicable to a specific Bond. , the Remarketing Agent wUl
determine a fixed per annum interestrateto be borne by such Bond for such Rate Pericxl
and is required to give telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the Tmstee of tbe
Adjustable Long Rate. In the. event that the Adjusuble Long Rate for any Bond is not
deteimined by the Remarketing Agent for the initial Rate Period, therateof interest borne
by such Bonds shall be daeimined pursuant to Section 4.01(e) hereof. Except on an
Adjustment Date, if the Remarketing Agent shaU fail to deteimine an Adjusuble Long
Rate on a Rate Determination Date for a Rale Pericxl within an Adjustable Long Mcxle,
the Bonds shaU automatically convert to a Rate Period of 367 days and shaU bear interest
at an Adjusuble Long Rate equaltothe Bond Buyer One-Year Note Index as most recendy
published in The Bond Buyer prior to the Adjustment Date.
(ii)

The Remarketing Agent, upon the request of the City, shall determine the

duration of Rale Pericxls during an Adjusuble Long Mcxle as wiU, in the judgment of the
Remarketing Agent, result in the lowest aggregate cx>st being payable by the City with
respect to the Bonds bearing interest at Adjustable Long Rates, taking into account interest
and any other determinable fees and expenses. The Remarketing Agenl may esublish
different Rate Periods on the same Rale Change Date for Bonds in an Adjusuble Long

 83308

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

.

5/1/2002

Mcxle in order to achieve an average duration of Rate Periods that, in the judgment of the
Remarketing Agent, is most lU^ely to achieve the lowesttotalaggregate cost being payable
by the City with respect to such Bonds,, taking into account interest and any other
deteiminable fees and expenses. The Remaiketing Agent's determination wiU be based
upon the market for and the relative yields of the Bonds and other securities that bear
interest at a variablerateor atfixedratesthat, in the judgment of the Remaiketing Agent,
are otherwise comparable to the Bonds, or any faa or circumstancerelatingto the Bonds,
affecting tbe market for the Bonds or affecting such other comparable securities in a
manner that, in the judgment of the Remarketing Agent, wUl affea the market for the
Bonds. The Remarketing Agent's determination wUl be conclusive and binding upon all
parties. Except on an Adjustment Date, in the event that the Rate Pericxl for any Bond in
an Adjusuble Long Mode is not detennined by tbe Remarketing Agent as pro'vided in tbis
clause (ii), the Rate Period for such Bond wUI be a 367-day Rate Period.
(f)
Fixed Rate. From and after the Fixed Rate Conversion Date for a Bond,
such Bond shaU bear interest at tbe Fuced Rate with respea thereto established as provided in
Section 4.03 hereof.
(g)
Etefaulted Interest. Defaulted Interest with respecttoany Bond shall cease
to be payable to the Registered Owner of such Bond on therelevantRecord Date, and shaU be
payable to the Registered Owner in whose name such Bond isregisteredat the close of business
of the Tnistee on the Special Record Date for the payment of such Defaulted Interest, which shall
be fixed, in the foUowing manner. The Cify shaU notify the Trustee in writing ofthe amount of
DefaiUted Interest proposed to be paid on each Bond and thedate ofthe proposed payment (which
date shall be such as wUl enable the Tmstee to comply with the next sentence hereof), and at the
same time the City shall deposit with the Trustee an amount of money equal to the aggrejgate
amount proposed to be paid in respect of such Defaulted Interest or shall make arrangements
satisfactoty to the Tmstee for such deposit prior to therfateof the proposed payment, such money
when deposited to be held in tmst for the benefit of the Bondholders entitied to such Defaulted
Interest as provided in this Section. FoUowing receipt of such fimds. the Tmstee shaUfixa
Special Record Date for the payment of such Defaulted Interest which shaU be not more than 15
nor less than ten days prior to the date of the proposed payment and not less than ten days after
the receipt by the Tnistee of the notice of the proposed payment. The Trustee' shaU prompdy
notify the City of such Special Recoid Date and, in the name and at the expense of the City shaU
cause notice of the proposed payment of such Defaulted Interest and the Special Record Date
therefor to be maUed, first class posuge piepaid, to each Registered Owner of a Bond at the
address of such Registered Owner as it appears on tbe Bond Register not less than ten days prior
to such Special Record Dale. Such Defaulted Interest shaU be paid to the Registered Owners in
whose names the Bonds on which such Defaulted Interest is to be paid are registered on such
.'ipecial Record Date.
(h)
Information for Bondholders. The Tnistee agrees to provide to any
Bondholder, upon the wrinen lequesi of such Bondholder, information regarding Ihe Adjusnneni
periods. Rate Periods, Interest Payment Dates, optional redemption provisions and interest rate
orratesapplicable to such Bondholder's Bonds.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83309

(i)
Notices to City. The Remarketing Agent agrees to provide to the City
notice of aU determinations made by the Remarketing Agent pursuant to the Indenture, iacluding,
but not liinited to, interestratedeterminatioiis and duration of Rate Periods, on atimelybasis.
(j)
Alternate Batik Rate. No Alternate Bank RateshaU become effective unless
the Trustee has retreived an Opinioo of Bond Counsel, in form and substance satisfactoty to them,
to the effect that the changetosuch Alternate Bank Rate wiU not adversely affea the exclusion
from gross income, for Federal income tax purposes, of interest oh the Bonds (other than Bank
Bonds) and will not adversefy affect the vaUcUfy of such Bonds.
Section 2.03. Execution; Limited Tax Obligations. Tbe Bonds shaU be executed
on behalf of the Cify with the official manual or facsimile signature ofthe Mayor ofthe Cify and
attested with the official manual or facsunUe signature of its City Clerk, and sbaU have affixed,
impressed, imprinted or otherwise reprcxluced thereon tbe coiporate seal ofthe Cify or a facsimUe
thereof. The Bonds are issued pursuant to and in fuU compliance with the Constimtion and laws
of the Sute, and pursuanttothe Ordinance. The Bonds are direct and general obligations of tbe
Cify, payable from moneys provided under the Lener of Credit, ifrom moneys attribuuble to tbe
prcx:eeds derivedfromthe sale of the Bonds or to incomefromthe temporaty investment thereof
andfromany funds ofthe City legaUy avaUable for the puipose of paying principal, redemption,
prenuum, if any, and interest on me Bonds, which amounts are hereby held as securify for the
equal andraublepayment of the Bonds; provided, however, thai in no event shaU the City be
obligated to levy any separate ad valorem or other tax, m addition to other City taxes, or any
special ad valorem or other tax unlimited as to rate or amount to pay principal, interest or
redeiiq)tion premium on the Bonds. In case any officer whose signature or a facsimUe of whose
signature shaU appear on the Bonds shall cease to be such officer before the defivety of such
Bonds, such signature or such facsimUe shaU nevertheless be valid and sufficient for aU puiposes,
as if he or she hadremainedin office until delivety.
Section 2.04. Authentication. No Bond shall be valid or obligatoty for any
purpose or be entitied to any security or benefit under this Indenture unless and until such
certificate of authentication in substantiaUy the form atuched hereto as part of Exhibit A shaU
have been duly executed by the Trustee, and such executed certificate of the Tnistee, upon any
such Bond shaU be conclusive evidence that such Bond has been authenticated and deUvered under
this Indenture. The Trustee's certificate of authentication on any Bond shaU be deemed to have
been executed by it if (a) signed by an audiorized signatoty of the Trustee, but it shaU not be
necessary thai the same signatory sign the ceitificaics of auihenuc:ation on all of the Bonds issued
hereunder, and (b) the date of autbenticration on the Bond is inserted in the place provided therefor
in the certificate of authenticatioD.
Section 2.05. Fonu of Bonds; Temporary Bonds. Tlic Bonds issued under this
Indenture shall be.substantially in the form atuched hereto as Exhibit A. with such appropriate
variauons, omissions and insertions as are permined or required by this Indenture.
Pending preparation of defmitive Bonds, or by agreement with the purchasers of
the Bonds, the City may issue and, upon its request, the Tmstee shall authenticate, in lieu of

 83310

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

definitive Bonds, one or more temporaty printed or typewritten Bonds in Authorized
Denominations of substantiaUy the tenor recited above. Upon request of the City, the Trustee
shaU authenticate definitive Bonds in exchange for and upon sunender of an equal principal
amoimt of temporary Bonds. Until so exchanged, temporaty Bonds shaU have the same rights,
remedies and security hereunder as definitive Bonds.
Section 2.06. DeUvery of Boncls. Upon tbe execution and delivety. of this
Indenture, the City shaU execute and deliver to the Trustee, and tbe Tmsiee shalUuthenticate, the
Bonds and deliver them to tbe purchasers as may be directed by die City as hereinafter in this
Section provided.
Prior to the deUvety by the Trustee of any of the Bonds there shall be fUed with
the Trustee:
(1)

a copy, duly certified by the City Cleik of the City, of the Ordinance; •

(2)
original executed counterparts of this Indenture, the Initial Credit
Agreement, the initial Letter of Crecfit anil the Remarketing Agreement;
(3)
an opinion of legal counsel to the effea that (i) the City hacl therightand
powertoadopt the OnUnance; (u) the Ordinance has been duly and lawfiiUy adopted by
the City CouncU, is in fiiU force and effea and is valid and binding upon the City and
enforceable in accordance with its terms; (iii) this Indenture, and the Initial Credit
Agreement have been duly and lawftiUy authorized by aU necessaty action on the part of
the Cify, have been duly and lawfiiUy executed by authorized officers of the Cify, are in
fiiU force and effect and are vafid and binding upon the City and enforceable in accordance
with their terms; and (iv) upon the execution, authentication and delivety thereof, the
Bonds wUI have been duly and vaUdly authorized and issued in accordance with the
Constitution and laws ofthe Sute and this Indenture; and
(4)
a written oider as- to the delivety of the Bonds, signed by an Authorized
Officer and stating (i) the identity of the purchasers, the aggregate puichase price and tbe
date and place of defivety, and (u) that no Event of Default has occurred and is continuing
under this Indenture. .
Section 2.07. MutUated, Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Bonds. In the event any
Bond is mutUated, lost, stolen or destroyed, the City may execute and the Trustee may
authenticate a new Bond of like date, maturity, interestrateand denomination as the Bond
mutUated, lost, stolen or destroyed; provided that, in the case of any mutUaied Bond, such
mutUated Bond shall first be surrendered to the Trustee, and in the case of any lost, stolen or
destroyed Bond, there shaU be first furnished to the City and the Trustee evidence of such loss,
theft or destruction satisfactotytothe City, and the Trustee, together with indemnity satisfactoty
to them. In the event Jiny such Bond shall have matured. Instead of issuing a substimte Bond the
City may pay the same without surrender thereof. The City and the Trustee may charge the
Registered Owner of such Bond with their reasonable fees and expenses in this cormection. All

 5/1 / 2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83311

Bonds so sunendered to the Tnistee shall be cancelled and destroyed, and evidence of snch
destmction shaU be given to the City. Upon the date of final maturity or redcnq>don of aU of the
Bonds, the Trustee shaU destroy any inventoty of unissued ceitificaies.
AU duplicate Bonds issued and authenticated pursuant to this Section shaU constitute
original, contracnial obfigations of the City (whether or not. in the case of the first paragraph of
this Section, lost, stolen or destroyed Bonds be at any time found by anyone), and shaU be entitied
to equal and proportionaterightsand benefits hereunder as aU other outstanding Bonds issued
hereunder.
All Bonds shall be o'wned upon the express condition thai ihe foregoing provisions,
to the extent peimitted by law, are exclusive with respect to thereplacementor payment of
mutilated, destroyed, lost, stolen or purchased Bonds, and shall preclude any and aU other rights
or remedies.
Section 2.08. li-ansfer and Exchange of Bondis; Persons Treated as Owners,
(a) Subject to the limiutions contained in subsection "(c) of this Section, upon surrender for
registration of transfer of any Bond at the principal coiporate trust office of the Trustee, duly
endorsed by. or accompanied by a written instrument or instruments of transfer in form
satisfactoty to the Tmstec and duly executed by the Bondholder or such Bondholder's attorney
duly authoiized in writing, the Cify shall execute, and the Tmstee shall authenticate and deliver,
in the name of the transferee or transferees a new Bond or Bonds of like date and tenor in
Authorized Denominations of the same Maturify Date for the aggregate principal ainount which
the Registeied Owner is entitiedtoreceive bearing numbers not contemporaneously Outstanding.
Subject to the limiutions contained in subsection (c) of this Section, Bonds may be exchanged at
such times at such principal coiporate trust office of the Tnistee upon surrender thereof together
wiOi an assignment duly executed by the Registered Owner thereof or such Registered Owner's
attorney in such fonn and with guarantee of signature as shaU be satisfactoty to the Tnistee for
an equal aggregate principal amount of Bonds of like date and tenor of any Authorized
Denomination as the Bonds sunendered for exchange bearing numbers not contemporaneously
Outstanding. The execution by the City of any Bond of any Authorized Denomination shaU
constitute full and due authorization of such Authorized Denomination, and the Tmstee shaU
thereby be authorized to authenticate and defiver such registered Bond.
(b)
No service charge shall be imposed upon the Registered Owners for any
exchange or transfer of Bonds. The City and the Trustee may, however, require payment by the
personrequestingan exchange or transfer of Bonds of a sum sufficient to cover any tax, fee or
other governmental charge that may be imposed in relation thereto, except in the case of the
issuance of a Bond or Bonds for die unredeemed portion of a Bond sunendered for redemption
in part.

(c)
Subsequent to the Fixed Rate Conversion Date for any Bond, the Tmstee
shaU not be required to transfer or exchange such Bond during the pericxl commencing on ihe
Record Date next preceding any Interest Payment Date of such Bond and ending on such Interest
Paymem Date, or lo transfer or exchange such Bond after die mailing of notice calling such Bond

 83312

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

for redemption has been made as herein provided or during the period of 15 days next preceding
the giving of notice of redemption of Bonds of the same Maturity Date and interestratewhich
were convened on tbe same date. Prior to the Fbced Rate Conversion Date applicable to any
Bonds, the Trustee shall not be required to exchange orregisterthe transfer of such Bond after
the mailing of notice calling such Bond for-redemption has been made as herein provided, except
that the Cify and the Trustee sbaU be required to issue orregisterthe transfer of .Tendered Bonds
after such date of maUing of notice of redeinption.
(d)
Bonds delivered upon anyregistrationof transfisr or exchange as provided
herein or.as provided in Section 2.07 hereof shaU be valid liinited obligations of tbe Cify,
evidencing the same debt as the Bonds sunendered. shaU be secured by the Indenture and shaU
be entitied to aU of the securify and benefits hereof to die same extent as the Bond sunendered.
(e)
The City, the Tnistee, the Remarketing Agent, die Bond Insurer, the Bank
and any Paying Agent may treat the Registered Owner of any Bond as the absolute owner thereof
for all purposes, whether or not such Bond shall be overdue, and shiaU not be bound by any notice
to the contraty. AU payments of or on account of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest
on any such Bond as herein provided shall be made only to or upon the written order of the
Registered Owner thereof or such Registered Owner's legal representative, but such registraticm
may be changed as herein pro'vided. All such payments shaU be valid and effectualtosatisfy and
discharge the liabiUfy upon such Bond to the extent of the sum or sums so paid.
(f)
In the event that sufficient moneys are on deposit with the Trustee to pay
the appUcable purchase price of any Tendered Bond as provided herein, such Tendered Bond shall
be deemed to have been purchased whether or not delivered by the Registered Owner thereof on
the date such Tendered Bond is to be purchased. In the event any such purchased Tendered Bond
is not so delivered, the City shall execute and the Tnistee shaU authenticate and deUver a
replacemem Bond of like date. Maturity Date and denomination as the Tendered Bond and bearing
a number not contemporaneously outstanding. In the event any such purchased Tendered Bond
is so delivered, the Trustee shaU register such Tendered • Bond as provided in
Section 3.09(b) hereof.
Section 2.09. Required Information in Bond Form, (a) On each date on which
the Tnistee or the Tmstee's Agent authenticates and delivers a Bond, it shall complete the
informationrequiredto be inserted by the Bond foim and shall keep a lecord of such information.
(b)
On each date on which the Tmstee or the Trustee's Agent authenticates and
delivers a Bond during a Flexible Mode or an Adjusuble Long Mode applicable to such Bond as
provided in Section 2.07 or 2.08 hereof, the Tnistee or Trustee's Ageiit shall atuch to each such
Bond a copy of the noiicc in substantially the form set forth In me form of Bond attached as
Exhibit A hereto for tbe purpose of mainUining an accurate retard of the terms and provisions
of the Adjustment Period then appficable to such Bond.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83313

(c)
On each date on whicb the Tnistee authenticates and delivers Bonds bearing
interest at a Fuced Ratefromand after the Fixed Rate Conversion Date appUcabletosuch Bonds,
the Tnistee shall issue Bonds with such information as is required pursuant to Section 4.03 hereof.
Section 2.10. Cancellation. Any Bond surrendered for the puipose of payinent
orretirement,or for exchange, transfer orreplacement,shaU be canceUed upon sunender thereof
to the Trustee or any Paying Agent. If tbe City shaU acquire any of the Bonds, the Cify shall
deliver such Bonds to the Tmstee for cancellation and the Tnistee shaU cancel the same. Any
such Bonds canceUed by any Paying Agent other than tbe Trustee sbaU be proinptiy transmitted
by such Paying Agent to tbe Tnistee. Certification of Bonds canceUed by tbe Trustee and Bonds
cancelled by a Paying Agent other than the Tnistee which are transmitted to tbe Tiustee shaU be
made to the Cify. Cancelled Bonds may be destroyed by the Tmstee unless instmctions to the
contraty are received.from the City. Upon the date offinalmaturify or redemption of aU Bonds,
the Trustee shall destroy "any inventory of unissued certificates.
Section 2.11. Book-Entty Provisions.. .The provisions of this Section shaU apply
as long as the Bonds are maintained- in book-entty form with DTC or another Securities
Depositoty, any pro'vislons of this Indenture to the contraty notwithstanding.
(a)
The Bonds shaU be payabletothe Securities Depositoty, or its noininee  as
the Registeied Owner of the Bonds, in same dayftindson each date on whicb the principal of,
premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds is due as set forth in this Indenmre and the Bonds.
Such payments shaU be made to the offices ofthe Securities Depositoty specified by the Securities
Depositoty to the City and the Tiustee in writing. Without notice to or the consent of the
beneficial owners of the Bonds, the City and the Securities Depositoty may agree in writing to
make payments of principal and imerest in a manner different from that set fonh herein. If such
different manner of payment is agreed upon, the City shall give the Trustee notice thereof, and
the Tmstee shaU make payments with respect to the Bonds in the manner specified in such notice
as set forth heiem. Neither the Cify nor the Tmstee shaU have any obligation with respect to the
transfer or crecfiting of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds to Participants
or tbe beneficial owners of the Bonds or their nominees.
(b)
If (i) the City determines, or (ii) the Cityreceivesnotice that the Securities
Depository has received notice from its Participants having interests in at least 50 percent in
principal amount of the Bonds that the Securities Depositoty or its successor is incapable of
discharging its responsibifities as a securities depository, or that it is in the best interests of the
beneficial owneis that they obtain ceitificated Bonds, the City may (or, in the case of clause (U)
above, the City shaU) cause the Tmsiee to audienticate and deUvcr Bond certificates. The City
shall have no obfigation to make any invesfigation to determine the occunence of any events that
would permit ihe City to make any determinadon described in ihis paragraph.
(c)
If, following a determination or event specified in paragraph (b) above, the
City discontinues the maintenance of the Bonds in book-entry form with the then cunem Securities
Depository, the City will issue replacement Bonds to the replacement Securities Depository, if
any. or, if no replacement Securities Depository is selected for the Bonds, direcUy to the

 83314

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Participants as shown on the records of the former Securities Depositoty or, to the extent
requested by any Participant, to the beneficial owners of the Bonds shown on the records of such
Participant. . Replacement Bonds shaU be in fidlyregisteredform and in Authorized
Denominations, be payable as to interest on the Interest Payment Dates of the Bonds by check
maUed to each Registered Owner at the address of such Registered Owner as it appears on the
Bond Register or, at the option of any Registered Owner of not less than $1,000,000 principal
amount of Bonds, by wire transfertoany address in the United Sutes of America on such Interest
Payment Date to such Registered Owner as of such Record Date, if such Registered Owner
provides tbe Trustee with written notice of such wire transfer address not later than the Recoid
Date (which notice may provide that it wiU remain in effea with respect to subsecjuent Interest
Payment Dates unless and untU changed or revoked by subsequent notice). Principal and
premium, ifany, on the replacement Bonds are payable only upon presenution and sunender of
such replacement Bond or Bonds at the principal corporate trust office of the Trastee.
. (d).- The Securities Depositoty and its Participants, and the beneficial owners
of the Bonds, by tbeir acceptance of the Bonds, agree that the City and the Trustee shaU not have
liabiUty for the faUure of such Securities Depositoty to perform its obligations to the Participants
and the beneficial owners of the Bonds, nor shaU the Cify or the Tnistee be liable for the faUore
of any Participant or other nomioee of the beneficial owneis to perform any obligation of the
Participant to a beneficial owner of the Bonds.
(e) . As long as Cede &. Co. is the Registered Owner of the Bonds, as nominee
of DTC,referencesherein to the Registered Owners of die Bonds shaU mean Cede & Co. and
shaU not mean the beneficial owners of the Bonds.
(f)

As long as Cede & Co. is the Registered Owner of the Bonds:

(i) selection of Bonds to beredeemedupon partial redemption, presenution of
Bonds to the Tiustee upon partial redemption, delivety of Bonds to the Trustee in
connection with an optional or mandatory tender,- or redelivery of such Bonds by the
Tnistee to registered owners foUowing a remarketing or faUed conversion to the Fixed
Rate shaU be deemed made when therightto exercise ownershiprightsin such Bonds
through DTC or DTC's Participants istiansfenedby DTC on its books;
(ii) notices of demand for purchase of Bonds shaU be given by the beneficial
owners of sucb Bonds exercising ownershiprightsto the Remarketing Agent (pursuant to
DTC's DeUver Order prcx:edures) by telephonic notice (confirmed in writing) or written
notice;
(iii) any notices of the interest rate on the Bonds to be provided by the Trustee
shall be provided to anyone identifying itself to the Trustee as a person entitied to exercise
ownershiprightswith respect to such Bonds through DTC or its Participants;
(iv) DTC may present notices, approvals, waivers or other communications
required or permiited to be made by Registeied Owners under the Indenture on a

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83315

fractionalized basis on behalf of some or aU of those persons entided to exercise ownership
rights in the Bonds through DTC or its Participants; and
(v) beneficial interests in Bank Bonds ';ha» be held for Oie account of the Bank
(or its Participant) on the records of DTC. .

ARTICLE i n
Purchase and Redemption of Bonds
Section 3.01. Purchase on Demand of Registered Owner WhOe Bonds Bear
Daily Rate or Weekly Rate, (a) WhUe a Bond (other than a Bank Bond) bears interest at a DaUy
Rate, such Bond (or portion thereof in an Authorized Denomination) shall be purchased on a
. Demand Date therefor upon the demand of the Registered Owner thereof, at a purchase price
equal to 100 percent of the principal amount thereof plus accmed interest, if any,tosuch Demand
Date, upon irrevocaible telephonic or written notice (which telephonic notice shaU be confirmed
in writing, and which written notice may be given by telecopy) to both the Trustee's Agent and
the Remarketing Agent, which notice must be received not later than 10:00 a.m., Chicago time,
on a Business Day in order to be effective on that date. Any notice received after 10:00 a.m.,
Chicago time, on a Business Day shaU be deemed given on the next succeeding Business Day;
The Business Day on which any notice is deemed given wiU be the Demand Date for the
applicable Tendered Bond. Such notice must specify the principal amount and number of such
Bond, the name and the address of such owner and the taxpayer identification number, if any, of
such owner. The Tmstee's Agent shall give Immecliate Notice (which notice shaU be delivered
no later than 10:30 a.m., Chicago time, on the Business Day on which it receives notice of tender)
to-the Tmstee, die Remarketing Agent, the City and the Bank as to the contents of any such
notices received by it.
(b)
WhUe a Bond (other tiian a Bank Bond) bears mterest at a Weekly Rate,
such Bond (or portion thereof in an Authorized Denomination) <:haU be purchased on a Demand
Date therefor upon the demand of the Registered Owner thereof, at a purchase price equal to 100
percent of the principal amount thereof plus accnied interest, if any, to such Demand Date, upon
inevocable wrinen notice (which may be given bytelecopy)to the Tmstee's Agent, which notice
must be received by the Trustee's Agenl and the Remarketing Agent not later than 4:00 p.m.,
Chicago time, on a Business Day m order to be effective on that day. Any noticereceivedafter
4:00 p.m., Chicago time, on a Business Day shaU be deemed given on die next succeeding
Business Day. Such notice must specify (i) the principal amount and number of such Bond, the
name and the address of sucb owner and the taxpayer identification number, if any, of sucb
owner, and (ii) the Demand Dale on wliich sucb Bond is lo be purchased. . The Tmsiee's Agent
shaU give Immediate Notice (which notice shall be given no later than 4:30 p.m., Chicago time,
on the Business Day on which it receives notice of tender) to the Trustee, the Remarketing Agent,
the City and the Bank as to the contents of any such notices received by it.

 83316

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(c)
The detennination of the Trustee's Agent astowhether a notice of tender
has been properly deliveied pursuant to the foregoing shaU be conclusive and binding upon tbe
Registered Owner of such Bond. Any notice received by the Trustee's Agent pursuant to this
Sectionfromany person reasonably believed by the Trustee's Agent to be the Registered Owner
of a Bond may be conclusively relied upon by the Tmstee's Agent as atirue,inevocable notice
of demand with respea to such Bond.
Section 3.02. Purchase on Notice of Certain Events of Default Under Credit
Agreement WhUe Letter of Credit is Required. During the period a Letter of Credit is required
by Section 6.02 of this Indenture, tbe Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest
at a Fixed Rate) are subjea to mandatoty tender by the Registered Owners thereof to the Tnistee
when the Tiustee gives Immediate Notice to the Registered Owners of such Bonds and the
Remarketing Agent of the cxxurrence and continuation of a Credit Agreement Default. Upon the
giving of such Immediate Notice, such Bonds shall be purchased, on a date designated by the
Tnistee, which date is ho more, than 15 days after the date of the Immediate Notice to the
Bondholders, and in no event later than the Business Day prior to the last day on whi<± fimds wUl
be available under the Letter of Credit, at a purchase price equal to 100 percem of tbe piincnpal
amount thereof plus accmed interest, if any, to the purchase date. In such case, the Registered
Owner of any such Bond recpiired ro be purchased may not elea toretainits Bond and by the
acceptance of such Bond shaU be deemed to have agreed to seU sucb Bondtothe Trustee on the
date specified pursuant to this Section. The Tiustee shaU give such Immediate Notice upon receipt
by the Tmstec of a written noticefromthe Bank of the occurrence of a Credit Agreement DefaulL
Section 3.03. Purchase While Bonds Bear FlexibleRate. WhUe any Bond (other
than a Bank Bond) bears interest at a Flexible Rate, sucb Bond shaU be purchased pursuant to this
Section on each Rate Change Date for such Bond; other than the Rate Change Date which is the
first day of a Flexible Mcxle applicable to such Bond, and on the Adjustment Date immediately
following Ihe last day of the Flexible Mcxle at a purchase price equal to 100 percent of the
principal amount thereof. The Registered Owner of such Bond may not elixt to retaio its Bond.
Section 3.04. Purchase Prior to Stated Temunation. Date When Required
Letter of CrecUt Not in Place; Purchase Prior to Substimtion Date; Purchase Prior to Letter
of Creilit CanceUation Date, (a) If, during the pericxl a Letter of Credit isrequiredpursuant to
theteimsof Section 6.02 of this Indenture, by the 20th day preceding any Suted Termination
Date of the Letter of Credit the Trustee has not received notice of an extension of the then cuneni
Letter of Credit or a Substitute Letter of Credit in accordance with tbetermsof this Indenture,
aU Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds b<:aTing interest at a Fixed Rate) sbaU be purchased
on the Business Day prior to the Suted Termination Date of the Letter of Credit pursuant to this
Section. If a Letter of Credit isrequiredpursuant to the terms of this Indenmre, and the Cify
gives notice to the Tnistee thai it wUl provide a Substimte Letter of Credit pursuant to
Seciion 6.01 of this Indenture, Bonds shall be subject to purchase hereunder, unless each Rating
Agency then providing a short-termratingon the Bonds confirms in writing that such short-term
rating will not be withdrawn or reduc:ed as a result of the delivery of such Substimte Letter of
Credit (a "Rating Exception Non-Tender"). In addition, if a Letter of Credit is no longer required
pursuant to Section 6.02 of this Indenture, all Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83317

interest at a Fixed Rate) shaU be purchased on the.Business Day prior to the Letter of Credit
CanceUation Date pursuant to this Section. A purchase of Bonds pursuant to this Section sbaU be
at a purchase price for each sucb Bond equal to the principal amount thereof plus accmed interest,
if any, to the purchase date.
(b)
Not later than die 15th day preceding the Suted Termination Date of the
Letter of Credit, if no extension of such Letter of Credit or SubstiDite Letter of CrecUt has been
defivered, tbe Trustee shall give Immediate Noticetothe Registered Owners of the Bonds (other
than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) and tbe Bond Insurer stating (i) the
Stated Termination Date, (ii) that no Substimte Letter of Credit has beenreceivedas of the date
of such notice, and (iii) that tbe Bonds are required to be purchased on the ..Business Day
immediately prececUng the Suted Tenmnation Date.
(c)
Except as provided in subsection (e) of this Section, not later than the 15tb
day preceding a Substimtion Date, the Trustee shall give Immediate Noti'ce to the Registered
Owners of the Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) sUting
(i) the Substitution Date and (u) the Bonds arerequiredtobe purchased on the Business Day prior
to the Substimtion Date.
(d)
If pursuant to subsection (a) -of this Section the Bonds are subject to
mandatotytenderand purchase, not later than the 15th day preceding the Letter of Credit
' Cancellation Date, the Trustee sbaU give TmiTn>rf;at«> Notice to the Registered Owners ofthe Bonds
(other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) suting (i) that tbe existing
Letter of Credit is to be cancelled puisuant to Section 6.02 of this Indenture, and (ii) the Bonds
are recpiired to be purchased on diie Business Day priortoUie Letter of Credit CanceUation Date.
(e)
In the event of a Rating Exception Non-Tender pursuant to subsection (a)
oftiiisSection, not later than die 15Ui day preceding die Letter of Credit CanceUation Date, the
Trustee shaU give Immediate Notice to the Registered Owners of the Bonds (other than Bank
Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) suting (i) that the existing Letter of Credit is
to be canceUed pursuant to Secfion 6.02 of this Indenmre. and (ii) the name of the Substimte Bank
and the materialtermsof the Substitute Credit Agreement and Substitute Letter of Credit proposed
to be deUvered.
Secti'on 3.05. Purchase WhUe Bonds Bear Adjustable Long Rate. While any
Bond (other dian a Bank Bond) bears interest at an Adjusuble Long Rate, such Bond shaU be
purchased pursuant to this Section on each Rate Change Date within an Adjusuble Long Mode
for such Bond, other than the Rate Change Date which is the first day of an Adjusuble Long
Mode applicabletosuch Bond, and on the Adjustment Date iinmediately foUowing the last day
of such Adjustable Long Mode, ai a purchase price equal lo 100 percent of ihe principal amount
thereof The Registered Owner of such Bond may not elect to reuin its Bond.
Not later than the 15th day next pieceding such Rate Change Date for each Rate
Period, the Trustee shafi give notice by mail to the Registered Owners of the Bonds which bear
interest at an Adjusuble Long Rate suting (i) the last day of the Rate Period then ending, and

 83318

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(ii) that the Bonds are required to be purchased on such Rate Change Date. The foregoing
notwithstanding, the faUure ofthe Tnistee to give such notice or cause such notice to be given wiU
not affect tbe requirement of such Registered Owneis totendertheir Bonds for purchase. If
sufficient moneys are on deposit with the Trustee on the applicable Rate Change Date to purchase
such Bonds at the purchase price therefor, such Bonds shall not after the applicable Rate Change
Date bear interest, be protected by tbe Indenmre or be deemed to be Outstanding.
Section 3.06. Purchase on Adjustment Date. On each Adjustment Date with
respecttoa Bond (other than a Bank Bond),- including, without limiution,- a proposed Fixed Rate
Conversion Date or a Substitute Adjustment Date, such Bond shaU be purchased pursuant to this
Section at a purchase price equal to 100 percent of the principal amount thereof, except that (i) a
JBond which istobe purchased on an Adjustment Date which immediately foUo'ws the last day of
a Flexible Mode shall be purchased pursuant to Section 3.03 hereof, and (u) a Bond which is to
be purchased on an Adjustment Date which immecfiately foUows the scheduled final day of an
Adjusuble Long Mode shaU be purchased puisuant to Section3.05 hereof. The Registered Owner
of such Bond may not elea to retain its Bond.
Not later than the. 15th day next preceding the Adjustment Date for any Bond
bearing interest at a DaUy Rate or a Weekly Rate, the Triistee shaU give Immediate Notice to the
Registered Owner of such Bond suting (i) the last day of the Adjustment Pericxl then endmg, and
(u) that such Bond is required to be purchased on the Adjustment Date.
Section 3.07. Purchase of Tendered Bonds DeUvered to Trustee's Agent;
Notices, (a) Tendered Bonds shall be purchased from the Registered Owners thereof at a purchase
price equalto100 percent ofthe principal amount thereof, plus accmed interest thereon (unless
purchased on an Interest Payment Date, in which event such accmed interest shaU not be paid as
part of the purchase price secured by the Letter of CrecUt), but solelyfromthe foUowing sources
in Older of priorify incficated, neither the City, the Trustee, the Tmsiee's Agem nor the
Remarkaing Agenl having an obligation to use fiindsfromany other sounx;
(i)
proceeds of the sale of such Tendered Bonds (other than Tendered Bonds
soldtothe City in violation of Section 3.15(b) hereof) pursuant to Section 3.08 hereof;
(ii)
moneys received from the underwriter or purchaser (other than the City) of
Tendered Bonds upon the conversion of die interest rate thereon to a Fixed Rate;
(in)

proceeds ofthe Letter of Credit, to the extent a Letter of Credit is available;

and
(iv) Eligible Moucys funiishcd by the Cily lo ihc Tiiisicc for the purchase of
Tendered Bonds, provided that the conditions of Section 3.15(b) hereof are satisfied.
(b)
The Trusiee's Agent shall pay the purchase price specified abovefromthe
sources specified above of each Tendered Bond to the Registered Owner thereof by 1:30 p.m..
Chicago lime, on the purchase date, provided that the Trustee's Agent shall have confirmed lhal

 5/ 1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83319

such Registered Owner has delivered sucb Tendered Bond (with any necessaty endoisements) to
the principal corporate trust office of the Trustee's Agent no later than 12:00 noon, Chicago time,
on such date.
Section 3.08. RemarketingorTenderedBondsby Remarketing Agent. Upon
the delivety or deemed defivety of Tendered Bonds by the Registered Owners thereof in
acc:ordance with the provisions hereof, the Remarketing Agent shaU offer for sale and use its best
efforts toremarketsuch Tendered Bonds pursuant to the Remarketing Agreement, any such
remariceting to be made on the date on whicb sucb Tendered Bonds are to be purchased, at a price
equal to 100 percent of the principal amount thereof plus accmed inteiest, if any.
If Bonds are delivered or - deemed delivered for purchase under
Section 3.01(a) hereof, the Remarketing Agent shaU givetelephonicnotice to die Tiustee, the
Trustee's Agent,tiieCity and the Bank no later than 11:00 a.m-, Clucago time, on the date on
which such Bonds are to be so deUvered or deemed defivered, of the aggregate principal amount
of such Bonds to be purchased on such date which it has reasonable groundstoexpea wUl not be
remarketed on such date.
In addition, with respect to Bonds delivered or deemed deUvered for purchase
under Section 3.01(b), 3.02, 3;03, 3.04,3.05 or 3.06 hereof, the Remarketing Agent shall give
telephonic noticetothe Tnistee, the Trusiee's Agent, the City and the Bank no later than 11:00
a.m., Chic:agorime,on the Business Day next preceding the date on which such Bonds are to be
so delivered or deemed defivered, of the aggregate principal amount of such Bonds to be
purchased on such date which it has reasonable grounds to expect wUl not be remarketed on such
dace.
The Remarketing Agent shaU remarket Bank Bonds to the extent, and subjecttothe
concfitions. set forth herein and in the Remarketing Agreement; provided, however, that no Bank
Bond may be remarketed unless the amount of fimds which are avaUable and may be loaned under
the Letter of Credit has beenreinstatedtothe amount which was available prior to the purchase
of such Bank Bonds, unless the Letter ofCredit has been reduced pursuant to Section 6.01 of this
Indenture or the Letter of Credii is no longer required pursuant to Section 6.02 of this Indenture.
Bank Bonds shaU beremaiketedat a price of par plus accmed interest, if any, at the Bank
"Variable Rate untU die Bond Sale Date; accrued interest on Bank Bonds at the Differential Interest
Amount shaU be diie to the Bankfromthe City on the Bond Sale Date. Upon theremarketingof
Bank Bonds, the Remarketing Agent shall iinmediately providetelephonicnotice, promptiy
confirmed bytelecopy,of such remarketing to the Trustee, the City and the Bank, and diereupon
the Tmstee shall, subject to Section 3.09(a)(u) hereof. immetUately deliver or provide for transfer
of beneficial interest in such Bonds for delivery to the purchasers thereof upon payment to the
Bank of the principal amoum of such Bank Bonds.

 83320

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 3-09. Defivety of Bonds and Proceeds of Sale.
(a)
(i) Subjea to Section 3.10 hereof. Bondsremarketedby the Remarketing
Agent puisuam to Section 3.08 hereof shaU be delivered by the Trustee or the Trustee's
Agenl as directed by the Remarketiing Agent by 11:00 a.m., Chicagotime,on the date of
purchase against payment therefor. The proceeds of sale by the Remarketing Agent shaU
be delivered to the Tmstec by 11:00 a.m., Chicago time, on the date of purchase.
(u)
Bank Bonds shall be deUveredtothe Trustee or otherwise at the direction
of the Bank, or for as long as the Bonds are in the Book-Entiy-Only System described in
Section 2.11 heieof, credited to the designated account of the Bank or its designee as
beneficial owner of such Bank Bonds by DTC (in its capacity as custodian) pursuant to the
CrecUt Agreement or the Custody Agreement, if any. Notwithstanding anything herein to
the coiitiaty, if the Tiustee holds Bank Bonds as custodian for the Bank pursuant to tbe
CrecUt Agreement or the Custody Agreement, if any, the Trastee shaU notreleaseto the
purchaser thereof Bank Bonds remarketed pursuanttoSection 3.08 hereof unless the Bank
shaU have given written notification (which may be by facsimUe communicatioD) to the
Tmstee that it hasreinsutedthe Letter of Credit. The Trustee hereby agrees to foUow the
provisions of the Credit Agreement or the Custody Agreement, if any, as to registration
and procedures for Bank Bonds during the effective period oftiieLetter of Creditl
(b)
Except as otherwise provided in the Credit Agreement or the Custody
Agreement, if any. Tendered Bonds delivered as provided in diis Section'shaU beregisteredin the
manner directed by the purchaser thereof, except that Bank Bonds shaU beregisteredin the name
of the Bank, and beneficial interest therein shall be transferred as provided in paragraph
(a)(u) above.
(c)
The Trustee's Agem shaU notify the Trustee in writing (which may be
delivered bytelecopy)no later than 10:30 a.m., Chicago time, on each day on which Tendered
Bonds in the DaUy Mode, and no later than 4:30 p.m., Chicago time, on the Business Day prior
to the day on which Tendered Bonds in any other Interest Mcxle, are delivered or deemed
delivered for purchase under Section 3.01, 3.02. 3.03, 3.04, 3.05 or 3.06 hereof of the aggregate
principal amount of Tendered Bonds to be purchased on such date. The Trustee shafi take sucb
a(:uons as are necessaty to draw or obtain fimds under the Letter of Credit in accordance 'with its
terms to pay the purchase price of aU Tendered Bonds (other than Bank Bonds) on such date; and,
in connection with the Initial Letter of Credit, shall make drawings thereunder (based upon the
proceeds of sale by the Remarketing Agent acttially delivered to die Tiustee by 11:00 a.m..
Chicago time, on the date of purchase pursuant to paragraph (a)(i) of this Section) no later than
11:15 a.m., Chicago time, on such date in order to obtain fiinds thereunder by no later than 1:15
p.m., Chicago time, on such date. If surplus moneys from the Bank remain after the payment in
full of aU Tendered Bonds, the Tmstee shall provide Immediate Notice to the Bank of the amount
of funds made available by the Bank on such date which are not required for the payment of
Tendered Bonds and shall iinmediately remm such excess funds to the Bank.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

.

83321

(d)
If sufficient moneys are on deposit 'vvith the Trustee or the Trustee's Agent
to pay the appUcable purchase price of any Tendered Bond, such Tendered Bond shall be deemed
to have been purchased whether or not delivered by the Registered Owner thereof on the date such
Tendered Bond is to be purchased. Ifany such purchased Tendered Bond is not so delivered, the
Cify shaU execute, and the Tnistee shaU authenticate and defiver, a replacement Bond of like date,
Maturity Date and denomination as tbe Tendered Bond and bearing a number not
contemporaneously outstanding.
Section 3.10. No Remarketing After Certain Defanlts. Anything in the
Indenture to the contraty notwithstanding, (a) if during the pericxl a Letter of Credit is required
pursuanttoSection 6.02 of this Indenture, there is no Letter of Crecfit in effect, there shall be no
remarketing of Tendered Bonds unless consentedtoin writing by the City, the Remarketing Agent
and the Bank, and (b) if there shaU have occuned and be continiiing an Event of De&ult under
the Indenture of which an authorized officer in the principal office of the Remarketing Agent or
an authorized officer in the principal corporate tmst office of the Trustee has actual knowledge,,
there shaU be no remarketing of Tendered Bonds pursuant to Section 3.08 hereof unless consented
to in'writing by the City,, the Remarketing Agent and the Bank.
Section 3.11. Redemption Terms, Dates and Prices. The Bonds shall be subject
to redemption prior to their Maturity Date in the amoimts, at the times and in the manner provided
in this Section.
(a) . Optional Redemption.
(i)
Bonds in a DaUy Mode or a Weekly Mode shall be subject to redemption
prior to their Maturity Date at the option of the City, from Eligible Moneys, in whole or
in part (and, if in part, in an Authorized Denomination) on any Business Day during such
DaUy Mode or Weekly Mode, as applicable, at a redemption price equal to 100 percent
ofthe principal amount thereof plus accmed interest, ifany, lo the redemption date.
(ii)
Bonds in an Adjusuble Long.Mode shaU be subject to redemption prior to
their Maturity Date, during each Rate Period therein, at the option of the City, from
Efigible Moneys, in whole or in part (and, if in part, in an Authorized Denomination) on
any Business Day after the No-CaU Period described below, at the following redemption
prices (expressed as percenUges of the principal amount of Bonds called for
redemption) plus accmed interest, ifany, to the redemption date:

 JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

83322

Length of Rate Pericxl

No-Call Period

5/1/2002

Redemption Price

greater than 12 years

10 yearsfromthe
Rate Change Date

102%, declining 1% per
12 mondis to 100%

less than or equal to 12 years
and greater than 4 years

untU 2 yeais prior to
end of Rate Period

100%

less than or equal to 4 yeais

length of Rate Period'

not subjea to optional
redemption

The City may deliver to the Trustee an alternative redemption schedule to the
schedule shown above, if the City deUvers to the Bank and the Tnistee an Opinion of Bond
Counseltothe effect that the alternative schedule of redemption 'wiU not adversely affect
the validity and enforc:eabifity of the Bonds in accordance with their teims, and 'wiU not
have an adverse effect on any exclusionfromgross income of the interest thereon for
Federal income tax puiposes. After the first Rate Change Date succeeding the deUvety
of such alternative schedule and Opinion of Bond Counsel, Bonds in an Adjustable Long
Mcxle shaU be subjea to redemption pursuant to thetermsof such alternative schedule.
(iu)
Bonds in the Fixed Mode shaU be subjea to redemption prior to their
Maturity Date at tbe option of the City, in whole or in pan (and, if in part, in an
Aulhorized Denomination) on any Business Day after the No-CaU Period described below,
at the foUowing redeinption prices (expressed as percenUges of the principal amount of
the Bond caUed for redemption) plus accmed imerest. if any, to the redemption date:
Tenn of Mamrity

No-Call Period

Redemption Price

greater than 12 years

10 yearsfromthe Fixed
Rate Conversion Date

102%, decfinmg 1 % per
12 months to 100%

less than or equal to 12 years
and greater than 4 years

untU 2 years prior to the
Maturity Date

100%

less than or equal to 4 yeais

term to the Maturity Date

not subject to optional
redemption

The City may deliver to the Trustee an alternative redemption schedule to the
schedule shown above, if the City defiverstothe Bank and the Tmstee an Opinion of Bond
Counsel to the effect that tbe alternative schedule of redemption wiU not adversely affect
the validity and enforceabUity of the Bonds in accordance with their terms, and wiU not
have an adverse effect on any exclusionfromgross income of the interest thereon foi
Federal income tax purposes. Bonds which commence bearing interest at a Fixed Rate on
or after the defivery of such alternative schedule and Opinion of Bond Counsel shall be
subjecttoredemption in accordance with ihe provisions of such alternative schedule.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83323

(iv) . Bonds bearing interest at a Flexible Rate or an Adjusuble Long Rate shall
be subject to optional redemption priortotheir Maturity Date at the option of the City,
from Eligible Moneys, in whole or in part (and, if in part, in an Authorized •
Denomination) on any Rate Change Date therefor, at a redemption price equal to 100
percent of tbe principal amount thereof plus accmed interest, if any,-to tbe redeinption
date.
(b)
Optional Redemption of Bank Bonds. Bank Bonds shaU be subject to
redemption prior to their Mamrity Date at the option of the Cify, in wh61e or in part (and, if in
part,' in an Authorized Denomination) on any Business Day at a redemption price equal to 100
percent of the principal amount thereof plus accnied interest, if any, to the redeinption date.
(c)
Extraordinary Redemption of Bank Bonds. Bank Bonds shaU be subject
to mandatoty redemption on the dates and in the amounts specified in Section 3.1 of the Citdit
Agreement. Such redemption shaU be at a price ec]ual to the principal amount thereof plus
accmed interest thereon to the redemption date, without premium. Bank Bonds shall be redeemed
pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph without any noticefromor direction by the Cify.
(d)

General Provisions Regarding Optional and Extraordinary Redemptions.

(i)
No redenq)tion of less than all of the Bonds outstanding shaU be made
pursuant to Section 3.11(a) or (b) hereof unless (i) if such redemption is of Bonds bearing
interest at a Short Rate or an Adjusuble Long Rate, the aggregate principal amount of
Bonds to be redeemed is equalto$100,000 or integral multiples thereof, and (u) if siich
redemption is 'wiihrespectto Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate, the aggregate
principal amount of Bondstobe redeemed is equalto$100,000 or $5,000 multiples in
. excess thereof. Any redenqition of less than aU of the Bonds outstanding shaU be made
in such a manner that all Bonds outstanding after such redemption are in Authorized
Denominations..
Oi)
Bonds may be called for redeniption by the Tmstee pursuant to
Section 3.11(a) hereof (A) in the case of Bonds bearing interest al a Short Rale, upon
receipt by the Trustee at least 35 days priortothe ledemption date of a written request of
the City requesting such redeinption, or 0 ) in the case of Bonds bearing interest at an
Adjusuble Long Rate or a Fixed Rate, upon receipt by die Trustee at least 45 days prior
to the redemption date of a written request of the City requesting such redemption.
(iu)
Bonds may be called for redemption by the Tmstee pursuant to
Section 3.11(b) hereof upon receipt by the Trustee at least one Business Day priortothe
redemption date of a written request of the City requesting such redemption. The Trustee
or the Trustee's Agent shall give notice to die Bank one Business Day prior to any
redemption of Bank Bonds pursuant to Section 3.11(b) or (c) hereof.
(iv)
In lieu of redeeming Bonds pursuant to Section 3.11 (a) hereof, the Trustee
may, at the request of the City, use such funds available hereunder for redemption of

 83324

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Bonds to purchase Bonds in the open market at a price not exceeding the redemption price
then applicable hereunder. Any Bond so purchased shall be purchased with Eligible
Moneys unless such Bond is a Bank Bond or bears interest at a Fixed Rate. Any Bond so
purchased in lieu of redemption shaU be delivered to the Tnistee for canceUation and shaU
be canceUed, aU as provided in Section 2.10 hereof.
Section 3.12. Notice of Redemption, (a) Except as hereinafter provided, a copy
of the notice of the caU for any redemption identifying the Bondstobe redeemed shall be given
byfirstclass mail, posUge prepaid, 'withrespecttoBonds bearing interest at a Short Rate, not less
than 30 or more than 45 days priortothe datefixedfor redemption and shall be given by-first
class mail, posuge prepaid, with respea to Bonds bearing interest at an Adjustable Long Rate or
a Fixed Rate, not less than 30 or more than 60 days prior to the datefixedfor redenqition, to the
Bank, the Remaiketing Agent and the Registered-Owners of the Bondstobe redeemed at their
addresses as shown on the Bond Register. Such notice shall specify the reden^tion date, the
redemption price, the place and manner of payment, and thatfromthe redemption date interest
wUl ceasetoaccme on the Bonds which are the subjea of such notice, and shaU include sucb
other infoimation as the Trustee shaU deem appropriate or necxssaty at the time such notice is
giventocomply with any appUrable law,regulationor industty standard. Prior to the date that
the redemption notice isfirstgiven as aforesaid, fimds shaU be placed with the Trustee to pay such
Bonds, any preinium thereon, and accmed interest thereontothe redemption date, which moneys
shaU be Eligible Moneys to the extent sucb payments are required to be made with Efigible
Moneys, or such notice shaU sUte that any redemption is coixfitional on such funds being
deposited on the redenqition date,, and that Mlure to deposit sucb fiinds shaU not constimte an
Event of Default under the bidenture; any funds so deposited with the Trustee shall be invested
solely in Federal ObUgations maturing no later than the earlier of (i) 30 days after the date of
placement with the Tiustee, or (u) the redemption date.
(b)
Notwithstandmg Section 3.12(a) hereof, if Bank Bonds are to be redeemed
pursuant to Section 3.11 (b) or (c) hereof, the Tiustee shaU give Immed iate Notice of a redemption
of Bank Bondstothe Bank at least one Business Day prior to the date fixed for redemption.
(c)
In addition to the requirements of subsections (a) and (b), notice of the
redemption of Bonds or any portion thereof identifying the Bonds or portions thereof to be
redeemed shall specify (i) the series name and designation and certificate numbers of Bonds being
redeemed, (ii) the CUSIP mimbcrs of the Bonds being redeemed, (in) the principal amount of
Bonds being redeemed and the redeemed amount for each certificate (for partial calls), (iv) the
redemption date, (v) the redemption pric:e, (vi) the Date of Issuance, (vii) the interest rate and
Mamrity Date of the Bonds being redeemed, (viu) the date of maUing of notices to Registered
Owners and infoimation services, and (ix) the name of die employee of the Tmstee which may
be conucied with regard lo such notice.
(d)
Redemption notices shall also be forwarded by registered mail, telecopier
or ovemighi delivery service with the intention that they be received al least two days prior to the
date of mailing of notices to Registered Ovvners, to the foUowing depository instimtions:

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

• (i)

(ii)

83325

The Depositoty Trust Company
711 Stewart Avenue
Garden City, New York 11530
Attention: Muni Reorganization Manager
FAX: (516) 227-4039 or 4190
Philadelphia Deposkoty Tmst Coinpany
Reorganization Di'yision
1900 Market Street
Philadelphia, Penntylvania 19103
Attention: Bond Department
DEX: (215)496-5058

If either such trust cximpany ceases operations, notices sbaU be sent to its successor (if any).
(e)
Redemption notices shaU also be sent byregisteredmaU, at least 30 days
but not more than 60 days prior to the redenqition date, to two national infoimation services that
disseminate redemption infoimation as determined by the Trustee as long as such services exist.
(f)
A second redenqition notice shaU be sent byfirstclass mail, not more than'
60 days after the redemption datetoeach Registered Owner of Bonds caUed for reden^tion who
bas not presented such Bonds within 30 days foUo'wing the redenq>tioa date.
(g)
In the event of an advancerefiuidingof the Bonds, a notice of such event
shaU be given as required above for redemptions at least 30 days but not more than 60 days prior
to the acnual redemption date.
(h)
FaUure to give notice in the manner prescribed hereunder with respect to
any Bond, or any defect in such notice, shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for
redemption for any Boixi with respect to which notice was properly given. Upon the happening
of the above conditions and if sufficient moneys are on deposit with the Trustee on the applicable
redemption date to redeem the Bonds to be redeemed and to pay interest due thereon and
preinium, if any. the Bonds thus called shaU not. after the applicable redemption date, bear
interest, be protected by the Indenture or be deemed to be outstanding under the provisions of the
Indenmre.
(i)
If any Bond is transferred or exchanged on the Bond Register after notice
bas been given caUing such Bond for redemption, the Tnistee wiU attach a copy of such notice
to the Bond issued in connecuon with such transfer or exchange.
Section 3.13. No Partial Redemption After Default. Anything in this Indenture
to the contrary notwithstanding, if there shaU have <x:c:urred and be cx)niinuing an Event of Default
of which an officer of Uie Tmstec has actual knowledge, there shaU be noredemptionof less than
all of the Bonds at the time outstanding.

 83326

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1 /2002

Section 3.14. Selection ofBonds for Redemption. If less than aU the Bonds shaU
be caUed for redeinption under any pro'vision of this Indenture permitting such partial redemption,
the particular Bonds or portions thereof to be redeemed shaU be selected by the City, in the
principal amount designated lo the Trustee by the City, which designation shaU include the Interest
Mcxle and Maturity Date of the particular Bonds to be redeemed, or otherwise asrequiredby this
Indenture; provided, however, that subject to the last sentence of this Section, (i) in the case of
the redemption of less than all Bonds which bear interest in the same Inteiest Mode at the same
rate for the same Rate Periods, and which, in the case ofBonds bearing imerest at a Fixed Rate,
were converted on the same date, such redemption shaU be by lot in such manner as the Tnistee
may determine among such Bonds, and (u) subjea to other appUcable provisions of the Indenture,
the portion of any Bondtobe redeemed shall be in a principal amount equal to an Authorized
Denomination. In selecting Bonds for redenqption, the Trustee shaU treat each Bond as
representing that number of Bonds which is obtained by dividing the principal amount of such
Bond by the minimum Aulhorized Denomination. If it is determined that one or more, but not
aU, of tbe integral multiples ofthe Authorized Denomination of principal amount represented by
any Bond is to be caUed for redeinption, then, upon notice of intentiontoredeem such integral
multiple of an Authorized Denomination, the Registered Owner of such Bond shall forthwith
surrender such Bondtothe Trustee for (a) payment to such Registered Owner of the redeniption
price of the integral multiple of the Authorized Denomination of principal amount caUed for
redeooption, and (b) delivety to such Registered Owner of a new Bond or Bonds m the aggregate
princnpal amount of the unredeemed balance of the principal amount of such Bond. New Bonds
representing the unredeemed balance of the principal amoimt of such Bond shaU be issuedtothe
Registered Owner thereof without charge therefor. Anything herein to the contraty
norwithstandmg, any redemption of less than aU of the Bonds outstanding shall be made fust from
Bank Bonds.
Section 3.15. Limit on Remarketiiig. (a) Any Bond purchased pursuant to
Section 3.01, 3.02. 3.03, 3.04, 3.05 or 3.06 hereoffromthe date notice is given of redemption
of such Bond pursuant to Section 3.12 hereof through the date for such redemption, or from the
date of notice of mandatory purchase of such Bond pursuant to Section 3.02, 3.03, 3.04. 3.05 or
3.06 hereof through the date for such mandatoty purchase, shall not be remarketed except to a
purchaser who has been notified at the time, of such purchase of the requiremeni to deliver such
Bond for redemption or purchase lo the Trustee on the redemption or purchase date.
(b)
Tendered Bonds shaU not be remarketed to the City. The requirement of
the preceding sentence shall not apply to a purchase of Tendered Bonds when there is either (a)
a default under the Letter of Credit then in effect with respea to the Bonds, or (b) no Letter of
Credit in effect pursuant to Section 6.02 of this Indenture. The Trustee shall not be required lo
monitor the actions of the Remarketing Agem to emure that il wiU not remarket any Bonds to the
City, and, for the purposes of Section 3.07(a)(i) hereof, the Trustee may, in ihe absence of actual
notice to the conoary, assume that no funds fiimished to the Trustee by the Remarketing Agent
constitute proceeds of the remarketing of any Bonds to the City.
(c)
Notwithstanding anything else herein to the contraty, in no event shall any
Bond owned by the City be entitied to the benefit of the tender provisions hereof, and.

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83327

consequendy, in no event shaU proceeds of the Letter of Credit ever be applied to die payment
of such City-owned Bonds (and. as such, the Trustee shaU make no drawings under the Letter of
Credit witii respect thereto).
Section3.16. Deposit of Funds. For theredemptionof any of the Bonds, the City

sbaU cause to be deposited in the Principal and Interest Account- moneys sufficient to pay when
due the principal of, and premium, if any, and interest on, tbe Bonds to be redeemed on the
redemption date to-be appUed in accordance 'with the provisions hereof.

ARTICLE IV
Mode Conversion
Section 4.01. Authority for and Conditions to Conversion to Adjustable Long
Mode or Short Mode, (a) If the City shall deliver to the .Trustee a form of supplemental
indenture responsive to the provisions of Section 11.01(b) hereof, it is not necessary that aU of
the Bonds operate in the same Interest Mcxle at the same time. The City may designate a different
Interest Mode with respect to any Bond during a Flexible Mode, or one or more Adjusuble Long
Mcxles on any Rate Change Date, and during a DaUy Mcxle or a Weekly Mode on any Business
Day, upon compliance with this Section. The City may select such subsequent Interest Mode and,
-within an Adjusuble Long Mode or a Rexible Mode, the Remarketing Agent may designate such
Rate Periodsfromtimetotime, upon tbe written request of tbe City in tbe case of the Adjustable
Long Mcxle, as wiU, in its Judgment, result in the.Iowest aggregate cost being payable by the City
wilh respect to the Bonds bearing interest at a Flexible Rate or an Adjusuble Long Rate, .as the
case may be, taking into acxount interest and any other deteiminable fees and expenses, and taking
into account any Qualified Swap Agreement relating to sucb Bonds. The City may esublish
different Interest Modes and, withiQ an Adjusuble Long Mcxle or a Flexible Mcxle, the
Remarketing Agent mayfiomtime to time, upon the rec[uest of the City in the case of tbe
Adjusuble Long Mcxle, esublish different Rate Pericxls, for Bonds on the same Adjustment Date
in order to achieve an average duration of Rate Periods that, in the judgment of the Remarketing
Agent, is most likely to achieve the lowest total aggregate cost being payable by the City with
respea to the Bonds, taking into account inteiest and any other deteiminable fees and expenses,
and taking into account any .Qualified Swap Agreement relating to such Bonds. The Remarketing
Agent's detennination shall be based upon the market for and the relative yields of the Bonds and
other securities that bear interest at a .variable rate or at fixedratesthat, in the judgment of the
Remarketing Agent, are otherwise comparable to the Bonds, or any fact or circumstance relating
to the Bonds or affecting the market for the Bonds, or affecting such other comparable securities,
in a manner that, in the judgment of the Remarketing Agent, wUl affect the market for the Bonds.
The Remarketing Agent, in its discretion, may consider such infonnation and resources as it
deems appropriate in making the determinations required by this Section, but the Remarketing
Agent's detennination shall be based solely upon the Remarketing Agent's judgment, and the
Remarketing Agent's determination shall be conclusive and binding upon all pames. The
foregoing notwithstanding, the City may select any Interest Mode and, within an Adjusuble Long
Mode or a Flexible Mode, the Remarketing Agent may designate any Rate Pericxl which does not

 83328

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

meet the foregoing standards if the conditions of Section 4.01(g)(ii) hereof are satisfied. The Cify
shall select such a principal amount of Bonds for conversionfromone Interest Mcxle to another
as wiU allow Bonds after conversion to be sold in the mirtimmn Authorized Denominations
applicable to such Interest Mode.
(b)
The Cify sbaU evidence each designation of a subsequent Interest Mode and
Adjustment Date-for Bonds pursuant to Section 4.01(a) hereof by giving written notice to the
Tnistee, tbe Tmstee's Agent, the Remarketing Agent, the Bank and eachratingagency then
maintaining aratingon the Bonds, which written notice shaU be received by each sucb party not
less than 20 days prior to tbe Adjustment Date with respect to the new Adjustment Period,
specifying (i) tbe Interest Mode or Modes in which such Bonds shall operate during such
Adjustment Pericxl and tbe commencement date of such Adjustment Pericxl, and (ii) if such
Interest Mode is to be an Adjusuble Long Mcxle, the duration of such Adjustment Period for each
Bond affected thereby, the Rate Determination Date or Dates, the Rate Change Date or Dates
therefor and the appfic:able ciptional redeinption provisions detennined in accordance with
Section 3.1 l(a)(ii) hereof; provided, however, that (A) if such Adjustment Pericxl is an Adjusuble
Long Mode or a Flexible Mcxle, the first day foUo'wing each Rate Period therein shall be a
Business Day, and (B) not later than the 20ih day priortothe Acljustment Date 'withrespeato the
new Adjustment Pericxl, the Tmstee must have received written evidencefromeachratingagency
then TnainMintng aratingon the Bonds that the then currentratingon the Bonds wiU not be
reduced or withdrawn due to the conversion of the Bonds to the Adjusuble Long Mcxle or the
Flexible Mode. In addition, the Letter of Credit must provide enough days of interest coverage
after the Adjustment Date as may be required by anyratingagency then maintaining aratingon
the Bondstocontinue its unenhanced rating, ifany, unless no Letter of Crecfit is required pursuant
to Section 6.02 of this Indenture.
(c)
No later than 10:00 a.m., Chicago time, on an Adjustment Date which is
thefirstcUy of a Flexible Mode, the Remarketing Agent shaU givetelephonicnotice (confirmed
bytelecopy)to the Cify and the Trustee of (i) the initial Rate Period and initial Flexible Rate to
be home by each Bond designatedtooperate in a Flexible Mode, and C") the Rate Change Date
which iinmediately suct«ds such initial Rate Pericxl. No later than 9:30 a.m., Chicago lime, on
an Adjustment Date which is the'first day of a DaUy Mode, the Remarketing Agent shaU give
telephonic notice (confiimed bytelecopy)to the Cify and the Trustee of the initial DaUy Rate to
be home by the Bonds designated to operate in a DaUy Mcxle. No later than 10:00 a.m., Chicago
time, on the Rate Determination Date preceding an Adjusttnent Date which is the first day of a
Weekly Mode, the Remarketing Agent shaU givetelephonicnotice (confirmed bytelecopy)tothe
City and the Tmstec ofthe initial Weekly Rate to be borne by the Bonds designated to operate in
a Weekly Mode. No later than 10:00 a.m., Chicago time, on the Rate Determination Date
preceding an Adjustment Date which is the first day of an Adjusuble Long Mode, the
Remarketing Agent shall givetelephonicnotice (confinned by telecopy) to the Trustee and the
City of the initial Adjusuble Long Rale to be borne by each Bond designated to operate in an
Adjusuble Long Mode.
(d)
If the City shall designate a Shon Mcxle for any Bond which had been
operating in an Adjusuble Long Mode, or if the City shall designate an Adjusuble Long Mode

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83329

for any Bond which had been operating in a Short Mode, the City shaU cause to be delivered to
the Tnistee, the Tmstee's Agent, the Bank and the Remarketing Agent concunendy with the
notice described in (b) above, an Opinion of Bond Counseltothe effect that such designation (i) is
aulhorized or permitted by this Indenture, (u) wiU not have an adverse effea on the exclusion
from gross income of interest on the Bonds for Federal income tax purposes, and (iii) wiU not
have an adveise effect on the validity or enforceability of any Bond. If an Opinion of Bond
Ccxinsel is required to be delivered together with the notice, the conversion contemplated by such
opinion and notice shaU not become effective unless prior to 11:00 a.m., Chicago time. On the
applicable Adjustment Date the Tiustee shaU have received an Opinion of Bond Counsel, dated
the Adjustment Date, reaffiiming the conclusions of the opinion accompanying the notice
delivered as above recpiired. .
(e)
In the event (i) the Remarketing Agent does not determine the inteiest rate
applicable to the initial Rate Pericxl during a new Interest Mcxle with respect to any Bond all as
provided in Section 4.01(a) hereof, or (u) an opinion required by Sec:tion 4.01(d) hereof is not
deUvered or reaffirmed on the applicable Adjustment Date, the immediatefy succeeding Interest
Mcxle with respea to the Bonds in the Interest Mcxle then ending shaU be (A) a DaUy Modi: if the
preceding Mode was a Short Mode, wilh a DaUy Rate esublished by the Remarketing Agenl, or
if the Remarketing Agent faUs to set such Rate, such DaUy Rate shaU be equal to the BMA
Municipal Index, or (B) an Adjusuble Long Mode with an Adjustmem Period of 367 days if the
prececfing Mode was an Adjusuble Long Mode, with an Adjusuble Long Rate esublisb»l by the
Remarketing Agent, or, if the Remarketing Agent fails to set suchrate,such Adjusuble Long Rate
shaU be equal to the Bond Buyer One-Year Note Index, as most recentiy published in The Bond
Buyer preceding the Adjustment Date.
(f)
.Upon leceiptofnoticefromthe City as provided in Section4.01(b) hereof,
the Trustee, at least 15 days prior to each succeeding Adjustment Date, shaU give the Immediate
Notice described in Section 3.06 hereof to each Registered Owner of Bonds thereby affected
bearing interest at a DaUy Rate or a Weekly Rate of tbe rhandatotytenderfor purchase of the
affected Bonds on the Adjustment Date.
(g)
Any designation pursuant to Section 4.01(a) of a subsequent Adjustment
Pericxl shall be accompanied by (i) a written sutementfromthe Remarketing Agent, addressed
to the City, the Bank and the Tnistee, to the effect that the Remarketing Agent bas determined that
such change satisfies the standards pro'vided in Section 4.01(a) hereof, or (u) an approval in
writing of such change by a duly authorized officer of the City or an Opinion of Bond Counsel
to the effect that such approval is notrequiredfor the continued validity and enforceability of the
Bonds in accordance with their terms.
(h)
During such time as a Letter of Credii is required under Section 6.02 of this
Indenmre, no conversion of Interest Modes shall be effective unless the City has certified to the
Tnistee that the Crecfit Agreement in effect on and after such Interest Mcxle change permits
requests to be made and funds to be made avaUable to the Trustee's Agent so the Tmstee's Agent
can comply with Seciion 3.07 hereof in atimelymanner.

 83330

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCll^-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 4.02. Designation of Substitute Adjustment Date: (a) The City may
designate a Substimte Adjustment Date (i) for any Bank Bonds (provided that such Bank Bonds
shall continue to bear interest at tbe Bank Rate as long as they remain Bank Bonds), with Bank
Approval, on any Business Day, and (u) for any Bonds in an Adjusuble Long Mode, on any
Business Day on which such Bonds can be optionally redeemed at a price of par plus accraed
interest as sa forth in Section 3.11 (a)(ii) hereof. Tbe Substimte Adjustment Date sbaU be the next
succeeding Adjusttnent Date for such Bonds for aU puiposes of the Indenture.
' (b). Tbe Cify shall evidence each such designation of a Substitute Adjustment
Date by giving written notice to the Remarketing Agenl. the Bank and the Tiustee, which 'written
notice shaU be received by tbe Remarketing Agent and the Tnistee not less than one day prior to
each such Substimte Adjustment Date for Bank Bonds and not less than 20 days prior to each
Substimtion Date for Bonds in an Adjusuble Long Mcxle, specifying (i) the Interest Mode in
which such Bonds shall operate commencuig with such Substimte Adjustment Date, and (ii) if
such Adjustment Period is to be an Adjusuble Long Mcxle. the duration of the- immediately
succeeding-Adjustment Period for each Bond affected thereby, the Rate Periods therein, the Rate
Change Dates and Rate Detennination Dates therefor, and the appUcable optional redemption
provbions detennined in accordance with Section 3.11(a)(U) hereof; provided, however, that
clauses (A) and (B) of the proviso of Section 4.01(b) hereof shall apply to the designation by the
City of a Substitute Adjustment Date and the selection of tbe Rate Change Date or Dates
appUcable thereto. In addition, if the succeeding Adjustment Period istobe an Adjusuble Long
Mcxle, the; Remarketing Agent shaU givetelephonicnotice (confirmed bytelecopy)tothe Trustee
no later than 10:00 a.m., Chicago time, on the Business Day immediately preceding the Substitute
Adjustment Date, specifying the interest rate which wiU be effective commencing on such
Substitute Adjustment Date. If the succeeding Adjustment Period is to be a Flexible Mcxle, the
Remarketing Agent shaU givetelephonicnotice (confinned bytelecopy)to the Trustee, no later
than 10:00 a.m.. Chicago time, on the Adjustment Date which is thefiistday of a Flexible Mode,
of (i) the duration of the initial Rate Periods during such Flexible Mode and the initial Flexible
Rates to be home by the Bonds designated to operate in a Flexible Mode during such Rate
Pericxls, and (U) the Rate Change Dates upon which such Rate Periods shaUtenninate.If the
succeeding Adjustment Period is to be a Weekly Mcxle. the Remarketing Agent shall give
telephonic notice (conftrmed bytelecopy)to the Cify and the Tnistee. no later than 10:00 a.m..
Chicago time, on the Business Day immediately preceding the Substimte Adjustment Date,
specifying the interestratewhich wiU be effecrtive commencing on such Substitute Adjustment
Date. If the succ:eeding Adjustment Period is to be a DaUy Mode, the Remarketing Agem shall
give telephonic notice (confinned bytelecopy)to the Tmsiee, no later than 9:30 a.m., Chicago
time, on the Substitute Adjustment Date which is the first day of a DaUy Mode, of the initial DaUy
Ratetobe home by the Bonds designatedtooperate m a DaUy Mode during such Rate Period.
If the succeeding Adjustment Period is to be a Fixed Mode, the City shaU satisfy the requirements
of Section 4.03.
(c)
If the City shall designate a Substimte Adjustment Date for any Bonds, it
shall cause to be delivered to \he Trustee, the Remarketing Agent and the Bank concurrently widi
the notice described in (b) above, and no such designation of a Substitute Adjustment Date shall
take effect without, an Opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that the designation of such

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83331

Substitute Adjustment Date (i) is authorized or permitted by this Bond Indenmre, (u).wUl not have
an adverse effect on the exclusion from gross income for Federal income tax puiposes of interest
on the Bonds', and (in) wUl not have an adveise effect on the vaUdity or enforceabiUty of any
Bond. The Substimte Adjustment Date shaU not be effective unless prior to 10:00.a.m.. Chicago
time, on the Substitute Adjustment Date, the. Tnistee shaU have received an Opinion of Bond
Counsel, dated such Adjustment Date, reaffimiing the conclusions of the opinion accon^anying
the notice defivered as above recjuired.
(d)
Any designation by the Cify pursuant to Secrion 4.02(a) of a Substimte
Adjusttnent Date shall be accompanied by (i) a written statement from tbe Remarketing Agent,
addressed to the City and the Tnistee, to the effect that the Remarketing Agent bas detennined that
such change satisfies tbe standards provided in Section 4.01(a) hereof, or (ii) an Opinion of Bond
Counsel to the effect that such approval is not reqjuired for the continued vafidity and
enforceabiUty of the Bonds in accordance with their terms.
Section 4.03. Authority for and Conditions to Conversion to fixed Rate, (a)
On any Rate Cbange Date during a Flexible Mode or an Adjusuble Long Mode, or on any
Business Day during a DaUy Mode or a Weekly Mcxle. the interestrateto be borne by all or any
portion of the Bonds in such Interest Mode sbaU be converted to a Fixed Rate, and such Bonds
so converted shaU thereafter bear interest at such Fixed Rate untU payment of the principal or
redeinption pric^e thereof shaU have been niade or provided for in accoidance with the provisions
hereof, whether at the Mamrity Date, upon redemption or otherwise, upon receipt by the Trustee
of (i) a direction from a duly authorized officer of the City specifymg a Fuced Rate Conversion
Date and the principal amount of Bonds to be converted, (U) a firm underwriting or purchase
contract from a rec^ignized firm of bond underwriters or recognized instimtional investois to
underwrite or purchase aU Bonds which are to be c:onverted on such Fixed Rate Conveision Date
at a price of 100 percent of the principal amount thereof, and (Ui) an Opinion of Bond Counsel
addressed to the City and the Tnistee to the effect that such conversion (A) is authorized or
permitted by this Bond Indenture, (B) wiU not have an adveise effect on the exclusionfromgross
income for Federal income tax purposes of die interest on the Bonds, and (C) wUI not have an
adverse effea on the vaUdity or enforceabiUfy of any Bond. aU of which direction, certificates.
cond:act and opinion shaU be received not less than 20 days prior lo the Fixed Rate Conveision
Date. The conversion of the interest rate borne by Bonds puisuam to tbis Section shall not
become effective unless prior to 10:00 a.m., Chicago time, on the applicable Fixed Rate
Conveision Date the Tmstee shall have received an Opinion of Bond Counsel, dated the Fixed
Rate Conversion Date, reaffirming the conclusions of the opinion accxjmpanying the written
direction of the Cify delivered as above required.
(b)
At least 15 days prior to the Fixed Rata Conversion Date, the Trustee shaU
give or cause the Remarketing Agent to give vtritten notice of such election by the City to the
Registered Owners of aU Bonds to be converted bearing interest al a Daily Rate or a Weekly Rate,
which notice shall sute (i) the Fixed Rate Conversion Date, and (ii) that such Bonds shall be
subject to mandatory purchase on such Fixed Rate Conversion Date. The Trustee shall give
written notice by first class maU to the Remarketing Agent and the Bank of the foregoing
information.

 83332

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(c)
The City, at the direction of the Trustee, shaU deliver replacement Bonds
bearing the Fixed Rate for converted Bonds surrendered or deemed sunendered by the Registered
Owner theieof. Any such replacement Bonds shaU be executed and authenticated as provided in
Section 2.08 hereof; provided, however, ihat. unless the forin of the Bonds isrevisedpursuant
to Section 2.05 hereof, Uie Trustee shaU affix a legend on the face of each Bond authenticated on
or after the Fixed Rate Conversion Date therefor in substantiaUy the foUowing form:
This Bond bears interest at the Fixed Rate, as defined in this Bond, of
percent per annumfromand after
. This Bond is not
secured by a Letter of Credit. This Bond matures on
(d)
From the date notice of tlie proposed esublishment of a Fixed Rate with
respecttoany Bond is received by the Tiustee as provided in subsection (a) of this Section 4:03
through the Fixed Rate Conveision Date therefor, such Bond shaU not be remarkaed by the
Remarketing Agent except to a buyer who is notified in writing of the mandatoty puichase of such
Bond on such Fixed Rate Conveision Date.
(c)
No Letter of Credit is required for Bonds bearmg interest at a Hxed Rate,
so the amount of the Letter of Credit, if any, may be reduced on or after the Fixed Rate
Conversion Date with respect to siteh Bonds as provided in the Credit Agreemeni. The
detennination of the Fixed Rate for any Bonds shall be conclusive and binding upon the
Registered Owners of such Bonds, tbe City and tbe Trustee.
(f) . After the Fixed Rate Conveision Date for any Bonds, interest on such Bonds
shaU be payable semiannuaUy on each Januaty 1 and July 1 untU aU of such Bonds shall have been
paid or payment shaU have been duly provided for. The interest payable on the Januaty 1 or July
I. as the case may be, next following the Fiiced Rate Conversion Date for such Bonds shall be for
the period, -which may be less than six months, commencing on such Fixed Rate Conversion Date
until such January 1 or July 1.
(g)
If the conveision of the interest rate on any Bond does not cxanir for any
reason, including in the event that any concUtion prec:edent to the conversion shaU not occmr. such
Bonds shaU bear interestfromand after the proposed Fixed Rate Conversion Date in the same
Interest Mode as the Interest Mode appUcable to such Bond prior to the proposed Fixed Rate
Conveision Date, at the interestratecalculated in the manner set forth in Seaion 2.02 hereof,
and, in the case of an Adjusuble Long Mode, for a Rate Period of 367 days.
Section 4.04. Effea of Notices. Any notice maUed as provided heiein shall be
conclusively presumed to have been given, whether or not the Registered Owners of the Bonds
receive the same.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83333

ARTICLE V
Revenues and Funds
Se<:tion 5.01. Source of Payment of Bonds. The Bonds are direa and general
obUgations of the City but are limited as to payment as described in Section 2.03 hereof and as
otherwise provided herein.
Section 5.02. Creation of Proceeds Fund and Debt Service Fund; Creation of
Bond Purchase Fimd. (a) Creation of Proceeds Fund and Debt Service Fund. There is hereby
created by the Cify and ordered esublished with the Trustee a separate and segregated fimd to be
designated the "Cify of Chicago Variable Rate Bonds, Series
Proceeds Fund" (the "'Proceeds
Fund") and a separate and segregated fimd to be designated the "Cify of Chicago Variable Rate
Bonds, Series
Debt Service Fund" (the "Debt Service Fund"). Moneys on deposit in the
Proceeds Fund and the Debt Service Fund, and in each Account esublished therein as hereinafter
provided, shaU be held in tmst by the Tmstec for the sole and exclusive benefit of the Registered
Owners of the Bonds and the Bank.
(b)
Creation of Accounts. There are hereby created by the Cify and ordered
established with the Trustee separate Accxiunts within the Pioceeds Fund, designated as foUows:
(1)
Projea Account: an Account to be designated the "City of Chicago
Variable Rate Bonds, Series
Projea Account" (die "Project Account");
(2)
Capitalized Interest Account: an Account to be designated the "Cify of
Chicago VariableRateBonds. Series
Capitalized Interest Account" (the "Capitalized
Interest Account");
(3)
Costs of Issuance Account: an Account to be designated the "City of
Chicago Variable Rate Bonds, Series
Costs of Issuance Account" (the "Costs of
Issuance Account"); and
(4)
Program Fee Account: an Accoum to be designated the "City of Chicago
Variable Rate Bonds,. Series
Program Fee Account" (the "Program Fee Account");
There is hereby created by the City and ordered esublished with the Tnistee
separate accounts within the Debt Service Fund designated as follows:
(1)
Principal and Interest Account: an Account to be designated the "City of
Chicago Variable Rale Bonds, Series
Principal and Interest Account" (the "Principal
and Interest Accoum"); and
(2)
Letterof Credit Account: an Account to be designated the "City of Chicago
Variable Rate Bonds. Series
Lener of Credit Account" (the "Letter of Credit
Account.")

 83334

JOURNAl^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(c)
Creation of Bond Purchase Fund. Tbe Tmstee shall esUbUsh and maintain .
(but shall not have a lien on as part of the Trust Esute),. as long as any Bonds are outstanding
•which have not been converted to a Fixed Rate, a separate fiind to be known as the "City of
Chicago Variable Rate Bonds, Series
Bond Purchase Fund" (die "Bond Purchase Fund").
There shaU be deposited into the Bond Puircbase Fundfromtime to-time Ihe foUowing:
(i)
the moneys received upon theremarketingof Tendered Bondstoany person
pursuant to the Remarketing Agieement (other than Tendered Bonds sold to the City in
violation of Seaion 3.15(b) hereof);
(u)
the moneys received from the underwriter or purchaser (other than the
City) of Tendered Bonds upon the conversion of tbe interest rate thereon to a Fixed Rate;
(ui)
the moneys obtained by the Tiustee puisuant to the Letter ofCredit. ifany,
then in effect to be applied to pay the purchase price of Tendered Bonds; and
(iv)
Eligible Moneysfitimthe Cify to the extent that moneys obuined pursuant
to (i), (ii) or (iii) above are insufficient on any date to pay the purchase price of Tendered
Bonds, provided that the conditions of Section 3.15(b)'bereof are satisfied.
Moneys in the Bond Purchase Fund shaU be held in trust exclusively for the
payment of the purchase - price of Tendered Bonds; provided, however, that under no
circunistances shaU prcx:eeds of a loan made pursuant to the Letter of Credit be usedtopurchase
Bank ponds. Moneys obUmed by the Tiustee pursuanttothe Letter of CrecUt in excess of the
amount needed for the payment of the purchase price of Tendered Bonds shaU be promptiy paid
to the Bank. Moneys on deposit in the Bond Purchase Fund shall be invested only in Federal
ObUgations with atermnot exceeding the earfier of 30 daysfromthe date of investment of such
moneys or the date or dates that moneys therefrom are anticipated lo be recjuired. Amounts held
to pay the purchase price shaU be applied in the same manner as provided under the Indenture
with lespectto.unclaimed payments of principal and interest.
Section 5.03. Application of Bond Proceeds. The prcxxeds received by the City
from the sale of tbe Bonds shall be appfied as foUows:
(a)
Principal and Interest Account: the Tnistee shaU deposh into the Principal
and Interest Account any accnied interest received upon the sale of the Bonds;
(b)
Capitalized Interest Account: the Tmstee shall deposit into the Capitalized
Interest Accoum the amount of $
;
(c)
Program Fee Account: the Tiustee shall deposit into the Program Fee
Account the amount of $
;
(d)
of S

Project Account: the Trustee shall deposit into the Project Account the sum
; and

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83335

(e)
Costs of Issuance Acxounl: the balance of the proceeds of the Bonds in the
amoum of $
shaU be deposited in the Costs oflssuance Account and appUed
by the City to the payment of Costs of Issuance of the Bonds.
Section 5.04. Deposits into Ddit Service Fimd and Accounts Therein. From
time to time, when and as received, the City shaU deposit into the' D^t Service Fund sucb ftinds
as are IcgaUy available therefor, as necessaty to satisfy the Principal and Interest Account
Requirement, such moneys to be applied as described below:
(a)
for deposit into the Principal and Interest Account, the amoum, projected
to berequiredas of the close of business on the applicable dates of calculation for the
Principal and Interest Account Requirementtorestore the Principal and Interest Account
' to an amount equal to the Principal and Interest Account Recpiiremem, treating, for
puiposes of such calculation any balance projected to be on deposit in the Capitalized
Interest Accoum as of the close of business on such date as amounts crccUiedtotbe
Principal and Interest Account; and
(b)
for deposit into tbe Program Fee Acc^oiui, the amount estimated by the City
to be required as of the dose of business on therelatedDeposit Date to pay all Program
. - Fees payablefromamounts in the Program. Fee Accoimt during die semi-annual period
commencing on suchrelatedDeposit Date.
In additiontothe Debt Service Fund, there shaU be deposited imo the Debt Service
Ftind any other moneys iec:eived by the Tiustee under and pursuant to this Indenmre, when
accompanied by directionsfromthe person depositing such moneys ihat such moneys aretobe
paid into the Debt Service Fund and to one or more accounts therein.
Section 5.05. Use of Moneys in Certain Accounts for Payment of Bonds.
Moneys in the Capitalized Inteiest Accoum, the Principal and Imerest Account and the Letter of
Credit Acciount shaU be used solely for the payment of the principal of, premium, if any, and
interest on the Bonds, for the redemption of the Bonds prior to their Maturity Date, and for
reimbursemem of the Bank for draws on the Letter of Credit as provided below. Funds for such
paymenls shaU be derivedfromthe foUowing source or sources but only in the following order
of priority:
(a)
for payment of principal of and interest on the Bonds on each Payment Date
with respect to the Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed
Rate), so long as the Letter of Credit shaU be in effea,frommoneys held in the Letter of
Crecfit Accoum, which Account shall be held for the sole and exclusive benefit of the
owners of the Bonds;
(b)
for payment of interest on the Bonds on each Interest Payment Date wid:
respect lo the Bonds,frommoneys held in the Capitaliz'ed Interest Account; provided,
however, ihai so long as the Leuci of Credii shall be in effea, inieiesl due on the Bonds
(except for Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fbced Rate) on such Interest

 83336

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Payment Date shaU be" paid from a draw or draws on the Letter of Credit and moneys held
in the Capitalized Interest Account shaU be used on sucb Interest Payment Date to
reimbuise the Bank in an amoimt not to exceed tbe amoum of such draw or draws;
(c)
for paymem of principal of the Bonds on each Payment Date on which a
Principal Installmem is payable with respea to tbe Bonds, from moneys transferred from
the Project Accoum pursuam to the provisions of Section 5.07 hereof and held in the
Principal and Interest Account; provided, however, that so long as the Letter of Credit
shaU be in effect, such Principal Installment or Sinking Fund Payment (except in respea
of Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) shaU be paid fitim a draw or
draws on tbe Letter of Credit and moneys held in tbe Principal and Interest Accoum shaU
be used on such Paymem Date toreimbursetbe Bank in an amount' not to exceed tbe
amount of such draw or draws; and
(d)
for paymem of principal of, premium, if any, and interest due on each
Payment Date with respect to the Bonds and not otherwise provided for,frommoneys held
in the Principal and Interest Accoimt.
Section 5.06. Use of Moneys in Costs of Issuance Accoimt and Program Fee
Account. Moneys deposited into the Costs of Issuance Account pursuamtoSection 5.03(e) shaU
be used solely for the payment of Costs of Issuance of the Bonds as directed in a c«rtificate of the
City fUed with the Trustee. If after the paymem of aU Costs of Issuance, as specified in a
certificate of the City fUed with the Trustee, there shaU be any balani» remaining m die Costs of
Issuance Account, such balance shaU be transferred to Ihe Program Fee Accoum. Moneys
deposited mto the Program Fee Account pursuant to Section 5.03(c) hereof shaU be used solely
for the payment of Program Fees payable by the Cify to third parties, including the.Bank. 'with
respect to the Bonds as set forth in a certificate ofthe City fUed with the Tmstee.
Section 5.07. Use of Moneys in Projea Account. Except as otherwise provided
herein, moneys in the Project Accoum shall be disbursed and appUed to pay, or to reunbiirse the
payment of, the cost of capital projects of the Cify and for the shorttermfinancingof the working
capital needs of the Cify.
•
Section 5.08. Tax Covenants. The Cify covenants to take any action recjuired by
the provisions of the Code and witliin its power to take in order to preserve the exclusion of
interest on the Bonds from gross income for Federal incxime tax puiposes, including, but not
limited to, the provisions of Section 148 of the Code relating tci "arbitrage bonds."
The Cify further covenants to comply with the provisions of the Tax Compliance
Cemficate ofthe City relating to the Bonds, including, but not limited to, those provisions relating
to the sums of the Bonds as "private activity bonds" under Section 141 of the Code.
Section 5.09. Non-presentment of Bonds. In the evem any Bond shall not be
presented for payment when the principal thereof becomes due, whether at maturity, at the date
fixed for redemption or otherwise, if moneys sufficient lo pay such Bond shall have been made

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83337

avaUable to the Tnistee for the benefit of the Registered Owner thereof, subject to the provisions
of the unmediately foUowing paragraph, aU liabUity of the City to the Registered Owner diereof
for tbe paymem of such Bond shall forthwith cease, determine and be completely discharged, and
thereupon it shaU be the dufy of the Trustee to hold such moneys, widiout liabilify for interest
thereon, for Ihe benefit of the Registered Owner of such Bond who shaU thereafter be restricted
exclusivefy to such moneys, for any claim of whatever nature on his or her part under the
Indenture or on, or with respect to, such Bond.
Any moneys so deposited with and held by the Tnistee not so appUed to the
payment ofBonds within two years after the date on which the same shaU have become due shaU
be repaid by the Trustee to the Cify, and thereafter the Registered Owners of such Bonds shaU be
entitiedtolook onlytothe Cify for payinent, and then onlytothe extent of the amoum so repaid,
and aU liabiUfy of the Tiustee with respect to such moneys shall thereupon cease, and tbe Cify
shaU not be liable for any interest thereon and shaU not be regarded as a trustee of such moneys.
The obfigation of Ihe Trustee under this Sectiontopay any such fiindstothe City shaU be subject,
however, to any provisions of law applicable to the Trustee or to such fimds providing other
requirements for disposition of unclaimed property.
Section 5.10. Moneys Held in Trust. All moneys requiredtobe deposited witti
or paid to the Tnistee for the accoum of any Fund or Accountreferredto in any provision of this
Indenture shaU be held by the Tmstee in tnist as provided in this Indenture, and shall, whUe held
by the Trustee, constitute part of the Tmst EsUte and be subject to the lien or security interest
created hereby. Payments under the Letter of Crecfit shall be used solely and only to pay principal
and interest on the Bonds, and the purchase price of Bonds, as provided in the Letter of Credit.

AR'nCLE VI
CrecUt Faculties
Section 6.01. Letter of Credit, (a) The City covenants and agrees that al aU times
whUe any Bonds are outstanding which bear interest at arateother than the Fixed Rate, it wUl
mainuin a Letter of Credit in fuU force and effect with respect to all such Bonds bearing interest
at other than a Fixed Rate, except as otherwise provided in Section 6.02 of this Indenture
(b)
Upon the receipt by die Tmstee of a written request of the City suting that
the amounl available under the Letter of Credit may be reduced in compfiance with Section 6.02
of this Indenture, the Trustee shaU direct or send appropriate notice to the Bankrequestingor
directing that such amount be reduced and specifying the amounl that shall thereafter be available
under the Letter of Crecfit, subject to any recjuirements of the Credit Agreemem. In no event shall
the Lener of Ciedit be reduced to an amount less than the principal amount of the Bonds
outstanding which bear interest at other than a Fixed Rate, plus an amount equal to interest
thereon at the Interest Coverage Rate then required by anyratingagency ihcnratingthe Bonds
for the number of days then required by anyratingagency then rating the Bonds, unless the City
has deposited a Substimte Letter of Credit wiih the Tmstec in accordance with the terms of this

 83338

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section, or unless the lecpiiiements set forth in Section 6.02 of this Indenture are satisfied; in no
event shaU any Substimte Letter of Credit replace only in part any then currem Letter of Crecfit.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, iinmediately after paymem biftiUhas been made on any Bond,
either at its Maturity Date, by optionalredemptionor otherwise, the Tnistee shall direa or send
appropriate notice to the Bankrequestingor directing that the amount available under the Letter
of Credit be reduced by an amoum equal to such principal so paid plus the amount of interest
theraofore provided for under thie Letter of Credit on such princq)a] amount. No duection or
consem ofthe City shaU be required for the Trustee to take the action required by the preceding
sentence.
(c)
Priortodie Fixed Rate Conversion Date, a Substitute Letter of Credit may
become effecrtive on any Business Day, which sbaU be a Substimtion Date. Tbe City shaU cause
a draft of any Substitute Letter of Credit in substantialfy final fonn and a commitmem letter 'with
respect thereto, together with written evidencefromeachratingagencyratingthe Bonds prior to
the Substimtion Date of theratingon the Bonds after the Substitution Date, to be delivered to tbe
Trustee, the Trustee's Agent and the Remarketing Agent, not less than 15 days prior to the
proposed Substitution Date. On each Substimtion Date the Cify, the Remaiketing Agem, the
Tiustee and tbe Tmstee's Agem shall also receive (i) an opinion of counsel for the Substitute Bank
regarding the enforceabiUty ofthe Substitute Letter of Credit in substantially the form deUvered'
to ihe Tnistee upon execsition and deUvety of the Letter of Creddt then in effect, and (ii) an
Opinion of Bond Counseltothe effea that tbe substimtion of tbe Letter of Credit then in effect
wiU not adveisely affea the validify of the Bonds or any exclusionfromgross income for Federal
income tax purposes of interest on the Bonds would otherwise be entitied. No Substimte Letter
of Credit shall become effective unless the then currem Bank certifies to the City, tbe Tmstee's
Agent and the Tnistee that aU obfigations owing to such Bank under the Credit Agreement have
been paid in fiiU.
(d)
On any Substimtion Date on which a Substimte Letter of Credit becomes
effective in accordance with the provisions of this Section, the Tnistee shaU take such action as
is required under the CrecUt Agreement to crause the cancellation of the Letter of Credit then in
effect provided that all dra'wings requested thereunder have been honored.
(e)
Immediate Notice shaU be given by the Trustee to the Bank, the City, the
Remarketing Agent, the Trustee's Agent and eachratingagenty then maintaining aratingon the
Bonds if no satisfactoty Substimte Letter Of Credit shaU beftimishedto ihe Trustee in accordance
with this Setmon on or prior to the Suted Termination Date of the then cunent Lettei of Ciedit,
unless the requirements of Secrion 6.02 of this Indenture are satisfied.
(f)
Each Substimte Letter of Crecfit shaU piovide for the submission of draws
thereunder, and the payment of properly submitted draws, on the same timing as that ofthe Letter
of Credit being substimted for, unless the Rating Agency shaU agree to some other liming.
SeOJon 6.02. Letter of Credit Not Required in Certain Circumstances, (a)
Prior to the Fixed Rate Conversion Date therefor. Bonds are not required to have the benefit of
a Letter of Ciecfit withrespectto 100 percent of the outstanding principal amount of such Bonds

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83339

if, priortothe expuation orterminationof the Letter of CrecUt then in effect, there is deUvered
to the Cify, the Remarketing Agent, the .Tmstee and the Trustee's Agent (i) an Opinion of Bond
Counsel to the effect that the expuation orterminationof the Letter of Credit then in effea wiU
not adversefy affect the validity of the Bonds or any exclusion from gross income for Federal
income tax puiposes of inteiest on the Bonds, and (u) written evidencefromeachratingagency
dien maintaining a rating on the Bonds that the ratings on tbe Bonds (other than Bonds in tbe
Fixed Mcxle) foUowing the expiration orterminationof the Letter of CrecUt wiU not be reduced,
or withdrawnfromtheratingson the Bonds immediately prior to such expiration or termination.
Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate shaU not be required to have the benefit of a Letter of
Credit after the Fuced Rate Conversion Date appUcabletosuch Bonds.
(b)
Upon satisfaction of tbe recpiirements described in subparagraph (a) above,
(i) tbe Tiustee, upon receipt of a written recjuest of tbe City, shall direct or send appropriate
notice to die Bank requesting or .directing the canceUation of tbe Letter of Credit then in effea on
the date (the "Letter of CrecUt CancieUation Date") requested by the City in such written request,
whicb date may not be less than 30 days, or such longer pericxl as is required by the CrecUt
Agreement for itstenninatitjnat the recpiest of die City,fromdie date the Trustee receives such
written request, and (U) following the date of such cancellation, all Tendered Bonds may be
remarketed by the Remarketing Agent pursuamtoihe Remarketing Agreement without the benefit
of a Letter of CrecUt until sucb time, if any, as the Bonds are thereafter entitied to the benefits of
a Letter of Credit puisuam to the provisions of Section 6.01 of Ihis Indenture, but only if diere
is deUveredtodie City, die Trustee, die Trustee's Agem and die Remarketing Agem an Opinion
of Bond Counsel to the effea that the execution and delivety of the Letter of Credit wiU not
adversely affea the vafidity of the Bonds or any exclusionfiomgross income for Federal income
lax puiposes of mterest on the Bonds. In the evem of a Letter of CrecUt CanceUation Date, the
Bonds shaU be subject to mandatorytenderpursuamtoSection 3.04 hereof. If at any time no
. Letter of Credit is lequired on the Bonds, the Trustee shaU affix a legend on the face of each Bond
which does not bear interest at a Fixed Rate audienticated on or after the date on whicb a Letter
of Credit is no longer recjuired in substantiaUy the foUowing form:
A Letter ofCredit is not recpiired witbrespectto this Bond. If a Letter of
Credii is currendy provided, il may be discontinued at any time without prior
notice to, or arighttotenderby, the Bondholder.
Section 6.03. Consent of Bank Required. No consent of or noticetothe Bank
shaU be required under any provision of the Indenture, nor shall the Bank have anyrightto
receive notice of, consemto,direct or control any actions,restrictions,rights,remecfies, waivers
or accelerations puisuam to any provision of the Indenture, during any time whicb:
(i)
the Bank is in default in its obfigation to make loans under and in
compliance with the lerms of the Letter ofCredit;
(ii)
the Letter of Credit for any reason ceases to h>e valid and binding on the
Bank or is declared to be null and void, or the valicfity or enforceabUity of any provision
of the Letter of Credit is denied by the Bank or any governmental agency or authority, or

 83340

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIl^-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

the Bank is denying furtherfiabifityor obligation under the Letter of Ciedit, in all of the
above cases contraty to thetermsof the Letter of Credit;
(iu) a petition has been fUed and is pending against the Bank under any
banknipnty, reorganization, arrangemem, insolvency, readjusttnentof debt, dissolution or
liquidation law of any jurisdiction, whether now or-hereafter in effea, and has not been
dismissed widiin thirty (30) day after such filing;
(iv) the Bank has filed a petition, which is pending, tinder any bankmptcy,
reorganization, arrangemem, insolventy, readjustment of debt, dissolution or Uquidation
law, of any jurisdiction, whether now or hereafter in effect, or has consented to the fUing
of any petition against it under such law; or
(v)
the Bank is dissolved or confisc:ated by action of govemment due to war or
peace time emergency or the United Sutes government declares a moratorium on the
Bank's activities.
Section 6.04. Draws on the Letter of Credit, (a) Tmstee's Duty to Draw on
Letter of Credit to Pay Principal of and Interest on Bonds. The City hereby authorized and directs
the Tmstee, and the Tnistee hereby agrees, to draw moneys under the Letter of Credit for tbe
benefit of the o"wners of ihe Bonds in accordance with the teims thereof in amounts sufficient to
make timely payments of the principal of and interest on tbe Bonds (other than Bank Bonds or
Bonds bearing interest at a Fbced Rate) in accordance with the pro'vislons of Section
hereof
after lakdng imo account any amounts held in the Letter of CrecUt Accoum as a result of draws on
the Letter of Credit pursuam to subsection (c) of this Section 6.04.
(b)
Tmstee's Duty to EHaw on Letter of Credit to Pay Purchase or Redemption
Price ofBonds. The Trastee shall also (i) draw moneys under the Letter of Credit m accordance
with thetermsthaeof to the extent necessaty to make timely payments required to be made
pursuant to, and in accordance with. Sections 3.01. 3.02, 3.03, 3.04, 3.05 and 3.06 hereof, and
(ii) draw moneys under the Letter of Ciedit lo pay Ihe redemption price of Bonds (other than Bank
Bonds or Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) pursuam to Section 3.11 hereof in accordance
with thetermsthereof in the amounts required by said Section 3.11. It is understocxl and agreed
that the Trustee when drawing amounts under the Letter of Credit as provided in clauses (i) and
(ii) of this subsection (b) is not acting as an agent of the City. The Tmstee shall make draws
under the Letter of CrecUt in acxordance with thetermsthereoftopay the purchase price ofBonds
pursuant to Sections 3.01, 3.02, 3.03, 3.04,3.05 and 3.06 hereof, or to pay die redemption price
or purchase price of the Bonds pursuant to Secdon 3.11 hereof, so as to provide immediately
avaUable fimds in New York, New York, by the close of business on the date such purchase or
redemption is to be made.
(c)
Drawings Under Letter of Credit When Bonds Bear Interest at Flexible
Rate. On the first Busmess Day of each month whUe the Bonds heai interest at a Flexible Rate
and on any Adjustment Date commencing a Hexible Mode that is not the first Business Day of
a month, the Tmstee shall make draws under the Letter of Credit in accordance with the terms

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83341

thereof in an amount that would be sufficient to cause tbe amount on deposit in the Letter of
Crecfit Accx>um on such day to ecjual the accmed and unpaid interest on tbe Bonds (other than
Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) plus the inteiest that would accme on the
Bonds from such datetoand including the first Business Day of the foUowing calendar momh if
the Bonds were outstanding at aUtimesduring such period calculated on the basis of the interest
rate used in the Letter of Credit for purposes of calculating the suted amcxim theieof for any day
interest is to accme at arateunknown on the date such draw is made. In either case, the Tmstee
shall apply amounts held to the crecfit of the Principal nnrf Interest Accounttoreimbursethe Bank
the amount of such draw pursuant to Section
hereof. The. Trustee shaU provide any Paying
Agem with the amounts calculated by die Tmstee to be drawn under the Letter of Credit by such
Paying Agem puisuam to this Section 6.04. Notwithstanding the deposit of such moneys in the
Letter of Credit Account and diereimbursementof die Bank, the Cify shaU have no ri^t, tide,
or interest in such moneys, and such moneys shaU be held exclusively for the Registered Owners
and paid over in acc:ordance with the provisions of this Indenture.

ARTICLEVn
Investment of Moneys
Section 7.01. Investment of Moneys. Moneys held in the ftinds, accounts and
sub-accounis esublished hereunder shall be invested andreinvestedin accordance with the
provisions goveming investments contained in the Indenture; provided., however, that pnxreeds
of tbe Letter of Crecfit shall onfy be invested in Federal ObUgations maturing no later than the date
upon which such moneys wiU be required to be used in - accordance herewith. AU such
investments shaU be held by or under the control of the Trustee and shall be deemed at all times
a part of the fimd. accoum or sub-accoum for which they were made.
Section 7.02. Investment Income. The interest earned on any mvestment of
moneys held hereunder, any profit realized from such investment and any lossresultingfromsuch
investment shall be credited or charged to the ftind. account or sub-accx>unt for which such
investment was made; provided, however, that any interest earned on, and any profit resulting
from, the investment of moneys on deposit in the Debt Service Reserve Account shaU be
transfened by the Tmstee to the Second Lien Revenue Fund.
ARTICLE v m
Discharge of Lien
Section 8.01. Defeasance. If the City shall pay to the Registered Owneis of the
Bonds, OI provide for the payment of, the principal, preinium, if any, and interest to become due
on the Bonds, and satisfy in full the Bank Obligations, then this Iixlenture sliall be fuUy discharged
and satisfied. Upon the satisfaction and discharge of this Indenture, the Trustee shaU, upon die
request of the City, exetnite and deliver to the City all such instruments as may be desirable to

 83342

JOURNAl^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

.

5/1/2002

evidence sucb discharge and satisfaction, and aUfiduciariesshall pay over or delivertothe City
aUftinds,accounts and other moneys or securities held by them puisuant to this Indenture which
are not required for the payinent or redemption of the Bonds or the Bank ObUgations
If tbe City shaU pay and discharge a portion of the Bonds as aforesaid, and such
portion sbaU cease to be entitied to any lien, benefit or security under the Indemure, and if the
City shaU so direct, the Trustee shaU take such actions as may be necessatytoreduce the Letter
of CrecUt in an amoumrelatedto such portion of the Bonds which have been paid and discharged
in accordance 'with Secdon 6.01 hereof. Tbe liabUity of tbe City widi respect to such Bonds shaU
continue,' but die Registered Owners diereof shaU thereafter be entided to payment (to the
exclusion of aU other Boixlbolders) only out of the moneys or Federal Obligations deposited with
the Trustee under Article XI of tbe Indenture.

ARTICLE IX
Default Provisions; Remedies
Section 9.01. Defaults. Each of the foUowing events is hereby declared to be an
"Event of Default":
(a)
payinent of the principal or Redeinption Price, if any, of any Bonds shaU
not be made when and as the same shaU become due, whether at maturity or upon caU for
redemption or otherwise;
(b)
payment of any instaUmem of interest on any Bonds shall not be made when
the same shaU become due;
(c)
the City ShaU faU or refusetocomply witb the provisions of this Indenture,
or shaU default in the perfonnance or observance of any of the covenants, agreements or
conditions on its part contained herein or in the Bonds, which materiaUy affects the rights
ofthe owners ofthe Bonds and such faUure,refiisalor default shall continue for a period
of 45 days after written notice thereof by the Trustee or the owners of not less than 25
percem in principal amount ofthe Outstanding Bonds; provided, however, that in the case
of any such defaidt which can be cured by due diligenc:e but which cannot be cured within
the 45-day fiericxl, the time to core shall be extended for such period as may be necessary
to remedy the default with aU difigence;
(d)
defaiUt in the dite and pimctual payment of the purchase price of any
Tendered Bond; or;
(e)
receipt by the Trustee of noticefromthe Bank that an Event of Default has
occuned under the Credit Agreement and that the Letter of Credit is bemg terminated
puisuant to its terms by the Bank.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83343

Secrtion 9.02. Remedies, (a) Upon the happening and continuance of any Event
of Default specified in paragraph (a), (b), (d) or (e) of Section 9.01 hereof, the Trustee shaU
proceed, or upon the happening and continuance of any Event of Default specified in paragraph
(c) of Section 9.01 heieof, the Trustee may proceed, and upon the written recjuest of the owners
of not less than 25 percent in principal amount of the Outstanding Bonds, shaU proceed, in its own
name, subjea to tbe provisions of tbis Section,toprotea and enforce itsrightsand therigbtsof
the owners of the Bonds by such of die foUowmg remedies as the Tnistee, being advised by
counsel, shall deem most effectual to protect and enforce sucb rights:
(0
by mandamus or other suit, action or proceeding at law or in eqaity, to
enforce aUrightsof tbe owners of the Bonds includmg therightto require the City or the
Bank to cany out any covenant or agreement with or for the benefit of Ihe owneis of the
Bonds and to perfoim its or their duties under this Indenture or the Letter of Credit;
(u)

by bringing suit upon the Bonds;

(iU) by action or suit in equity, recpiire the City to accoum as if it were tbe
tnistee of an express trust for the owners of the Bonds; or
(iv)
by action or suit in equity, enjoin any acts or things which may be unlawfid
or in violation of therightsof the owners of the Ekinds.
(b)
In the enforcemem of anyrightsandremediesunder this. Indenture, the
Trustee shaU be entided to sue for, enforce payment of and receive any and all amounts then or
during any defatUt becoming, and at any time.remaining, duefromthe City but only out of
moneys pledged as security for the Bonds for principal. Redemption Price, interest or otherwise,
under any provision of this Indenmre or of the Bonds, and uiqiaid. with interest on overdue
payments at therateorratesof interest specified ui such Bonds, together with any and aU costs
and expenses of coUection and of all proceedings hereunder and under sucb Bonds without
prejucfice to any otherrightor remedy of the Trustee or of the owneis of the Bonds, and to
recover and enforce a judgment or decree against the City for any portion of sucb amounts
remaining unpaid, with interest, cost and expenses, and to coUect from any moneys avaUable
under this Indenture for such purpose, in any manner provided by law, tbe moneys adjudged or
decreed to be payable.
(c)
As long as the Letter of Credit shall be in effect, and the Bank shall not
have failed to satisfy its obligations thereunder or otherwise lost itsrigbtsas provided in Section
6.03 hereof, the Bank shall be entitled to exercise all of the rights granted to the Registered
Owners of the Bonds under this Indenture, and, in such event, shaU befiirtherentided to direa
the Tmstee with respect to the use and disposition of moneys on deposit in the FYincipal and
Interest Account of the Debt Service Fund (including, without limiution, therighttoduect die
Tmstee to pay over all or any part of such moneys to the Bank) untU aU of the obligations to die
Bank secured by the Trust Esute shaU have been satisfied in fidl. Except as provided in Section
9.02(e) hereof, as long as the Letter of Credit shall be in effect, and the Bank shall not have faded
to satisfy its obligations thereunder or otherwise lost itsriglitsas provided in Section 6.03 hereof.

 83344

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

the Bank shall control the exercise of aUremediesheieunder; as such, in the foregoing
circumstances. Registered Owners of the Bonds shall not be entided to the exercise of any
remecfies hereunder widiout the Bank's prior written c^onsent.
(d)
Under no cironiastance may the iTrustee declare the principal of or interest
on the Bonds to be due and payable prior to tbe Maturify Date following the ocxurrence of an
Event of Default under this Indenture.
(e)
Notwidistanding anydiing in diis Indenmretotbe contraty, the Tmstee and
the Bondholders shaU have the absoluterightat aU times to enforce the provisions of the Letter
of Credit without any requirement of consentfromthe Bank.

ARTICLE X
Trustee, Remarketing Agent and Paying Agent
Section 10.01. Acceptance of Trusts. The Tnistee hereby accepts the tnists
imposed upon it by this Indemure, and agrees to perform said tnists, but only upon and subjea
to the express terms and concfitions set fonh herein. The Tnistee assumes no duties.
responsibUities or UabUities by reason of its execution of tbis Indenture other than as expressly
set forth in this Indenture. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Indenture, the Tnistee
shaU have no lien or securify interest in and lo the proceeds of the Letter of Credit or Ihe proceeds
ofremarketedBonds; for the purpose of paying the fees or expenses of the Trustee. The Tnistee
shaU draw on the Letter of CrecUt, when required, whether or not its fees and expenses have been
fully paid. Notwithstanding any provision of this Indenture to the c^ontiaty, the Trustee may not
resign or be removed untU a successor Tmstee shaU have been appointed as herein provided, and
the Letter of Credit duly and effectively transfened to such successor Tiustee.
Section 10.02. Dealing in Bonds. Tbe Tmstee and the Remarketing Agent, in
its individual capacify, may buy, seU, own, hold and deal m any of the Bonds, and may join in
any action which the Registered Owner of any Bond may be entided to take with like effea as if
it cfid not act in any capacity heieunder. The Tnistee or the Remarketing Agent, in its individual
capacity, either as principal or agent, may also engage in or be interested in any financial or other
transaction with the City, and may act as depositaty, trustee or agem for any committee or body
of the Registered Owners of Bonds secured hereby or other obfigations of the City as fireely as if
it did not aa in any capacity hereunder. It is expressly understood that the Trustee in carrying
out its duties under this Indenture shall be acting as a conduit widi respea to deliveries of Bonds
for purchase and purchases pursuant to Article in of this Indenture.
Section 10.03. Remarketing Agent. The City shall designate the Remarketing
Agent for the purpose of determining the interestrateon the Bonds, subjea to the conditions set
forth in Section 10.04 hereof, and for the purpose of remarketing the Bonds as provided herein.
The Remarketing Agent shall designate to the Trustee its Delivery Office and signify its

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83345

aixeptance of the duties and obligations imposed upon it hereunder by written instnunents of
acceptance delivered to ihe Cify and the Trustee.
Section 10.04. Qualifications of Remarketiiig Agent. The Remarketing Agem
sbaU be (i) a member of the National Association of Securities Dealeis, Inc.. having a
capitalization of at least $
, and (u) audiorized by law to perform aU the duties
imposed upon it by this Indenture and the Remarketing Agreemem.
In tbe event of tbe resignation or removal of tbe Remarketing Agem, tbe
Remarketing Agem shall pay over, assign and deliver any moneys and Bonds held by it in such
capacity to its successor or, if there be no successor, to the Tnistee.
Section 10.05. Paying AgenL The Tmstee may, and, if the Bonds bear interest
at a Short Rate and are no longerregisteredin Ihe name of a nominee of a Securities Depositoty,
shaU, appomt a Paymg Agent with power to act on its behalf and subjea to its direction (i) in the
authentication,registrationand deUvety of Bonds in connection with transfers and exchanges
hereunder, as fiiUy to aU intents and puiposes as though such Paying Agent had been expressly
audiorized by this Indemure to authenticate,registerand deliver Bonds, (U) for effecting purchases
and sales ofBonds pursuant hereto and accepting deliveries ofBonds, making deliveries ofBonds
and holding Bonds pursuant hereto, and (in) in the "lalring of draws and accepting notice of
reinsutements under the Letter of Credit, including m the case of clauses Cd) and (in) the
esublishmem of required trust accounts in the name and on behalf of the Tmstee. The foregoing
notwithstanding, the Tiustee need not appoim a Paying Agem for as long as the Trustee shaU have
an office in New York, New York capable of hanrtHxig the duties of Paying Agem heieunder.
Any Paying Agent appointed pursuamtothis Section shall evidence its acceptance by a certificate
filed wilh the Tnistee, the Bank and the Cify. For all purposes of this Indenture, the
authentication,registrationand delivety of Bonds by or to any Paying Agent pursuant to this
Section shaU be deemed to be the authentication, registration and delivery of Bonds "by or to the
Tmstee." Such Paying Agent shall at aU times.be a commercial bank having an office in New
York, New Yoik, and shall at aU times be a coiporation organized and doing business under the
laws ofthe United Sutes or of any sUte widi combined capital and surplus of at least $50,000,000
and authorized under such laws to exercise corporate tmst powers and subjea to supervision or
examination by Federal or sute authority. If sucb corporation publishes reports of condition at
least annuaUy pursuant to law or the requirements of such authority, then for the purposes of this
Section the combined capital and suiplus of such corporation shall be deemedtobe its combined
capital and surplus as set forth in its most recent report of condition so published.
Any corporation into whicb such Paying Agent may be merged or converted, or
widi which it may be consolidated, or any corporation resulting from any merger, consolidation
or conversion to which such Paying Agem shaU be a party, or any corporation succeeding lo the
corporate onist business of such Paying Agem, shaU be a successor of such Paying Agent
hereunder, if such successor corporation is otherwise efigible under this Section, widiout tbe
execution or filing or any further act on the pan of the parties heieto or such Paying Agent or
such successor corporation.

 83346

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Any Paying Agent may at any time resign by giving written notice of resignation
to the Tnistee. the Remarketing Agem. the Bank and the Cify, and such resignation shaU take
effect at the appoimment by the Tnistee of a successor Paying Agem pursuam to the succeeding
provisions of this Section and the acceptance by tbe successor Paying Agem of such appointment.
The Trastee may at any timeterminatethe agency of any Paying Agem by giving written notice
ofterminationto sucb Paying Agent, the Remarketing Agem, the Bank and the City. Upon
receiving such a notice of resignation or upon sucb atermination,or in case at any time such
Paying Agem shaU cease to be eUgible under this Seaion, the Trustee shaU prompdy appoint a
successor Paying Agem, shaU give written notice of such appointmem to the Cify, the
Remarketing Agem and the Bank, and shaU mad notice of such appointmem to aU registered
owners of Bonds.
Notwithstanding anything hereintoIhe contraty, any Paying Agem shaU be entided
to rely on infoimationftimishedto it orally or in writing by the Trustee and the Remarketing
Agent, and shaU be protected hereunder in relying thereon.
The Tnistee agrees to pay to any Paying Agent from time to time its fees and
expenses for its services, and the Tiustee shall be entided to bereimbursedfor such payments
puisuam to Section 1005 of the Indemure. .
Section 10.06. Notice to Rating Agendes. The Tnistee hereby agrees that if at
any time (a) any mandatoiy tender of the Bonds occurs, (b) the Cify redeems any portion of the
Bonds outstanding hereunder prior to their Maturify Date, (c) tbe City provides for the paymem
of any portion of tbe Bonds pursuant to Article: XI of the Indemure, (d) a- successor Trastee is
appointed, (e) any supplement to the Indenture, the Crecfit Agreement or the Custody Agreemem,
if any, shaU become effective, or any party thereto shaU waive any provision of the Indenture,
(f) any change m die Remarketing Agem occurs, (g) any Fuced Rate Conversion Date occurs,
(h) an Adjusuble Long Mode or a Flexible Mcxle is esublished, (i) the Letter of Credit then in
effea expires or terminates or a Substimte Letter of Credit is delivered, ® the Suted Teiminau'on
Date of the Letter of Crecfit is changed,, then, in each case, the Trustee shaU give notice thereof
to eachratingagency then maintaining aratingon the Bonds.
Section 10.07. Qualification ofTrustee. The Tiustee hereunder shall be a bank,
tmst company or national banking association having the powers of a tmst company doing
business and having an office in the City of Chicago, Blinois.
Section 10.08. Respon^bUities ofTrustee. (a) The recitals of fact herein and in
the Bonds shall be taken as the suiements of the City and the Tmstee assumes no responsibifity
for the conecmess of the same. The Tmsiee makes norepresenutionsas to the validity or
sufficiency of this Indenture or any Supplemenul Indenture or of any Bonds issued hereunder or
thereunder or inrespectof the security afforded by this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture,
and Uie Tmstee shall not incur any responsibility inrespectthereof. The Tnistee shaU, however,
be responsible for its represcnution contained in its certificate of authentication on the Bonds.
The Tmstee shall not be under any responsibility or duty with respect to the issuance of the Bonds
for value or the application of the proceeds thereof except to the extent such prcx:eeds are paid to

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83347

the Tmstee in its capacity as Tmstee. or the application of any moneys paidtothe City or others
in accordance with this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenmre. The Tmstee sbaU not be under
any obUgation or duty to perfoim any act that would involve it in expense or liabifity or to
instimte or defend any action or suit in respect hereof, or to advance any of its o'wn moneys,
unless pioperly mdemnified. Subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this Section, the
Tiustee sbaU not be liable in connection with the perfonnance of its duties hereunder except for
its own negfigence or wUlfid miscondua or that of its agents.
(b)
Tbe Trustee, prior to the cxxurrence of an Event of Default and after the
remedy of aU Events of Default that may have cxxuned, undertakes to perfoim such duties and
only such duties as are specificaUy set forth in this Indenture and each Supplemental Indenture.
In case an Event of Default has occuned and bas not been remedied, the Tnistee shaU exercise
such of therightsand powers vested in it by law, this Indenture and each Supplemental Indenture,
and shall use the same degree of care and skiU in their exercise as a pmdent person would exercise
or use under the circumstances in the ccmduct of his or her o'wn affairs. Any provision of this
Indenture and any St^lemental Indenturerelatingtoaction taken or so to be taken by tbe Trastee
or lo evidence upon which the Trustee mayrelyshaU be subjecttothe provisions of this Section.
Section 10.09. Funds Held in Trust and Security Therefor. Any moneys held
by the Trustee, as such, at any time pursuant lo thetermsof ibis Indenture or any Supplemental
Indenture sbaU be and hereby are assigned, tzansferrcd and set over unto the Tnistee in trust for
the purposes and upon thetermsand conditions of this Indenture or such Supplemental Indenture.
Subject to theteimsof this lndenture conceming Permitted Investments, all moneys (not inchiding
securities) held by the Tnistee, as such,, may be deposited by the Tmsiee in its banking
depaitment, or with such other banks, trust companies, or national banking assocnations, each
having its principal place of business in Ihe City of Chicago, Ulinois, as may be designated by the
Cify and approved by the Tnistee. No such fiinds shaU be deposited with any bank, trust
company or national banking asscx;iation, other than the Tnistee, in an amount exceeding 25
percem of the amount whicb an officer of such bank, trust company or national banking
association shaU certifytothe Trustee and the Cify as the.combined capital, surplus and undivided
profits of sucb bank, trust company or national banking asscxriation. No suchftindsshaU be
deposited or remain on deposit with any bank, trust coinpany or national banking asscx:iaticjn in
excess ofthe amoiuit insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Coiporation. unless (a) such bank,
trust company or national banking association shaU have deposited in tmst with the trust
depanmem of the Tnistee or with a Federal Reserve Bank or branch or. with the wrinen approval
of the Tmstee and the City, pledged lo some other bank, trust company or national banking
assixriation, for the benefit of the City and the appropriate fimd, account, subfimd or subaccoimt,
as collateral security for the moneys deposited. Qualified CoUateral having a cunent market value
(exclusive of accmed interest) at least eqaal to 110 percent of the amoum of such moneys, or
(b) in lieu of such collateral security as to all or any pan of such moneys, there shaU have been
deposited in trust with the trust department of the Tmstee, for the benefit of die City and the
appropriate fimd, account, subfimd or subaccoimt, and remain in fidl force and effect as security
for such moneys or pan thereof, the indemnifying bond or bonds of a surety company or
companies qualified as surety for deposits of fiinds of the United Sutes of America and qualified
to transact business in the Sute in a sum at least equal to the amount of such moneys or part

 83348

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCII^-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

thereof. The Trustee shaU allow and credit interest on any such moneys held by it at such rate
as it customarily aUows upon sinular moneys of sitnUar size and under similar conditions or as
recjuired by law. Interest in respea of moneys or on securities in any fimd, account, subfimd or
subaccount shaU be credited in-each case to the fimd, acxount, subfimd or subaccount in which
such moneys or securities are held.
Section 10.10. Evidence on' which Trustee May AcL The Tmstee shaU be
protected in acting upon any notice, resolution, recpiest, consent, order, certificate, report,
opinion, bond or other paper or document believed by it to be genuine, and to have been signed
or presented by the proper party or parties. The Trustee may consult with counsel, who may or
may not be of counsel to ihe City, and the opinion of such cxnmsel shaU be fidl and complete
• authorization and protection in respect of any action taken or-suffered by it hereunder in gtxxl
faith and in accordance therewith. Whenever the Trustee shall deem it necessary or desirable that
a matter be proved or esublished prior to taking or suffering any action hereunder, including
paymem of moneys out of any Fund or Accoum, such matter (unless other evidence in respect
thereof be herein specificaUy prescribed) may be deemed to be conclusively proved and
esublished by a Certificate, and such Certificate shaU befrdlwarrant for any action taken or
suffered in gcxxl faith under the provisions of this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture upon
the faith thereof, but in its discretion the Trustee may in lieu thereof accept other evidence of such
faa or matter or may require such fiinher or additional evidence as to it may seem reasonable.
Exc:ept as otherwise expressly provided herein or therein, any request, order, notice or other
direction retjuiied or permitted to be fiimished pursuant to any provision hereof or thereof by the
City to the Trustee sbaU be sufficiendy executed if executed in the name of the City by an
Authorized Officer.
Section 10.11. Permitted Acts and Functions. The Tnistee may become the
Owner of any Bonds, with die samerightsit would have if it were not the Trustee; To the extern
pennitted by law, the Tnistee may act as depositaty for, and permit any of its officers or directors
to act as a member of, or in any other capacify with respect to, any committee formed to protect
tberightsof the Owners of Bonds or to effect or aid in any reorganization growing out of the
enforcemem of the Bonds or this Indenture or any Supplemental Indenture, whether or not any
such committee shaU represent the Owners of a majority in piincipal amount of the Bonds then
Outstanding.
Sec:tion 10.12. Resignation. The Tiustee may at any time resign and be
discharged of its duties and obligations created by this Indenture by giving not fewer than 60 days'
written notice to the City and inailing notice thereof, to the Bank and to the owners of Bonds at
their addresses shown on the registration bcxiks kept by the Tmstee within 20 days after the giving
of such wrinen notice. Such resignation shall take effect upon the appointment of a succ:essor by
the City or the Owners of Bonds as herein provided.
Section 10.13. Removal. The Tmstee may be removed at anytimeby the Owneis
of a majority in principal amoum of the Bonds then Outstandmg, excluding any Bonds held by or
for the account of the City, by an instrument or concunent instmmenis in writing signed and duly
acknowledged by such Owners of Bonds or by their attorneys duly authorized in writing and

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83349

delivered to the City. Copies of each such instrument shall be delivered by the City to the Bank
and to the Trustee and any successor. The City mayremovethe Tnistee at any time, except duriiig
the existence of an Event of Default, for such cause as shaU be deteimined in the sole discretion
of the City by fUing with the Trustee an instmmem signed by an Audiorized Officer and by
mailing notice thereof to the Bank and to the, Owners of Bonds at their addresses shown on the
registration btxjks kept by the Tnistee. Any removal of the Trustee shaU take effect upon tbe
appointinem of a succ:essor Trustee.
Section 10.14. Appointment of Successor. In case at any time the Tiustee shaU
resign or shaU be removed or shaU become incapable of acting, or "ihall be adjudged a bankrupt
or insolvem, or if a recieiver, Uquidalor or conservator of the Trustee or of its property .shall be
appointed, or if any public officer shaU take charge or control of the Trustee or of its property or
affairs, a successor may be appomted by the Owners of a inajorify in principal amount of the
Bonds then Outstanding, excluding any Bonds held by or for the account of the City, by an
instrument or concunem instruments in 'writing signed by such Owners or their attomeys duly
authorizied in writing and defivered to such successor Trustee, notification thereof being given to
tbe City, the Bank and the predecessor Tnistee. Pending such appointmem, the City shaU
forthwith appoint a Trustee to fiU such vacancy until a successor Tmstee Qf any) shall be
appointed by the Owners of Bc>nds as herein authorized. The City shaU mail notice to tbe Bank
and to Owners of Bonds of any such appoinnnem within 20 days after such appointment. Any
successor Trastee appointed by the City shaU, unmediately and without further act, be superseded
by a Tnistee appointed by the Owneis of Bonds. I f in a proper case no appointment of a
succ^sor Trustee shaU be made puisuam to the foregoing provisions of this Section within 45
days after the Tnistee shall have given to the Cify wrinen notice of lesignaiion as provided in
Section 10.12 hereof or after the occunence of any other evem recpiiring or authorizing such
appointmem, the Trustee, the Bank or any Owner of Bonds may apply to any court of competem
juriscUction to ^point a successor. Said cpmt may thereupon..after such notice, if any. as said
court may deem proper and prescribe, appoim such successor Trustee. Any Trastee appoimed
under the provisions of this Section shaU be a bank, tmst company or national banking
asscx:iation. doing business and having an office in die City of Chicago, Dlinois.
Section 10.15. Transfer of Rights and Property to Successor. Any successor
Trastee appoimed under this Indenture shaU execute, acknowledge and deliver to its predecessor
Trustee, and alsotothe City, a written instrument of acxeptancerespectingsuch appointment, and
thereupon such successor Tmstee, without any fiirther aa, deed or conveyance, shaU become fiiUy
vested wilh aU moneys, esUtes, properties, rights, powers, duties and obUgations of such
piedecessor Tmstee, widi like effea as if originally named as Tmstee; but the Trustee ceasing to
act sbaU nevertheless, on the request of the City, or of ihe successor Trastee, execute,
acknowledge and defiver such instniments of conveyance and further assurance and do such other
things as may reasonably be required for more fidly and certainly vesting and confirming in such
successor Tmstee aU theright,tideand interest of the predecessor Trustee in and to any property
held by it under this Indenture, and shall pay over, assign and defiver to the successor Trtistee any
money or other property subjea to die trusts and conditions herein set fonh. Should any deed,
conveyance or instrumem in writingfromthe City be required by such successor Trustee for more
fiilly and ceruinly vesting in and confinning to such successor Tnistee any such esUtes, rights.

 83350

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

poweis and duties, any and aU such deeds, conveyances and instniments in writing shall, on
request, and so far as may be authorized by law, be executed, acknowledged and delivered by the
Cify.
Section 10.16. Merger or ConsoUdation. Any coinpany imo which the Tnistee
may be merged or converted or with which it may be cxinsofidated or any company resulting from
any merger, conversion or consolidation to which it shall be a party or any company to which the
Tiustee may seU or transfer aU or substantiaUy aU of its corporate trust business, provided such
company shaU be a bank, trust coinpany or national banking association which is qualifiedtobe
a successor to the Tiustee under Section 10.14 hereof and shaU be authorized by law to perform
aU die duties imposed upon it by this Indenture and any Supplemental Indemure, shaU be the
successor to the Trustee without the execution or filing of any paper or the peifoimance of any
fiirther aa.
Section 10.17.' Adoption of Authentication. In case any of the Bonds
contemplatedtobe issued under this Indenture shaU have been authenticated but not deUvered,
any successor Tmstee may.adopt the certificate of authentication of any predecessor Tiustee so
authenticating such Bonds and deUver such Bonds so authenticated, and in case any of the s^d
Bonds sbaU not have been authenticated, any successor Trustee may authenticate such Bonds in
the name of the piedec:essor Tiustee, or in the name of the successor Trustee, and in aU such cases
such certificate shaU have the fiiU force which it is anywhere m the Bonds or in this Indemure
provided that the certificate of the Trustee shaU have.
Section 10.18. E-vidence of Signatures of Owners and Ownership of Bonds,
(a) Any request, consent or other instrument which ibis Indenture may require or permit to be
signed and executed by the Owners ofBonds may be in one or more instniments of simUar tenor,
and shaU be signed or executed by sucb Owneis in peison or by their attomeys appointed in
writing. Proof of (i) tbe execution of any sucb instmmem, or of an instrument appointing any
such attorney, or (u) the o^ynership by any peison of the Bonds, shaU be sufficient for any
purpose of this Indenture (except as otherwise herein expressly provided) if made in the following
manner, but the Trustee may nevertheless in its discretion requirefiirtheror other prcxif in cases
where il deems the same desirable:
(1)
The fact and date of the execution by any Owner or his attorney of sucb
instmment may be proved by the certificate, which need not be acknowledged or verified,
of an officer of a bank or trust coinpany satisfactoty to the Trustee or of any notary pubUc
or other officer authorized to lake acknowledgments of deeds lo be recorded in the
jurisdiction in which he puiports to act, that the person signing such request or other
instrument acknowledged to him the execution thereof, or by an affidavit of a wimess of
such execution, duly swomtobefore such notary public or other officer.
(2)
The authority of the person or persons executing any such instrument on
behalf of a corporate Owner of Bonds may be esublished without fiinher proof if such
instrument is signed by a person purporting lo be the president or vice president of such

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83351

coiporation wilh a coiporate seal affixed and attested by a person puiporting to be-its
secretaty or an assistant secretaty.
(b) The ownership of Bonds and the amount, numbeis and other identification,
and date of owneiship of the same shaU be proved by the Bond Register. Anyrecpiest,consem
or vote of the Owner of any Bond shaU bind allfiitureOwners of such Bond in respect of anything
done or suffered to be done by the City or the Trustee in accordance iherewidi.
Section 10.19. Freservatioii and Inspection of Documents. All documents
received by the Tiustee under the provisions of this Indenture shall be retained in its possession
and shaU be subject al aU reasonabletimesto the inspection ofthe City, the Bank and any Owner
of Bonds and their agents and their represenUtives, any of whom may make copies thereof:
Section 10.20. Trustee's Agent. UntU such time as the Bonds have been
converted to bear interest at a Fixed Rate, tbe Trustee shaU have therightto appoim a Trustee's
Agenl with the power to act on the Tmstee's behalf and subject to its direc:tion in the
authentication and deUvety of the Bonds, payment of the Bonds, provision of notice of interest
rates on Bondsto'Bondholdersand in connection with transfers, exchanges,tendersand purchases
thereof, asftiUytoall intents and purposes as though the Trustee's Agent had been expressly
authorized heieunder to authenticate, deliver, pay, transfer and exchange Bonds, provide notice
of interestratestoBondholders. rec:eivetendernotices, pundiase tendered Bonds and make
payments on the Bonds. The Trustee's Agent shaU perform such fimctions subjea to the terms
and conditions expiessed in this Article X. The foregoing notwithstanding, the Trustee's Agem
shaU not be answerable for other than its gross negligence or wUlfid miscronduct and the Trustee's
Agent shaU not be deemed to have notice of any evem of default hereunder unless notified by the
Trustee. Any such Tmstee's Agem shaU be a crommeicial bank with tmst powers or a trust
company organized under the laws of the United Sutes of America or one of the Sutes thereof.
For aU purposes, any such Trustee's Agent shaU be deemedtobe acting solely as the agem of the
Tmstee and the authentication, defivety, transfer or exchange of Bonds, provision of notice of
interestratesto Bondholders, receipt oftendernotices, purchase oftenderedBonds and paymem
of Bonds by the Tmstee's Agem pursuamtotbis Section shaU be deemed to be ihe authentication,
delivety, transfer or exchange of Bonds, provision of notice of uiterestratesto Bondholders,
receipt of tender notices, purchase oftenderedBonds and payment ofBonds by the Trustee. The
Tmstee's Agem may act as Bond Registrar for any Bond prior to the Fixed Rate Conversion Date.
The Tmstee's Agent shall at aU times be a bank or trust company having a
coiporate trust office in the City of New York. New York (or having an agent with such a
principal corporate trust office) and shall at all times be an institution organized and doing
business under tbe laws of the United Sutes or of any sUte. authorized under such laws to
exercise corporate tmst powers and subject to supervision or exarriination by federal or sute
authorities and either (a) having, together with its parent bank or trust company, a reported
combined capital and surplus of at last $50,000,000 or (b) affiliated wilh and indemnified by the
Trustee. If such instimtion publishes reports of condition at least annually pursuant to law or the
requirements of such authorities, then for die purposes of this Section the combined capital and
surplus of such institution shall be deemed to be its combined capiul and surplus, as set forth in

 83352

JOURNAI^-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

its most recent report of condition so published. The appointmem of a Trustee's Agent under this
Section shall be effective upon acceptance by the Trustee's Agent and shaU continue untU the
Trustee making such appointinem shaU rescind such appointment or umU the effeaive date of the
resignation orremovalof such Tmstec pursuant lo Section 10.13 or 10.14 heieof. In addition,
die Trustee's .Agent may resign upon 60 days prior written notice to.die Trustee, die Cify, the
Remarketing Agem, and the Bank. The Trustee's Agent may act through an agent constimting
a a>mmercial bank or trust conqiany.
If at any time there is no Trustee's Agent, aUreferencesto the Tmstee's Agent
herein and in the Bonds shaU be deemed to refer to the Tiustee. As. of tbe Date of Issuance, there
is no Tmstee's Agent hereunder.

ARTICLE XI
Supplemental Indentures
Section 11.01. Supplemental Indcuiturc Effective Upon Execution by the
Trustee. For any one or more of the foUowing purposes, and at any time orfromtime to time,
a supplemental indenture may be authoiized by an ordinance adopted by the City CoimcU of the
City, which, upon tbe filing with the Trustee of a copy of such ordinance certified by the Cify
Clerk and the execution and defivety of such supplemental indenture by the Cify and the Tnistee,
shall be fidly effective in accordance with its terms:
(a) to addtothe covenants and agreements of the Cify in this Indenture other
covenants and agreements to be observed, by the Cify which are not contrary to or
inconsistent with this Indenture as theretofore in effect;
(b)
to addtothe limitations and resttrictions in this Indenture other limiutions
andrestrictionsto be observed by die City which are not contraty to or inconsistent with
this Indenture as theretofore in effect;
(c)
to surrender anyright,power or privilege reservedtoor conferred upon the
City by thetermsof this Indenture, bul only if the sunender of suchright,power or
privilege is not contratytoor inconsistent witb the covenants and agreements of the City
contained in this Indenture;
(d)
to create a series of Bonds and, in connection therewith, to specify and
determine other maners and things relative to sutdi Bonds whicb are not contraty lo or
inconsistent with this Indenmre as theretofore in effect, or to amend, mcxfify or rescind
any such authorization, specification or determination at any time prior lo thefirstissuance
of such Bonds;

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83353

(e)
to confirm, asftirtherassurance, the pledge herein, and the subjection of,
additional properties, taxes or other coUateral to any Uen. claim or pledge created or to
be created by. this Indenture;
- (f)
to modify any of the provisions of this Indemure in anyrespectwhatever,
provided diat sucb modification shaU take effect only as of the date on which aU of the
Bonds are subject to mandatoty tender;
(g)
to cure any ambiguity, supply any omission, or cure or conect any defea
or inconsistent provision in this Indenture;
(b)
to insert such provisions clarifying matters or questions arising under tins
Indenture as are necessaty or desirable and are not contraty to or inconsistent with this
Indenture as theretofore in effea;
(i) to provide additional duties of the Tmstee under this Indenture;
0)

to provide for certificated Bonds;

(k)
to implemem a conversion of the interestrateon aU or any portion of the
Bonds to a Fbced Rate, an Adjust:d>Ie Long Rate, or a Short Rate, aU as provided herein,
including, but not limited'to, mcxfifying, amending or supplementing the form of Bond to
reflect, among other things, a change in die designatedtideof ihe Bonds, thefixingof an
annual rate of interest, theteiminationof therigbtsof any Registered Owner of Bonds to
tender such Bonds for purchase, and the faa that the purchase price of,- or interest on, the
Bonds is no longer payable out of moneys drawn under the Letter of Crecfit;
G)
to evidence or give effect to, or faciUute. the delivety and, administration'
under this Indenhire of a Substitute Credit Agreemem and/or a Substimte Letter of Credit,
including, but not liinited to, such provisions as are nec:essarytopermit the issuer of such
a Substimte CrecUt Agreemem to provide crecfit supportrelatingto payinent of principal
of and uiterest on the Bonds and a separate issuer of anodier Substimte CrecUt Agreemem
to provide liquidify supportrelatingto payment of the purchase price of Bonds delivered
or deemed delivered hereunder for purchase;
(m) to evidence or give effea to or facifiute the delivery and administration
under this Indenture of a letter of crecfit, a line of crecfit, a bond purchase agreement, an
insurance poficy or any other crecfit or liquidity device to secure the Bonds;
(n)
to secure or mainuinratingsfromany rating agentry in the highest
short-term or commercial paper debtraiingcategoty, and the highest long-term debt rating
categoty, of such raiing agency which are available for the Bonds, whether or not a Letter
ofCredit secures the Bonds, which changes wiU not restrict, limit or reduc:e the obligation
ofthe City to pay the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the Bonds as provided

 83354

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

in the Indenture or otherwise adveisely affect tbe Registered Owners of the Bonds tmder
the Indenture; and
(o)
to effect a change in the optional redenqition schedule for Bonds in a Fixed
Mode or an Adjusuble Long Mode pursuam to Section 3.U(a)(u) or (iu) hereof, or to
effect a cbange in redenqition price in accordance with Section 3.11(d) hereof.
Section 11.02. Supplemental Indentures Effective Whh Consent of Owners of
Bonds. At any time orfromtime to time, a supplemental indemure may be authorized by an
ordinance adopted by the City CouncU of the City, subject to consent by the Owners ofBonds in
accordance widi and subjea to the pro'vislons of this Article, which Supplemental Indenture, upon
Ihe filing with tbe Trustee of a copy of such ordmance certified by the City Clerk, upon
conqiliance with the provisions of this Article, and upon execution and delivety of sucb
Supplemental Indemure by the City and the Tiustee, shaU become fiiUy effecrtive in accordance
'With its terms.
Section 11.03. General Provisions, (a) This Indenture shaU not be mcxlified or
amended in anyrespeaexcept as provided in and in accordance with and subjea to the provisions
of this Article. Nothing in this Anicle shaU affect or limit therightor obligation ofthe City to
adopt, make, do, execute, acknowledge or deliver any ordinance, resolution, act or other
instmmem pursuam to die provisions of this Article or therightor obUgation of the City to
execute and deUver to tbe Tiustee any instniment which elsewhere in tbis Indenture it is provided
shaU be deUvered to the Tnistee.
(b)
Any ordinance authorizing a supplemental indenture.refenedto and
permitted or audiorized by Section 11.01 hereof may be adopted by ihe City CouncU of the City
without the consent of any of tbe Owners of Bonds, but such supplemental indenture shall be
executed and deUvered by the City and the Trustee and shaU become effective only on the
conditions, to the extent and at the time provided in this Article. Eveiy supplemental indenture
delivered to the Tmstee for execution shall be accompanied by an opinion of counsel suting that
such supplemenul indenmre has been duly and lawfidly aulhorized by tbe City Conned of tbe City
and executed by the City in accordance with the provisions of this Indenture, is authorized or
pemiitted by this Indemure, and wUI, when executed and delivered by the Tnistee, be valid and
binding upon the City and enforceable in accordance with its terms.
. (c)
The Tmstee is hereby authorized to enter imo, execute and deliver any
supplemenul indenture refened to and pennitted or aulhorized by this Article and to make aU
fiinher agreements and stipulations which may be therein conlained, and the Tmstee, in taking
sucb action, shaU befidlyprotected in relying on an opinion of counsel that such supplemental
indenture is authorized or permitted by the provisions of this Indenture.
(d)
No supplemenul indenture shall change or mocfify any of the rights or
obligations of the Tmstee without its written assent thereto.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83355

(e)
No supplemental indenture sbaU take effec;t unless and untU there has been
defiveredtothe Trastee an Opim'on of Bond Counsel to the effect that such supplememal indenhire
does not adversely affect the exclusionfromgross income for federal income tax puiposes to
which interest on the Bonds would otherwise be entided.
Section 11.04. Consent of Bank Required. As long as (i) a Letter- of CrecUt is
in effect or any Bank Bonds are outstanding, or (u) the Bank Obfigations remain unsatisfied, a
supplemental indenture under this Article shaU not become effective unless and until the Trustee
shaU have received Bank Approval. In this regard, the Tnistee sbaU cause notice of the proposed
execution of any such supplemental indenture, together with a copy of the proposed supplememal
indenture, to be maUed to the Bank at least fifteen Business Days prior to the proposed date of
execution and deUvety of such supplemental indenmre. Tbe Bank shall be deemed to have denied
consem to the execution and delivety of such supplemental indenture if the Tiustee does not
receive a letter of approval thereto signed by or on behalf of the Bank on or before the fifteenth
Business Day after tbe mailing of said notice.
Section 11.05. Maiiingof Notice of Amendment. Any provision in this Article
for the mailing of a notice or other paper to owners ofBonds shaU befidlycompUed 'with if it is
maUed posuge prepaid only 0) to each Registered Owner of then Outstanding Bonds- at his
address, if any, appearing upon theregistrationbooks maintained by the Cify at the principal
coiporate trust office of the 'Tmstee, Oi) to the Bank, and (ui)tothe Trustee.
Section 11.06. Powers of Amendment- Any mcxlification or amendment of this
Indenture or of any supplemenul indenture or of therightsand obligations of the City and ofthe
Owners of tbe Bonds, in particular, may be made by a supplemental indenmre, with tbe written
consent given as provided in Section 11.07. (a) of the Owners of a majority in principal amoum
of the Bonds Outstanding at the time such consent is given, or (b) in case less than aU of the then
Outstanding Bonds are affected by the mcxfification or amendment, of the Owners of a majority
in principal amount of the then Outstanding Bonds so affected, except that if such mcxlification
or amendment wiU, by iisterms,not take effect so long as any Bonds of any specified maturity
remain Outstanduig, the consent of the Owners of such Bonds shaU not be recjuired and such
Bonds shaU not be deemedtobe Outstanding for the purpose of any calculation of Outstanding
Bonds under this Section. No such mocfification or amendment shaU peimit a change in the teims
of redemption or maturity of the principal of any Outstanding Bonds or of any installmem of
imerest thereon or a reduction in the principal amoum or the Redemption Price thereof or in the
rate of interest thereon, or in terms of purchase or the purchase price thereof, without the consem
of the owner of such Bonds, or shall reduce the percenUges or otherwise affect the classes of
Bonds the consent of the owneis of which is reqfuired to effect any such modification or
amendment, or shall change or mcxlify any of therightsor obligations of the Tmstee without its
written assent thereto. For the purposes of this Section, a Bond shaU be deemed to be affected
by a mcxlification or amendment of this Indenture if the same adversely affects or diminishes the
rights of the owners of such Bond.
Section 11.07. Consent of Owners of Bonds, (a) The City may al any lime
authorize a supplemental indenture making a modification or amendment permined by the

 83356

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

provisions of Section 11.06. to take effea when and as provided in this Section. A copy of such
supplemental indenture (or brief summaty thereof or referience thereto in form approved by the
Tnistee), together "with a request to tbe Owners of the Bonds for their consent thereto in form
satisfaaoty to Ihe Tnistee. shaU be'maUed by the City to the Owners of the Bonds (but failure lb
mail such copy and request shaU not affect the validity of the supplemental indenture when
conseniedtoas in this Secnion pro'vided). Such supplemental incienture shaU not be effective unless
and untU, and sbaU take effect in accordance widi itstermswhen, (i) there shaU have been filed
witb tbe 'Trustee (1) the written consents of Owners of the percenUges of Outstanding Bonds
specified in Section 11.06 and (2) an opinion of counsel suting that such supplemental indamire
has been duly and lawfidly executed and deUvered by the City and the Trastee in accordance with
the provisions of diis Indemure, is authorized or pennitted hereby and is vafid and binding upon
tbe Cify and enforceable in atxordance with itstermsupon its betximing effective as in this
Section provided, and (u) a notice shaU haye been maUed as hereinafter in this Secrtion provided.
(b)
The consent ofan Owner ofBonds to any modification or amendmem shaU
be effeaive only if accompanied by proof of the Ownership, at die date of such consent, of the
Bonds with respeatowhich such consent is given, which prtxif shaU be such as is permitted by
Section 10.18. A certificate or certificates signed by the Trustee that it has examined such pioof
and that sucb prcxif is sufficiem in accordance with Section 10.18 shaU be cxinclusive that the
consents have been given by the Owners of the Bonds described in such certificate or certificates.
. Any such consem shaU be binding upon the Owner of the Bonds giving such consem and upon
any subsequem Owner of such Bonds and of any Bonds issued in exchange therefor (whether or
not sucb subsequem Owner thereof has notice thereof) unless such consem isrevokedin writing
by ibe Owner of such Bonds giving such consent or a subsequent Owner thereof by filing such
revcx:ation with tbe Tmstee, prior to the time when the written sutement of the Trustee hereinafter
provided for in this Section is filed. The fact that a consem has not been revoked may likewise
be proved by a certificate of the Trustee to the effect that norevcx:ationthereof is on fUe with the
Trustee.
(c)
At any time after the Owners of the required percenUges of Bonds shaU
have filed their consents to the supplemental indenture, the Tnistee shaU make andfilewith the
City a written sutement that the Owners of such required percenUges of Bonds havefiledsuch
consents. Such written sutement shall be conclusive that such consents have been so filed. At
any time thereafter notice, suting in substance that the supplemental indenture (which may be
refened to as a supplemental indenture enteied imo by the City and the Tnistee as of a suted date,
a copy of which is on fUe with the Tmstee) has been consented to by the Owners of the recjuired
percenUges ofBonds and wUl be effective as provided in this Section, shall be giventoOwners
by the Tmstee by mailing such notice to the Owners of tbe Bonds and the Bank (but faUure to
maU sucb notice shall not prevent such supplemental indenturefrombecoming effective and
binding as provided in this Section). The Trastee shall file with the City proof of the mailing of
such notice. A record, consisting of the papers required or permitted by this Section to be fUed
with the Trustee, shaU be proof of the matters therein suted. Such supplemental indenture making
sucb amendment or modification shaU be deemed conclusively binding upon the Tmstec, the Bank
and the Owners of all Bonds at the expiration of 40 days after the fding with the Tmstee of proof
of the mailing of such last mentioned notice, except in die event of a final decree of a coun of

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83357

competent jurisdiction setting aside such supplemental indenmre in a legal action or equiuble
proceeding for such purpose commenced within such 40-day period; except that the Tmstee and
the City, during such 40-day period and any sucih fiirther period during which any such action or
proceeding may be pending, shaU be entided in their absolute discretiontotake such action, or
torefiainfromtaking such action, with respeatosuch supplemental indenture as they may deem
expedient.
"
"
Section 11.08. Modifications by Unanimous Consent. Thetermsand provisions
of tbis Indemure and dierigbtsand obligations c>f the Cify. and pf tbe Owners of the Bonds
heieunder may be modified or amended in any respea upon tbe consent of the Owners of aU the
then Outstanding Bonds to the execution and delivety of such supplemental indemure, such
consent to be given as provided in Section 11.07 except that no noticetothe Owners of the Bonds
shaU be required; but no such modification or amendment shaU change or modify any of the rights
or obUgations of the Trustee without its written assent thereto.
Section 11.09. 'Exclusion of Bonds. Bonds owned by or for the account of the
Cify shaU not be deemed Outstanding for the purpose of cxinsent or other action or any cralculation
of Outstanding Bonds provided for in this Article, and the City shaU not be entided 'with respea
to such Bondstogive any consent or take any other action provided for in this Article. At the
time of any consem or other action taken under this Article, the City shall'fiimish the Trustee widi
a Certificate upon which the Tnistee may rely, desc:ribing aU Bonds so to be excluded.
Section 11.10. Notation on Bonds. Bonds authenticated and deliveied after the
effective date of any action taken as in this Article provided may, and, if the Tnistee so
detennines, shaU, bear a noution by endorsement or otherwise in foiin approved by tbe City and
the Tnistee as to such action, and in that case upon demand of the Owner of any Bond
Outstanding at such effective date and presenution of his Bond for that purpose at the principal
coiporate trust office of the Tmstee or upon any exchange orregistrationof transfer of any Bond
Outstanding at such effective date, suiuble noution shaU be made on such Bond or upon any Bond
issued upon any such exchange or registration of transfer by the Trastee as to any such action.
If the City or the Trustee shaU so determine, new Bonds so mcxfified as in the opinion of the
Tnistee and the Cify to conform to such action shaU be prepared, authenticated and defivered, and
upon demand ofthe Owner of any Bond then Outstanding shall be exchanged, without cost to such
Owner, for Bonds of the same maturity upon surrender of such Bond.

ARTICLE x n
MisceUaneous
Section 12.01. SeverabiUty. If any provision of this Indenture shall be held or
deemed to be, or shall, in fact, be, illegal, inoperative or imenforceable, the same shall not affect
any other provision or provisions herein contained or render the same invalid, inoperative or
unenforceable to any extent whatever.

 83358

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Section 12.02. Payments Due on Saturdays, Sundays and Hobdays. If die date
for making any payment, or die last date for the perfonnance of any act or the exercise of any
right, as provided in this Indenture, shall not be a Busmess Day. such paymem may be made, act
peifoimcd or right exercised on die next Buskiess Day widi die same force and effect as if done
on die nominal date provided in diis Indenmre. and no inteiest shaU accme for die period after
such nominal date; provided, however, dial nodiing herein shaU be deemed to cxteirf the Suted
Temunation Date or oflverwisc affect the obligations, of the Bank under the Credit Agreement.
Section 12.03. Counterparts. This Indenhire may be simultaneously executed
in several counieiparts, each of which shall be an original and all of which shall constimte but one
and the same instnimem.
Section 12.04. Rules of Interpretation. Unless expressly indicated otherwise,
refisrences to Sections or Articles arc to be constmed asreferencesto Sections or Articles of this
mstimiiemasoriginaUy executed. Useofthc words "herein," "hereby." "hereunder," "hereof."
"hereinbefore." "hereinafter" and other equivalent words refer to this Indenture and not solely
to the particular portion in which any such word is used.
£>ection 12.05. Captions. The captions and headings in this Indenmre are for
convenience only and in no way define, limit or describe the scc>pe or intent of any provisions or
Sections of this Indentuie.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, City has caused dicse presents to be executed in its
name and with its official seal hereunto affixed and attested by its duly authorized officials; and
to evidence its acceptance of the trusts hereby created, and Tmstec has caused these presents to
be executed in its corporate name and with its coiporate seal hereumo affixed and attested by its
duly authorized officers, as of the date first above wrinen.
[SEAL]
CITY OF CHICAGO
Attest:

By:

:

:

City Clerk

By:
Chief Financial Officer

[SEAL]
(NAME OF TRUSTEE], as Tnistee
Attest:
By:

By:.
Audiorized Signatory

Audiorized Signatoiy

(Sub)Exhibit "A" referred to m this Trust Indenture reads as follows:

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83359

(Sub)Exhibit "A".
(To Trust Indenture)

Form Of Bond
Number R-1

$_
United States' Of America
State Of lUinois
City Of Chicago
City Of Chicago Variable Rate Bond,
Series
.

Maturity Date

"

Original Issue Date

C.U.S.I.P.

Current Mode:
(If the current Interest Mode is a Flexible'Mode or an Adjustable Long Mode,
adtfitioritd information is set forth in the Notice of Rate Period attached hereto.)
Registered Owner; Cede & Co.
Principal Amount:
As Hereinafter Described, Under Certain Circumstances On Certain Dates This
Bond Is Permitted To Be, Or Is Required To Be, Tendered For Purchase To The
Tmstee Or The Trustee's Agent At The Purchase Price Specified Hereiri. The
Registered Owner Hereof Who Elects To Tender This Bond, Or Is Required To Tender
This Bond, For Purchase Shall Be Entitled Solely To The Payment Of Such Purchase
Price On The Appficable Purchase Date, And ShaU Not Be Entitled To The Payment
Of Any Principal Hereof Or Any Interest Accrued Hereon On Or After Such Date.
City of Chicago (the "City"), a municipal corporation and home rule unit of local
govemment duly organized and existing under the laws of the State of Illinois, for
value received, hereby promises to pay (but only out of the sources hereinafter

 83360

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

provided) to the registered owner identified above, or registered assigns, on the
maturity date specified above, unless this Bond shaU have been caUed for
redemption and payment of the redemption price shaU have been duly made or
provided for, upon presentation and surrender hereof, the principal sum specnficd
above, and to pay (but only out of the sources hereinafter provided) interest on the
balance of smd principal sum from time to time remaining unpaid from and
including the original issue date specified above, or from and including the most
recent Interest Payment Date (as defined i n the hereinafter-defined Indenture) with
respect to whicJi interest has been paid or duly provided for, untU payment pf said
principal sum has been made or duly provided for.
The Bonds are fimited obligations of the City and shaU not constimte an
indebtedness of the City or a loan of crecfit thereof within the meaning of any
constitutional or stamtoiy limitation. Neither the faith and crecfit nor the taxing
power ofthe City, the State of Illinois or any political subdivision thereof is pledged
to the payment of the principal of the Bonds, or the interest or any premium
thereon. The Bonds are payable solely from the Trust Estate (as defined i n the
hereinafter-defined Indenture) pledged to such payment under the Indenmre and
" certain other monies held by or on behalf of the TVustee, and no registered owner
or owners of the Bonds shaU have the right to compel any exercise of the taxing
power of the City, the State of Illinois or any pofitical subdivision thereof.
Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth below,
and such further provisions shaU for all pm^ioses have the same efliect as i f set forth
at this place.
It Is Hereby Certified, Recited And Declared that aU acts and concfitions required
to be peribrmed precedent to and in the execution and defivery of the Indenture and - •
the issuance of this Bond have been performed i n due time, form and manner as
required by law, and that the issuance of this Bond and the series of which it forms
a part does not exceed or violate any constitutional or stamtory limitation.
This Bond shaU not be valid or become obfigatory for any purpose or be entitled
to any security or benefit under the Indenture urdess and u n t i l the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been duly executed by the Trustee.
In Witness Whereof, The City of Chicago has caused this Bond to be executed in its
name by the rnanual or facsimUe signature of its Mayor and the manual or facsimUe
of its corporate seal to be printed hereon and attested by the manual or facsimile
.signamre of its City Clerk.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83361

City of Chicago
By:

:
Mayor

Attest:

City Clerk

. .

Certificate Of Authentication.

This Bond is one of the Bonds described i n the within-mentioned Indenmre.
Authentication Date:
[Name ofTrustee], as Trustee
By;

:
Authorized Signatory

D.T.C. Legend.
Unless this certificate is presented by an authorized representative of The
Depository Trust Company, a New York corporation ("D.T.C"), to the issuer or its
agent for registration of transfer, exchange or payment, and any certificate issued
is registered in the name of Cede & Co. or in such other name as is requested by an
authorized representative: of D.T.C. (and any payment is maide to Cede & Co. or to
such other entity as is requested by an authorized representative of D.T.C), Any
Transfer, Pledge Or Other Use Hereof For Value or Otherwise By Or To Any Person
Is Wrongful inasmuch as tfie registered owner hereof, Cede & Co., has an interest
herein.
Payments. The principal of and premium, ifany, on Bonds bearing interest at a
Bank Rate, a Short Rate or an Adjustable Long Rate shaU be payable al the

 83362

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

principal corporate trust office o f t h e Trustee, upon presentation and surrender of
such Bonds. The principal of and premium, i f a n y , on Bonds bearing interest at a
Fixed Rate shaU be payable at the principal corporate trust office o f t h e Trustee or,
at the option of the registered owner, at the principal corporate trust office of any
Paying Agent, if any, named in any such Bond, upon presentation and surrender
of such Bonds. Any payment of the purchase price of a Tendered Bond shaU be
payable at the principal corporate trust office of the Trustee's Agent (or at such
other office as may be designated by the Trustee), upon presentation and surrender
of such Tendered Bond as hereinafter described.
Interest on Bonds bearing interest at a DaUy Rate, a Weekly Rate, an Adjustable
Long Rate or a Fixed Rate shaU be paid by check maUcd on the Interest Payment
Date to the persons appearing on the Bond Register as the registered owners thereof
as ofthe close of business ofthe Trustee on the Record Date at the address of such
registered owners as. they appeeir on the Bond Register or at such other addresses
as are furnished to the Trustee i n writing by such registered owners not later than
the Record Date. Payment of interest on Bonds bearing interest at a Flexible Rate
shaU be made to the persons appearing on the Bond Register as the registered
owners thereof as of the close of business o f t h e Trustee on the Record Date, upon
presentation and surrender of such Bonds at the principal corporate trust office of
the Trustee on the appUcable Interest Payment Date. Payment of interest on any
Bond shall be made to registered owner of One MiUion DoUars ($ 1,000,000)or more
in aggregate principal amount ofBonds as o f t h e close of business ofthe Trustee on
the Record Date for a particular Interest Payment Date by wire transfer to such
registered owner on such Interest Payment Date upon written notice firom such
registered owner containing the wire transfer address within the United States to
which such registered owner wishes to have such wire directed, which written
notice is received not later than the Business Day next preceding the Record Date;
provided that such wire transfer shaU only be made for Bonds bearing interest at
a Flexible Rate upon presentation and surrender of such Bonds at the principal
corporate trust office of the Trustee on the appUcable Interest Payment Date.
Payment of interest on Bank Bonds shaU be made to the Bank by wire transfer on
each Interest Payment Date at the wire transfer address specified i n the Letter of
Credit (or such other wire transfer address as is specified by the Bank i n writing
from time to time).
Interest accrued on the Bonds during each Rate Period shaU be paid in arrears on
each Interest Payment Date. Interest on the Bonds shaU be computed (i) during any
Short Mode upon the basis of a three hundred sixty-five (365) or three hundred
sixty-six (366) day year, as appficable, for the number of days actuaUy elapsed, (u)
during any Adjustable Long Mode or a Fixed Mode, upon the basis of a three
hundred sixty (360) day year consisting of twelve (12) thirty (30) day months, and
(in) with respect to Bank Bonds, upon the basis of a three hundred sixty (360) day
year and the actued number of days elapsed.
General. This Bond is one of an authorized series of bonds limited in aggregate

 5/1 /2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83363

principal amount to $
and designated City of Chicago Variable Rate
Bonds, Series
(the "Bonds") issued pursuant to, under authority of and in full
compfiance with the-Constitution and laws of the State of lUinois, particularly
Artide VII, Section 6(a) of the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois and an
ordinance of the City CouncU of the City, and a Trust Indenture dated as of
, 2002 (the "Indenture"), from the City to (Name of Trustee ,
Chicago, Illinois, as trustee, (the "Trustee"), for the purpose of
:
:
, and paying costs and expenses incidental thereto and
to the issuance of the Bonds.
The Bonds aiid the interest thereon are direct and general obligations o f t h e City
(describe payment]. •
.
•
Copies of the Indenture are on file at the principal corporate trust office of the
Trustee, and reference to the Indenture and any and aU supplements thereto and
modifications and amendments thereof is made for a description of the pledge, and
covenants securing the Bonds, the nature, extent and manner of enforcement of
such pledge, the rights and remecfies of the registered owners o f t h e Bonds; and the
fimitations on such rights and remedies.
Definitions. Terms used i n this Bond shaU have the same meanings as set forth .
in the Indenture.
Interest Rates. The Bonds shall iiutially bear interest at the Initial Rate specified
i n the Indenmre for the pericxl specified in the Indenture, and thereafter at a DaUy
Rate as provided i n the Indenmre untU and unless any portion thereof is converted
to a different Interest Mode as provided i n the Indenture.
DaUy Mode. The-Remarketing Agent wiU determine,' and is required to give
telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the Trustee of, the DaUy Rate i n the
manner set forth in the Indenture. Except on an Adjustment Date, i n the event that
the DaUy Rate for any Rate Period is not determined by the Remeuketing Agent, the
rate of mterest home by the Bonds bearing interest at a DaUy Rate shaU be equal
to the BMA Municipal Index until the Remarketing Agent next determines the Daily
Rate as required under the Indenture.
Weekly Mode. The Remarketing Agent wUl determine, and is required to give
telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the Trustee of, the Weekly Rate i n the
maimer set forth in the Indenture. Except on an Adjustment Date, in the event that
the Weekly Rate for any Rate Period is not determined by the Remarketing Agent on
a Rate Determination Date, the rate of interest borne by the Bonds bearing interest
at a Weekly Rate shedl be equal to the BMA Municipal Index untU the Remarketing
Agent next determines the Weekly Rate as required under the Indenture.
Flexible Mode. The Remarketing Agent wiU determine, and is required to give
telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy) to the Trustee of, the duration o f t h e Rate

 83364

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Period and the Flexible Rate i n the manner set forth i n the Indenture. Except on
an Adjustment Date, i n the event that the Flexible Rate for any Bond is not
determined by the Remarketing Agent on any Rate Determination Date, such Bond
shaU bear interest at a Flexible Rate equal to the B.M.A. Municipal Index for a Rate
Period o f t h e shortest possible duration.
Adjustable Long Mode. The Remarketing Agent wiU determine, and is required
to give telephonic notice (confirmed by telecopy), to the Trustee of, the Adjustable
Long Rate in the manner set forth i n the Indenmre. In the event that the
Adjustable Long Rate for any Bond is not determined by the Remarketing Agent for
the initial Rate Period, the rate of interest borne by such Bonds shaU be determined
pursuant to the Indenture. Except on an Adjustment Date, i f the Remeirketing
Agent shaU faU to determine an Adjustable Long Rate on a Rate Determination Date
for a Rate Period within an Adjustable Long Mode, the Bonds shaU automatic:aUy
convert to a Rate Period of three hundred sixty-seven (367) days and shall bear
interest at an Adjustable Long Rate eqfual to the Bond Buyer One (1) Year Note
Index as most recentiy pubUshed i n The Bond.Buyer prior to the Adjustment Date.
. Fixed Mode. From and after the Fixed Rate Conversion Date for a Bond, such
Bond shaU bear interest at the Fixed Rate with respect thereto estabfished as
provided below under "Conversion to a Fixed Rate".
Bank Rate. Eacdi Bank Bond shaU bear interest at the Bank Rate.
Maximum Interest Rate. At no time shall the Bonds (including Bank Bonds)
bear interest at a rate higher than the Maximum Interest Rate, and at no time shaU
Bonds entitied to the benefit of the Letter of Credit bear interest at a rate higher
than the Interest Coverage Rate.
Purchase On Demand Date. WhUe a Bond (other than a Bank Bond) bears
interest at a DaUy Rate, such Bond (or portion thereof i n an Authorized
Denomination) shaU be purchased on a Demand Date therefor upon the demand of
the registered owner thereof, at a purchase price equal to one hundred percent
(100%) of the princripal amount thereof plus accrued interest, i f any, to such
Deraand Date, upon irrevocable telephonic or written notice (which telephonic
notice shaU be confirmed in writing and which written notice may be given by
telecopy) to both the Trustee's Agent and the Remarketing Agent, which notice must
be received not later than 10:00 A.M., Chicago time, on a Business Day in order to
be effective on that date. Any notice received after 10:00 A.M., Chicago time, on a
Business Day shaU be deemed given on the next succeeding Business Day. Such
notice must specify the principal amount and number of such Bond, the name and
the address of such registered owner and the taxpayer identification number, i f
any, of such registered owner.
While a Bond (other than a Bank Bond) bears interest at a Weekly Rate, such
Bond (or portion thereof in an Authorized Denomination) shaU be purchased on a

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83365

Demand Date therefor upon the demand of the registered owner thereof, at a
purcdiase price equal to one hundred percent (100%) o f t h e princnpal amount thereof
plus accrued interest, ifany, to such Demand Date, upon irrevocable written riotice
(which may be given by telecopy) to the Trustee's Agent and the Remarketing Agent,
which notice must be received by the Trustee's Agent and the Remarketing Agent
not later than 4:00 P.M., Chicago time, on a Business Day i n order to be effective
on that day (any notice received after 4:00 P.M.. Chicago time, on a Business Day
shall be deemed given on the next succeeding Business Day). Such notice must
specify (i) the principal amount and number of such Bond, the name and the
address of such registered owner and the taxpayer identification number, i f any,
of such registered owner, and (ii) the Demand Date on which such Bond is to be
purchased.
Purchase On Notice Of Certain Events Of Default Under CrecUt Agreement
While Letter Of Crecfit Is Required. During the period a Letter of CrecUt is
required by the Indenture, the Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing
interest at a Fixed Rate) are subject to mandatory tender by the registered owners
thereof to the TYustee when the Trustee gives ImmecUate Notice to the registered
owners of such Bonds and the Remarketing Agent of the occurrence and
continuation of a CrecUt Agreement Default. I n such case, the registered ovimer of
any such Bond required to be purchased may not elect to retain its Bond, and by
the acceptance of sucdi Bond shciU be deemed to have agreed to. seU such Bond to
the Triistee on the date specified pursuant to the Indenture.
Purchase WhUe Bonds Bear Flexible Rate. WhUe any Bond (other than a Bank
Bond) bears interest at a Flexible Rate, sucdi Bond shall be purchased on each Rate
Change Date for such Bond, other than the Rate Change Date which is the first (l"')
day of a Flexible Mode appUcable to such Bond, and on the Adjustment Date
immecfiately foUowing the last day ofthe Flexible Mode at a purcdiase price equal to '
one hundred percent (100%) ofthe principal amount thereof. The registered ovvner
of such Bond may not elect to retciin its Bond.
Purchase Prior To Stated Termination Date When Required Substitute Letter
Of CrecUt Not in Place; Purchase I ^ o r To Substitution Date; Purchase • Prior
To Letter Of Credit Cancellation Date. During the period a Letter of Credit is
required under the Indenmre, all Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds
bearing interest at a Fixed Rate) shaU be purchased (a) on the Business Day prior
to each Stated Termination Date ofthe Credit Agreement, and (b) on the Busmess
Day immediately preceding each Substitution Date, unless each Rating Agency
then providing a short-term rating on the Bonds confirms that such short-term
rating wUI not be withdrawn or reduced as a result ofthe defivery of such Substitute
Letter of Crecfit. If a Letter ofCredit is no longer required pursuant to the Indenture,
aU Bonds (other than Bank Bonds and Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rale) shaU
be purchased on the Business Day prior to the Letter of Credii CanceUation Date.
A purchase of Bonds pursuant to this paragraph shaU be at a purchase price for
each such Bond equal to the princnpal amount thereof plus accrued interest, i f a n y .

 83366

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

to the purcdiase date. The registered owner of such Bond may not elect to retain its
Bond.
Purchase WhUe Bonds Bear Adjustable Long Rate. While any Bond (other
than a Bank Bond) bears interest at an Adjustable Long Rate, such Bond shaU be
purchased on each Rate Chsmge Date within an Adjustable Long Mode for.such
Bond, other than the Rate Change Date which is the first (1") day of an Adjustable
Long Mode applicable to such Bond, and on the Adjustment Date immecfiately
following the last day of such Adjustable Long Mode, at a purchase price equal to
one hundred percent (100%) ofthe principal amount thereof. The registered owner
of such Bond may not elect to retain its Bond.
Purchase On Adjustment Date. On each Adjustment Date with respect to a
Bond (other than a Bank Bond), such Bond shaU be purchased at a purchase price
equal to one hundred percent (100%) o f t h e princnpal amount thereof, except that
(i) a Bond Which is to be purchased on an Adjustment Date which immediately
follows the last day of a Flexible Mode shaU be purcdiased as describee! under
"Purchase WhUe Bonds Bear Flexible Rate" above, and (U) a Bond which is to be
purchased on an Adjustment Date which immecfiately foUows the scheduled final
day of cin Adjustable Long Mode shaU be. purchased as described under "I*urcdiase
WhUe Bonds Bear Adjustable Long Rate" above. The registered owner of such Bond
may not elect to retain its Bond.
Payment Of Purchase Price. Bonds remarketed by the Remarketing Agent shaU
be deUvered by the Trustee or the Trustee's Agent as directed by the Remarketing
Agent by 11:00 A.M., Chicago time, on the date of purchase against payment
therefor. The proceeds of sale by the Remarketing Agent shaU be defivered to the
Trustee by 11:00 A.M., Chicago time, on the date of purchase. The Trustee's Agent
shaU pay the purchase price of each Tendered Bond from the sources specified i n
the Indenture, to the registered owner thereof by 1:30 p.m., Chicago time, on the
purchase date; provided that the Trustee's Agent shaU have confirmed that such
registered owner has defivered such Tendered Bond (with any necessary
endorsements) to the Principal Office of the Trustee's Agent no later than 12:00
Noon, Chicago time, on such date.
In the event that sufficient monies are on deposit with the Trustee to pay the
applicable purchase price of any Tendered Bond, such Tendered Bond will be
deemed to have been purchased whether or not delivered by the registered owner
thereof on the date such Tendered Bond is to be purchased. In the event any such
purchased Tendered Bond! is not so delivered, the City wUl execute and the Trustee
wiU authenticate and defiver a replacement Bond of like date. Maturity Date and
denomination as the Tendered Bond and bearing a number not contemporaneously
outstanding.

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83367

Purchase Price of Bank Bonds. The purchase price of remarketed Bank Bonds
shall be one hundred percent (100%) o f t h e princnpal amount thereof plus accrued
interest, if any, at the Bank Veiriable Rate through the Bond Sale Date.
No Remarketing After Certain Defaults. Unless consented to i n writing by the
City, the Remarketing Agent and the Bank, (a) if during the period a Letter of Crecfit
is required pursuant to the Indenture, there is no Letter of Crecfit i n effect, there
shaU be no remarkefing of Tendered Bonds, and (b) if there shall have occurred and
be continuing an Event of Default under the Indenture of which an authorized
oflicer in the principal office ofthe Remarketing Agent or an authorized officer in the
jprincipal corporate trust office of the Trustee has actual knowledge.
Conversion To An Adjustable Long Mode Or Short Mode, The City may
designate a different Interest Mode with respect to any Bond during a Flexible Mode
or one (1) or more Adjustable Long Modes on any Rate Change Date, and during a
DaUy Mode or a Weekly Mode on any Business Day, upon compUance with the
Indenture.
In the event that the Remarketing Agent does not determine the interest rate
appUcable to the initial Rate Pericxl during a new Interest Mode with respect to any
Bond or i f any relevant opinion required is not defivered, the immecfiately
succeeding Interest Mode with respect to the Bonds i n the Interest Mode then
ending shaU be determined as provided i n the Indenture.
Designation Of Substitute Adjustment Date. The City may designate a
Substitute Adjustment Date (i) for any Bank Bonds (provided that such Bank
Bonds shaU continue to bear interest at the Bank Rate as long as they remain Bank
Bonds), with Bank Approval, on any Business Day, and (ii) for any Bonds i n an
Adjustable Long Mode, on any Business Day .on which such Bonds can be
optionally redeemed at a price of par plus accrued interest as set forth m the
Indenmre. The Substi'tute Adjustment Date shaU be the next succeeding
Adjustment Date for such Bonds for all purposes of the Indenture.
Fixed Rate Conversion. On any Rate Change Date during a Flexible Mode or an
Adjustable Long Mode, or on any Business Day during a Daily Mode or a Weekly
Mode, the interest rate to be borne by all or any portion of the Bonds i n such .
Interest Mode shaU be converted lo a Fixed Rate, and such Bonds so converted
shaU thereafter bear interest at such Fixed Rate untU payment o f t h e principal or
redemption price thereof shaU have been made or provided for in accordance witli
the provisions of the Indenture.
If the conversion of the interest rate of any Bond does not occur for any reason,
including i n the event that any concfition precedent to the Fixed Rate Conversion
shaU not occur, such Bonds shaU bear interest from and after the proposed Fixed
Rale Conversion Date as provided in the Indenture.

 83368

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

Effect Of Notices. Any notice maUed as provided herein shaU be conclusively
presumed to have been given, whether or not the registered owner of Bonds
receives the notice,,
Redemption. The Bonds shaU be subject to redemption prior to their Maturity
Date in the amounts, at the times and i n the manner provided below.
(a) Optional Redemption.
(i) Bonds i n a DaUy Mode or a Weekly Mode shaU be subject to redemption
prior to their Maturity Date at the. option of the City, from Efigible Monies, i n
whole or i n part (and, if in part, in an Authorized Denomination) on any
Business Day during such DaUy Mcxle or Weekly Mode, as appUcable. at a
redemption price equal to one hundred percent (100%) o f t h e principal amount
thereof plus accrued, interest, i f a n y . to the redemption date.
(u) Bonds i n an Adjustable Long Mode shaU be subject to redemption prior to
their Mamrity Date, during each Rate Peripd therein, at the option o f t h e City,
from EUgible Monies, in whole or i n part (and, if i n part, i n an Authorized
Denomination) on any Business Day after the No-CaU Period described below,
at the foUowing redemption prices-(expressed as percentages of the principal
amount of Bonds caUed for redemption) plus accn-ued interest, i f any, to the
redemption date:
Length Of Rate Period

No-CaU Period

Redemption Period

greater than twelve (12)
years

ten (10) years from
the Rate Change Date

one hundred two percent,
(102%) d e c l i n i n g one
percent (1%) per twelve
(12) months
to one
hundred percent (100%)

less than or equal to
twelve (12) years and
greater than four (4)
years

until two (2) years
prior to end of Rate
Period

one h u n d r e d
(100%)

less than or equed to
four (4) years

length of Rate Period

not subject to o p t i o n a l
redemption

percent

The City may defiver to the Trustee an alternative redemption schedule to the
schedule shown above, if the City defivers to the Bzink and the Trustee an
Opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that the alternative schedule of

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83369

redemption wiU not adversely affect the vaficfity and enforceablfity of the Bonds
in accordance with their terms, and wiU not have an adverse effect on any
exclusion firom gross income of the .interest thereon for Federal income tax
purposes. After the first (1") Rate Change Date succeeding the defivety of such
alternative schedule and Opinion of Bond Counsel, Bonds i n an Adjustable Long
Mode shaU be subject to redemption pursuant to the terms of such alternative
schedule.
(iii) Bonds i n the Fixed Mode shall be subject to redemption prior to their
Maturity Date at the option ofthe City, in whole or in part (and, if in part, i n an
Authorized Denomination) on any Business Day after the No-CaU. Period
described below, at the foUowing redemption prices (expressed as percentages
of the principal amountof the Bond caUedfor redemption) plus accrued interest,
if any, to the redemption date:
Term Of Maturity

No-Call Period

greater than twelve (12)
years

ten (10) years from
the Fixed Rate
Conversion Date

one hundred two percent,
(102%) d e c l i n i n g one
percent (1 %) per twelve
(12) months . to one
hundred percent (100%)

untU two (2) years
prior to the
Maturity Date

one h u n d r e d
(100%)

term to the Maturity
Date

n o t subject to o p t i o n a l
redemption

less than or equal to
twelve (12) years and
' greater than four (4)
years
less than or equal to
four (4)

Redemption Period

percent

The City may defiver to the Trustee an alternative redemption schedule to the
schedule shown above, if the City delivers to the Bank and the Trustee an
Opinion of Bond Counsel to the effect that the alternative schedule of
redemption wiU not adversely affect the vaficfity and enforceabUity o f t h e Bonds
in accordance with their terms, and wUl not have an adverse effect on any
exclusion from gross income of the interest thereon for Federal income tax
purposes. Bonds which commence bearing interest at a Fixed Rate on or after
the delivery of such alternative schedule and Opinion of Bond Counsel shall be
subject to redemption in accordance with the provisions of such alternative
schedule.

 83370

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

5/1/2002

(iv) Bonds bearing interest at a Flexible Rate or an Adjustable Long Rate shaU •
be subject'to'optional redemption prior to their Maturity Date at the option of
the City, from Efigible Monies, in whole or i n part (and, i f i n pcirt, i n an
Authorized Denomination) on any Rate Change Date therefor, at a redemption
price equal to one hundred percent (100%).of the principal amount thereof plus
accrued interest, if any, to the redemption date.

(b) Optional Redemption Of Bank Bonds. Bank Bonds shall be subject to
redemption prior to their Maturity Date at the option of the City, i n whole or i n
part (and, i f in p£irt, i n an Authoiized Denomination) on any Business Day at a
redemption price equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the principal amount
thereof plus accrued interest, i f a n y , to the redemption date..
(c) Extraordinary Redemption Of Bank Bonds. Bank Bonds shaU be subject
to mandatory redemption on the dates and in the amounts specified i n Section 3.1
of the Credit Agreement. Such redemption shaU be at a price equal to the
principal amount thereof plus accrued interest thereon to the redemption- date, •
without premium. Bank Bonds shaU be redeemed pursuant to the provisions of
this paragraph without any notice from or direction by the City.

General Provisions Regarding Redemptions, (i) No redemption of less than aU
of the Bonds outstanding shaU be made pursuant to (a) or (b) above unless (i) i f
such redemption is ofBonds bearing interest at a Short Rate or an Adjustable Long
Rate, the aggregate principal amount of Bonds to be redeemed is equed to One
Hundred Thousand DoUars ($100,000) or integral multiples thereof, and (ii) if such
redemption is with respect to Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate, the aggregate
prindpal amount of Bonds to be redeemed is equal to One Hundred Thousand
DoUars ($100,000) or Five Thousand DoUar ($5,000) multiples i n excess thereof.
Any redemption of less- than aU of the Bonds outstanding shall be made in such a
memner that aU Bonds outstanding after such redemption Eire i n Authorized
Denominations.
(U) Bonds may be caUed for redemption by the Trustee pursuant to (a) above (A)
in the case ofBonds bearing interest at a Short Rate, upon receipt by the Trustee
at least thirty-five (35) days prior to the redemption date of a written request of the
City requesting such redemption, or (B) in the case of Bonds bearing interest at an
Adjustable Long Rate or a Fixed Rate, upon receipt by the Trustee at least forty-five
(45) days prior to the redemption date of a written request of the City requesting
such redemption.
(iii) Bonds may be called for redemption by the Trustee pursuant to (b) above
upon receipt by the Trustee at least one (1) Business Day prior to the redemption
date of a written request of the City requesting such redemption. The Trustee or the
Trustee's Agent shall give notice to the Bank one (1) Business Day prior to any

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83371

redempti'on of Bank Bonds pursuant to (b) or (c) above.
I«Iotice Of Redemption. Except as otherwise provided with respect to Baidc
Bonds i n the Indenture, riotice ofthe caU for any redemption identifying the Bonds
to be redeemed shaU be given by first class mail,- postage prepaid, -with respect to
Bonds bearing interest at a Short Rate, not less than thirty (30) or more than fortyfive (45) days prior to the date fixed for redemption, and shall be given by first class
maU, postage prepaid, with respect to Bonds bearing interest at an Adjustable Long
Rate or a Fixed Rate, not less than thirty (30) or more than sixty (60) days prior to
the date fixed for redemption, to the registered owners ofBonds to be redeemed at
their addresses as shown on- the Bond Register. Failure to give notice i n the
manner prescribed with respect to any Bond, or any defect i n such notice, shaU not
affect the vaficfity of the proceedings for redemption for any Bond with respect to
which notice was properly given. Upon the happening o f t h e above concfitions and •
if sufficient monies are on deposit with the Trustee on the appficable redemption
' date to redeem the Bonds to be redeemed and to pay interest due thereon and
preinium, i f a n y , the Bonds thus caUed shaU not after the appficable redemption
date bear interest, be protected by the Indenture or be deemed to be outstanding
under the provisions of the Indenture.
Selection Of Bonds To Be Redeemed. If less than aU the Bonds shall be called
for redemption under any provision of the Indenmre permitting such partial
redemption, the particular Bonds or portions thereof to be-redeemed shall be
selected by the City and designated to the Trustee; provided, however, that (i)- in the
case of-the redemption of less than aU Bonds which bear interest i n the same
Interest Mode at the same rates for the same Rate Periods and which i n the case of
Bonds bearing interest at a Fixed Rate were converted on the same date, such
redemption shaU be by lot in such maimer as the Trustee may determine among
such Bonds, (U) in the case of the redemption of less than aU Bonds which bear
interest at the same rates for the same Rate Periods, such redemption shaU be by
lot in such manner as the Trustee may determine among such Bonds, and (iu)
subject to other appficable provisions o f t h e Indenture, the portion of any Bond to
be redeemed shaU be in a principal amount equal to an Authorized Denomination.
Any redemption of less than all o f t h e Bonds outstancfing shall be made first (1")
from Bank Bonds.
Letter Of CrecUt. The City covemants and agrees that at aU times whUe any Bonds
are outstanding which bear interest at a rate other than the Fixed Rate, the City -will
maintain a Letter of Crecfit in fuU force and effect with respect to aU Bonds bearing
interest at other than a Fixed Rate except as otherwise provided i n the Indenture.
Letter Of Crecfit Not Required In Certain Circumstances. Prior to the Fixed
Rate Conversion Date therefor, under the circumstances provided in the Indenture,
the Bonds are not required to have the benefit of a Letter of Credit. Bonds bearing
interest at a Fixed Rate shall not be required to have the benefit of a Letter ofCredit
after the Fixed Rate Conversion Date appficable to such Bonds. In the event of a

 83372

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O .

5/1/2002

Letter ofCredit Cancellation Date, the Borids shaU be subject to mandatoiy tender
pursuant to the Indenture.
Limited ObUgation. The Bonds are issued pursuant to an ordinance adopted by
the City Council ofthe City, which ordinance authorizes the execution and.defivery
of the Indenture. The Bonds are limited obligations o f t h e City payable solely firom
the Trust Estate pledged therefor under the Indenture, monies paid under the Letter
of Credit and other monies legaUy avaUable therefor.
No recourse shaU be had for the payment of the principal of, premium, if any, or
interest on any ofthe Bonds or for any claim based thereon or upon any obUgation,
covenant or agreement in the Indenture c:ontained; against any past, present or
fumre officer, employee or agent, or member o f t h e City CouncU; of the City, or any
successor to the-City, as such, either directiy or through the City, or any successor
to the City, under any rule of law or equity, statute or constitution or by the
enforcement of any assessment or penalty or otherwise, and aU such Uabifity.of any
sucdi officer, employee or agent, or member o f t h e City CouncU. as such, is hereby
expressly waived and released as a concfition of and i n consideration for the
execution ofthe Indenture and the issuance of any o f t h e Bonds.
Registration. This Bond is transferable by the registered owner, hereof i n person
or by such registered owner's attorney duly authorized i n writing at the princnpal
corporate trust office of the Trustee, but ordy i n the manner and subject to the
fimitations provided i n the Indenture.
Defeasance. Provision for payment of aU or any portion of the Bonds may be
made, and the Indenmre may be discharged, prior to payment of the Bonds i n the
manner provided i n the Indenture.
Miscellaneous. The registered owner of this Bond shaU have no right to enforce
the provisions of the Indenmre or to instimte action to enforce the covenants
therein, or to take any actipn with respect to any event of default under the
Indenmre, or to institute, appear i n or defend any suit or other proceedings with
respect thereto, except as provided i n the Indenture.

Assignment.
The foUowing abbreviations, when used in the inscription on the face of this
certificate, shaU be construed as though they were written out i n f u l l according to
appUcable laws or regulations:

 5/1/2002

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

83373

Ten. Com.

—

as tenants i n common

Ten. Ent.

—

as tenants by the entireties

Jt. Ten.

—

as joint tenants with right of survivorship emd not as tenants
i n common

Unif. Gift Min. Act

Custocfian
(Cust.)

_^
(Minor)

.

under Uniform Gifts to Minors Act
(State)
Adcfitional abbreviations may also be used, though not i n the above Ust.
For Value Received, The undersigned hereby seUs, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)
this Bond ofthe City of Chicago and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
•
. to transfer said Bond
on the books kept for registration thereof, with full power of substituti'on i n the
prenuses.

Dated:
Signature:
Signamre Guaranteed:
Notice:

The signature to this assignment must correspond with the name as it
appears upon the face of this Bond in evety particular, without
cdteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

 83374

JOURNAL-CITY C O U N C I L - C H I C A G O

5/1/2002

Notice Of Rate Period.
Rate Change Date on which Current Rate Period Commences:
Next Rate Change Date:
Appficable Interest Rate during Current Rate Period:
Appficable Optional Redemption Provisions during Current Rate Period (if
Adjustable Long Mode):
 Name of Trustee], as Trustee
By:
Authorized Signatory

 STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS.
COUNTY OF COOK )

I, SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk of ihe City of Chicago in the County of Cook and State
of Illinois, DO HEREBY CERTIFY Ihat the annexed and foregoing is a true and correct copy of that
certain ordinance now on file in my office Authorizing Issuance of Citv of Chicago General
Obligation Bonds. Series 2012 and Amendments to Commercial Paper Program.
1 DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was passed by the City Council of the said
City of Chicago on fourleenlh (\4'^) day of March. 2012.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the vote on the question of the passage of the said ordinance
by the said City Council was taken by yeas and nays and recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings
ofthe said City Council, and that the result of said vote so taken was as follows, to wit:
Yeas 47

Nays 0

I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was delivered to the Mayor of Ihe said City
of Chicago after the passage thereof by the said City Council, without delay, by the City Clerk ofthe
said City of Chicago, and that the said Mayor did approve and sign said ordinance on the
. sixteenth n6"''> day of March. 2012.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the original, of which the foregoing is a true copy, is entrusted
to my care for safekeeping, and that I am the lawful keeper of the same.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my
hand and affixed the corporate seal of the City of
Chicago aforesaid, at the said Cily, in the County and
State aforesaid, this fourth (4'") day of Febn)aiy, 2013.

SUSANA A. MENDOZA, fcityf l^rjf
,~ I

^:!.^.i.._,."r^-r,'

 The following is said ordinance as passed:
WHEREAS, the City of Chicago (the 'Chy') is a body potilit? and corporate under the laws
of the State of Illinois and a home mle unit under Article Vll of the Illinois Constitution of 1970;.
and .

. WHEREAS, the City has heretofore authorized Ihe issuance of ils general obligation
- bonds and notes and has established a commeicial paper program authbr&ing the issuance of
its general obligation commercial paper from time to time; and
WHEREAS, the City's general obligation bonds and notes currently outstanciing and its
general obligation cximmerctaf paper currently or hereafter outstanding frotii time to time-(collectiyely, the "Outstanding Indebtedness) mature and are subject to optional and mandatoiy
redemption as prb\^ded in the respective proceedings authorizing the Outstanding
Indebtedness; and'
WHEREAS, ttie City has heretofore entered into agreements of the type described In
Section 14 hereof which are in existence as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance (the
'Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements'): and
WHEREAS, it is in the tiest interests of the inhabitants of the City and necessary for the
welfare of the govemment and affairs of the City to authorize (i) refunding all or a portion of the •
Outstanding lndet>tedness and C'i) terminating, amending or otherwise modifying all or ariyporfion of the Existing Interest Rale Exchange Agreements and paying any settlement,
breakage or temiination amounts thai may be due and owing in connection therewith, in order to
achieve, (^ebt service savings for the City, restmchire debt, service of Ihe Outstanding
indebtedness or reducx, limit or manage the City's exposure to interest tate risk (collectively,
the 'Refunding Purposes^; and

• WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of the inhat»tants of the City and necessary for the
welfare of the govemment and affairs of the City lo finarice (i) public ilght-of-^vay infrastructure
improvemehls in CHy neighbortioods, including street and alley construction and improvements,
lighting improvements, sidewalk improvements and replacement, and cxjrb and gutter repairs '
^ n d replacement; (ii) infrastructure Improvements to "enhance the development of econornic
activity,, induding • industrial street construction and improvements, streetscaping, -medianlandscaping, demolition of hazardous, vacant or dilapidated buildings that pose a threat to
public safety and welfare, shoreline reconstructron. riveriaank stabilization. resWenUal and
commercial infrastructure redevelopment and railroad viaduct clearance improvements;
(iii) transportation improvements (to City property and fadWies and to Dfotxertv and fadlilies

 21708

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

located within the City limits which are owned by other governmental entities), including street
resurfacing, bridge and freight tunnel rehabilitation, traffic signal modernization, new traffic
signal installation, intersection safety improvements and transit facility improvements; (iv) grants
or loans to assist not-for-profit organizations or educational or cultural institutions, or to assist
other municipal corporations, units of local govemment, school districts, the State of Illinois or
the United States of America; (v) cash flow needs of the City; (vi) the acquisition of personal
prc)perty, including, but not limited to, computer hardware and software, vehicles or other capital
items useful or necessary for City purposes; (vii) the duly authorized acquisition of improved and
unimproved real property within the City for municipal, industrial, commercial or residential
purposes, or any combination thereof, and the improvement,, demolition and/or remediation of
any such property; (viii) constructing, equipping, altering and repairing various municipal
facilities including fire stations, police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and other
municipal facilities; (ix) the enhancement of economic development within the City by making
direct grants or loans to, or deposits to funds or accounts to' secure the obligations of,
not-for-profit or for-profit organizations doing business or seeking to do business in the City;
(x) the funding of (A) judgments entered against the Gity, (B) certain settlements or other
payments required to be made by the City as a condition to the resolution of litigation or
threatened litigation or arbitration and (C) such escrow accounts or other reserves as shall be
deemed necessary for any of said purposes; (xi) the payment of certain contributions (the
"Pension Contributions') to the Policemen's Annuity-and Benefit Fund, the Firemen's Annuity
and Benefit Fund, the Municipal Employees'. Officers' and Officials' Annuity and Benefit Fund
and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund (collectively, the
'Pension Funds'); (xii) the provision of facilities, services and equipment to protect and enhance
public safety, including,, but not limited to, increased costs for jsolice and fire protection services,
emergency medical services, staffing at the City's emergency call center and other City
facilities, and enhanced security measures at airports and other major City facilities; and (xiii)
acquiring motor vehicles for a term of years or lease period (the purposes described in clauses
(i) through (xiii) above being referred to herein as the 'Project"); and
WHEREAS, the cost of the Refunding Purposes and the Project is estimated to be not
less than $900,000,000 and the City expects to pay a portion of such costs by bonrowing money
and issuing its general obligation bonds in one or more series and at one or more times in the
aggregate principal amount of not to exceed $900,000,000 (plus the amount of any original
issue discount as herein provided); and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is advisable and necessary to authorize the
borrowing of the sum necessary at this time for any or all of the purposes of (i) paying costs of
the Refunding Purposes, (ii) paying costs of the Project, including capitalizing or funding such
interest on the bonds herein authorized for said purpose as may be necessary, (iii) capitalizing
or funding interest on Outstanding Indebtedness and (iv) paying the expenses of issuing the
bonds herein authorized for the purposes described herein, and in evidence thereof to authorize
the issuance of its General Obligalion Bonds (the 'Bonds'), in one or more series and at one or

 3/14/2012

REPORTS O F COMMITTEES

21709

more times as herein provided, such borrowing being for a proper public purpose and in the
public interest, and the City, by virtue of its constitutional home rule powers and ail lawts
applicable thereto, has the power to issue such Bonds; and
WMEREAS, the Bonds may.include one or more series of bonds the interest on which is,
as designated by series, either includible or excludable from gross income for federal income
tax purposes under Section 103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. as amended (the
••Code-);and
WHEREAS, the City-has authorized the issuance of certain bonds, notes and commercial
paper of the City secured by and payable, from a specified revenue source, including, without
limitation, airport revenues, sales tax revenues, motor fuel tax revenues, water system revenues
and sewer system revenues (such bonds and notes being hereinafter referred to as .'Revenue
Bonds and Notes" and such commercial paper being hereinafter-referred to as "Revenue
Commercial Paper"); and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is necessary to provide for various
restructuring-amendments (i) to the Outstanding Indebtedness, (u) to the Revenue Bonds and
Notes curtiently outstanding arid the Revenue Commercial Paper currently or hereafter
outstanding from time to time (collectively, the" Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness") and (iii) to
the extent issued and outstanding from lime to time in the future, the Bonds; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is nec:essary to amend certain sections of the
ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City of Chicago on May' 1. 2002. (the "2002
Ordinance"), which authorized the issuance of Cohimercial Paper Notes Series A and Series B
in ah amount not to exceed $200,000,000 and pursuant to which the City proposed' to establish
a commercial, paper program, an auction rale securities program, a variable rate securities
program and a line of credit program (collectively. Ihe "Bon-owing Plan"); and
WHEREAS, the Borrowing Plan authorizes the issuance of one or more series of
Authorized Debt (as defined in the 2002 Ordinance) for (i)the payment, or reimbursement of the
City for the payment, of the cost of all or any portion of- any capital project approved by City
Council, (ii) cash flow needs of the City, (iii) the deposit of monies into funds and accounts as
are provided for in any indenture entered into under the Borrowing Plan, and (iv) the payment of
costs of issuance incurred in connection with each series of Authorized Debt; and
WHEREAS, the city desires to amend the 2002 Ordinance iri order to. among other
things, (i) increase the maximum aggregate principal amount of Authorized Debt to be
outstanding under the 2002 Ordinance from $200,000,000 to $500,000,000 and (ii) further
delegate authority and establish the borrowing parameters for the line of credit program; now,
therefore,
BE IT ORDAINEO B Y THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHICAGO:

Section 1. The City Council of the City (the "C//y Councin. after a public meeting
heretofore held on this Ordinance by the Committee on Finance of the City Coundl. pursuant to

 21710

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

proper notice and In accardanc:e with the findings and recommendations of suc:h Committee,
hereby finds that all of the recitals contained in the preambles to this Ordinance are full^ true and
correct and does incorporate them into this Ordinance by this reference.
Sectiori 2. There shall be borrowed on the credit of and for and on t>ehalf of the City in
one or more series and at one or more times the sum of not to exceed $900,000,000 plus an
amount equal to Ihe amount of any net original issue discount used in the mariceting of the
Bonds (not to exceed 10 percent of Ihe principal amount of each series thereof) for the
purposes aforesaid; and the Bonds shall be issued from time to time in said aggregate principal
amount, or such lesser amount, as may be determined by the City's Chief Financial Officer or
the City Comptroller (each such officer being hereinafter referred to as an "Authorized Officer^.
. All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds payable in one payment on a
fixed date ('Capital Appreciation Bonds'). Each series of Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be
dated the date of issuance thereof and shall also bear the date of authentication, shall be in fully
registered form, shall be numbered, as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar (as
hereinafter defined), and shall be in' denominations eqijal to the original prirKipal amounts ot
such Caf»tal Appreciation Bonds or any integral multiple thereof, each such original principal
amount representing Compciund Accreled Value (as hereinafter defined) at maturity (the
"Maturity Amount") of such minimum amounts and integral multiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Capital Appreciation- Bonds (but no
single Bond shall represent Compound Accreted Value maturing on more than one date). As
used herein, the "Compound Accreted Value" of a Capital Appreciation Bond on any date of
determination shall t>e an amount equal to the original principal amount (or integral multiple
thereof) plus an investrrient return accrued to the date of such detenrination at a serhiannual
compounding rate which is necessary to produce the yield to maturity t>ome by such Capital
Appreciation Bond (the 'Yield to Maturity").
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at fixed rates
and paying interest semiannually as described below (the 'Current Interest Bonds'). Each
series of Current Interest Bonds shall be dated such date as shall be agreed upon by an
Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Current Interest Bonds, shall be in fully registered
form, shall be in such minimum denominations and integral riiultiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Current Interest Bonds (but no single
Current Interest Bond shall represent installments of principal maturing on more than one date),
and shall be numbered as detennined by the applicable Bond Registrar.
The Bonds may be initially issiicd as Capital Appreciation Bonds containing provisions
for the conversion of the Compound Accreted Value of such Bonds into Current Interest Bonds
(the 'Convertible Bonds") at such time following the initial issuance as shall be approved by an
Authorized Officer. .While in the form of Capital Appreciation Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shall be subject to all of the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance relating to Capital
Appreciation Bonds, and while in the fonm of Current Interest Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shall be subject to all of the provisions and limilations of this Ordinance relating to Current
Interest Bonds. In particular, when Convertible Bonds are in the form of Capital Appreciation
Bonds prior to their conversion to Cunent Interest Bonds, the transfer, exchange and

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21711

replacement provisions of this Ordinance with respect to Capital Appreciation Bonds shall apply
to such Convertible Bonds; provided that the Convertible Bonds delivered in the form of Capital
Appreciation Bonds in connection wilh any such transfer, exctiange or replacement shall have
identical provisions for conversion to Current Interest Bonds as set forth in the Convertible
Bonds being transferred, exchanged or replaced. In connection vyith the issuance and sale of
any Convertible Bonds, the terms and provisions relating to the conversion of the Compound
Accreted Value' of such Convertible Bonds into Current Interest Bonds shall be as approved by
an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Convertible Bonds. Notwithstariding any other
provision hereof, any series of Bonds may be issued as Capital Appreciation Bonds. Current
Interest Bonds. Convertible Bonds or any combination thereof.
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at variable rates
established by reference to such indices or otherwise and adjustable and payable from time to
time as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer and as agreed upon by an Aulhorized
Officer and the purchaser of the Bonds (the 'Variable Rate Bonds'). Each series of Variable
Rate Bonds shall be dated such date as shall be agreed upon by. an'Authorized Officer arid the
purchasers of such Bonds, shall be in fully registered fonm. shall b t in siich denominations as
shall be agreed upon by ah Authorized Officer and the purchasers of the Bonds (but no single
Bond shall represent installments of principal maturing on more than one date), and shall be
numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar. Each series of Variable Rate Bonds
may be issued pursuant to. and have such terms and provisions as are set forth in, a trust
indenture behween the City and a bank or trust company selected by an Authorized Officer. The
Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into one or more such trust
indentures on behalf of the CHy. Each such trust indenture shall be in Substantially the form of
trust indentures previously entered into by the City in connection with the sale «f general
obligation bonds or .notes bearing interest at variablis rates.but-with-such revisions in text as the
Mayor or the Authorized Officer executing the same shall delerrnine are necessary or desirable.
Inc:luding such revisions as shall be necessary to incorporate provisions relating to .the manner
of establishing the interest rate and the payment of interest from time to time on the Variable
Rate Bonds,-the execution thereof, and any amendment thereto, by the Mayor or such
Authorized Officer to evidence the City Council's approval of all suc:h revisions.
All or any portion of the Bonds niay be issued and sold from time to time on a retail basis
to "individual investors (the 'Retail Bonds') or as a direct purchase to holders (the 'Dired
Purchase Bonds'). The Retail Bonds and the Direct Purchase Bonds shall be sold as provided
in Section 12 hereof.
The principal of the Bonds of each series shall t>ecome due and payable on or before
the earlier of (i) January 1, 2054, or (ii) 40 years after the date of issuance thereof. Each series
of Current Interest Boiids shall bear interest at a rate or rates and each series of Capital
Appreciation Bonds shall have Yields to Maturity not to exceed 15 percent per annum. Each
series of Variable Rate Bonds shall bear interest from time to time at such rates detennined by
such remarketing or other indexing agent as shall be selected by an Authorized Officer for that
purpose or as provided in the related trust indenture referred to above not to exceed 15 percent
per annum. Any portion of the Bonds may be issued as bonds the interest on which is not

 21712

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

excludable from Ibe gross income of the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes if
determined by an Authorized Officer lo be beneficial to the City.
Each Capital Appreciation Borid shall accrue interest from its dale at the rate per annum
compounded semiannually on each January 1 and July 1. commencing on such January 1 or
July 1 as determined by ah Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Capital Appredation
Bonds, which will produce the Yield to Maturity identified therein until the maturity date thereof.
Interest on the Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be payable only at the respective maturity dates
thereof.
Each Current Interest Bond shall bear interest from the later of its date or the most
recent interest payment date to which interest has been paid or duly provided for, until the
principal ampurit of such Bond is paid, such interest (computed upon the basis of a 360-day
period of twelve 30-day months) being payable on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
commencing on such January 1 or July 1 as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the
time of the sale of each series of Current Interest Bonds. Interest on each Current Interest
Bohd shall be paid'to the person in wtiose -name such Bond is registered .at the close of
business on the 15th day of the month next preceding the inlerest payment date, by check or
draft of the applicable Bond Registrar, or. at Ihe option of any registered owner of $1.0(}0,.000 or
more in aggregate principal amount o  Current Interest Bonds of a series, by wire transfer of
immediately available funds'to such bank in the continental United States of America as the
registered owner of such Bonds shall request in writing to the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each series of Variable Rate Bonds shall bear Interest (computed from time-to time at
such rates and on such basis as shall be detennined by an. Authorized Officer or at the time of
sale of such series of Variable Rate Bonds) payable on such dates as shall be determined by an
Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds. Ariy Variable Rate Borids
may be made subject to optional or mandatory tender for purchase by the owners thereof at
such limes and at such prices (not to exceed 105 percent of the principal amount thereof) a s .
shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale .of such Variable Rate Bonds. In
connection with the remarketing of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series so tendered for
purchase under the terms and conditions so specified by an Authorized Officer, the Mayor and
each Authorized Officer, are hereby aulhorized to execute on h>ehalf of the Cily a remarketing
agreement, and any amendment Ihereto, with respect to such series of Variable Rate Bonds in
substantially the form previously used for variable rate financings of the City with appropriate
revisions lo reflect the tenns and provisions of such Bonds sold as Variable Rate Bonds and
such other revisions in text as an Aulhorized Officer shall determine are necessary or desirable
in Connection wilh the sale of such Bonds as Variable Rale Bonds. The annual fee paid to any
remarketing agent serving in such capacity pursuant to any such remarketing agreement with
respect to a series of Variable Rale Bonds shall not exceed one-quarter of one percent (0.25%)
of the average principal amount of such Variable Rate Bonds of such series outstanding during
such annual pericxl.
The Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appreciation Bonds, the principal of the
Current Interest Bonds and the Variable Rale Bonds and any redemption premium shall be

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21713

payable in lawiful money of the United States of America upon presentation and surrender
thereof at the designated corporate trust office of the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each of the Bonds shall be designated "General Obligation Bonds. Series J
with
such additions, modifications or revisions as shall be determined to be necessary by an
Authorized Officer at the time of the sale of such Bonds to refiect the calendar year of issuance
of the Bonds, the order of sale of the Bonds, the specific series of the Bonds, whether the
Bonds are being issued on a taxable basis, whether the Bonds are Capital Appreciation Bonds,
Cun-ent Interest Bonds. Convertible Bonds. Variable Rale Bonds, Retail Bonds or Direct
Purchase Bonds, whether the Bonds are being issued and sold for the purpose of paying costs
of the Refunding Purposes, paying costs of the Project or a combination thereof and any other
aulhorized features of Ihe Bonds determined .by an-Authorized Officer as desirable to be
refiected in the title of the Bonds being issued and sold.
The seal of the City or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed to or printed on each of the
Bonds, and the Bonds shall be executed by the manual or facsimile signature, of the. May or arid
attested by the manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk, and in case any officer whose
signature shall, appear on any Bond, shall cease lo be such officer before the delivery of such
Bond, such signaturo shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all proposes,'the same as-if
such officer had remained in office until delivery. As used iathis Ordinance-, 'City Clerk" shall
mean the duly qualified and acting City Clerk of the City or any Deputy City Clerk or other
person that may lawfully take a specific action or perform a specific duly prescribed for the City
Cleric pursuant to this Ordinance.
/ '
' All Bonds shall have thereon a certificate of authentication substantially in the form
h6reinafler set forth duly execiuted by the applicable Bond Registrar as authenticating agenl of
the City and showing the date of authentication. No Bond shall be-valid or obligatory for any
purpose' or be entitled to any security or benefit under this " Ordinance unless and until such
certificate of authentication ishalfhave been duly executed bythe applicable Bond Registrar by
mariual signature, and such certificate of authentication upon any such Bond shall be conclusive
evidence that siich Bond has been authenticated and delivered under this Ordinance. The.
certificate of authentication on any Bond shall be deemed to have been executed by the
applicable Bond Registrar if signed by an aulhorized officer of such Bond Registrar, but il shall
not be necessary that the same officer sign the certificate of aulhentlc;ation on all of Ihe Bonds
issued hereunder.
Secffon 3. • (a) Registration and Transfer The City shall cause books (the "Sond
Register^ lor the registration and for the transfer of each series of Bonds as provided in this
Ordinance lo be kept at the designated corporate tmst office of a bank or trust company
designated by ah Aulhorized Officer (Ihe "Bond Registrar^, as the registrar fpi- the City in
connection with such series of Bonds. The Cily is aulhorized to prepare rriulliple Bond blanks
executed by thei City for use in the transfer and exchange of Bonds.
Upon surrender for transfer of any Bond al the designated cxirpcrate trust office of the
applicable Bond Registrar, duly endorsed by, or accompanied by a written instrument or
instruments of transfer in form satisfactory to such Bond Registrar and duly executed by the

 21714

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

registered owner or its attorney duly aulhorized in writing, the Cily shall execute and such Bond
Registrar shall authenticate, date and deliver in the name of the transferee or transferees (a) in
the case of any Capital Appreciation Bond, a new fully registered Capital Appreciation Bond or
Bonds of the same series, maturity and yield to maturity of aulhorized denominations, for a like
aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same series,
maturity and yield to maturity of other authorized denominations, or (b) in the. case of any other
Bonds, one or more fully registered Bonds of the same series, type (Current Interest Bonds or
Variable Rate Bonds), interest rale (or in the case of Variable Rale Bonds, method of interest
rate determination) and maturity of authorized denominations, for a like principal amount. Any
Capital Appredation B.ond or Bonds may be exchanged at said office of the applicable Bond
Registrar for a like aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of
the same series, maturity and yield to maturity of other authorized denominations. Any other
Bond or Bonds may be exchanged' at said office of the applicable Bond Registrar for a like
aggregate principal amount of Bonds ofthe same series, type, interest rate and rnaturity of other
authorized denominations. The execution by the Cily of any fully registered Bond shall
constitute full and due authorization of such Bond, and- the applicable' Bond Registrar shall
thereby be authorized to aulhenficate, date and deliver such Bond; provided that (a)-the
aggregate original principal amount of outstanding Capital Appreciation Bonds'of 6ach series,
maturity and yield to maturily authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall not exceed
the aulhorized aggregate, original principal amount of Capital-Appreciation Bonds of such series
and maturity less previous retirements and (b) the principal amount of Current Interest-Bonds or
Variable Rate Bonds of each series, maturity and interest rale (or interest rate determination
methcxl) authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall not exceed the authorized
principal amount of Current Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds for such series, maturity and
interest rate (or interest rate determination method) less previous retirements.
The applicable Bond Registrar shall not be required" to transfer or exchange (a) any
Bond after notice calling such Bond for redemption has been mailed, or (b) any Bond during a
period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of such Bond; provided,
however, that provisions relating to the transfer or exchange of Variable Rate Bonds of a series
shall be as determined by an Authorized Officer at the lime of the sale thereof and may be set
forth in the trust indenture securing such series of Variable Rale Bonds as authorized in
Section 2 hereof.
The person in whose name any Bond shall be registered shall be deemed and regarded
as the absolute owner thereof for all purposes, and payment of the Compound Accreted Value
of. principal of, redemption premium, if any. or interest on any Bond, as appropriate, shall be
made only' lo or upon the order of the registered owner thereof or its legal representative. All
such payments shall be valid and effectual lo satisfy and discharge ihe liability upon such Bond
to the extent of the sum or sums so paid..
f
tio service charge shall be made for any transfer or exchange of Bonds, but the City or
the applicable Bond Registrar may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other
governmental charge that may be imposed in connection w'lth any transfer or exc:hange of
Bonds, except that no such payment may tie required in the case of the issuance of a Bond or
Bonds for the unredeemed portion of a Bond surrendered for redemption.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21715

(b) Book-Entry Only System. If so determined and directed by ah Aulhorized Officer in
connection with the sale of any of the Bonds, such Bonds may'be issued in book-entry only
form. In connection with the issuance of Bonds in book-entry only form, an Aulhorized Officer is
authorized to execute and deliver to .the book-entry depository selected by such Authorized
Officer such depository's standarci form of representafion letter. If any of the Bonds are
registered in the name of a securities depository which uses a book-entry system, the standing
of the beneficial owner to enforce any of the covenants herein may be established through the
books and records of such securities depository or a participant therein.
(c) Bonds Lost, Destroyed, etc. If any Bond, whether in temporary or definitive form, is
lost (whether tiy reason of thett or otbietwiie). destroyed (whether by muWatton, damage, in
whole or in part, or otherwise) or improperly cancelled, the applicable Bond Registrar may
authenlicate a new Bond of like series, date, maturity date, interest rate (or, in'tbe case of
Capital Appreciation Bonds, yield to maturity, and in the case of-Variable Rate Bonds, method of
interest rate determination), denomination and original principal amount (in the case of Capital
Appreciation Bonds) or principal amounl (in the case of other'Bonds) and bearing a number not
contemporaneously outstanding; provided that (i) in the case of any mutilated-Bond, such
mutilated Bond shall first be surrendered.!© the applicable Bond Registrar, and (ii) iri the case of
any lost Bond or Boncl destroyed in whole, there shall be first furnished to the applicable Bond
Registrar evidence of such'loss or destruction, together with indemnification of the City and'
such Bond Registrar, satisfactory to such Bond Registrar. If any lost, .destroyed or improperly
cancelled Bond shall have matured or is about to mature, or has been, called for rederoption.
instead of issuing a duplicate Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar'shall pay the same without
surrender thereof it there shall be first furnished to such; Bond Registrar evidence of such loss;
destruction or cancellation, together with indemnity, satisfactory to il. Upon the issuance of any
substitute. Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar may require the payment of a sum suffident to
cover any tax or other governmental charge that may be imposed, in relation thereto.
. (d) ^Redemption and Repun:hase. The Bonds- may. be made subject to redemption
prior to maturity at the option of the- City. in whole, or .in part on any date, at such times and at
such redemption prices (to-be expressed as a percentage of the principal amountof Current
Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds being redeemed or as a formula as described below and
expressed as a percentage of the Compound Accreled Value of Capital Appreciation" Bonds to
be redeemed or as a formula as descritTed below) not to exceed 105 percent, plus, in the case
of Current Inlerest Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, accrued interest to the date of redemption,
as determined by an Authorized Officer at the lime of the sale thereof.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, such 105 percent limitation on the redemption price of
Bonds shall not apply where the redemption price is based upon a formula' designed to
compensate the owner of the Bonds to be redeemed based upon prevailing rriartcel conditions
on the date fixed for redemption; commonly known as a "make-whole* redemption price (the
°Make-Whole Redempliori Price"). At the time of sale of the Borids, an Authorized Officer shall
determine the provisions of the formula to be used to establish any Make-Whole Redemption
Price, which may vary depending on whether the Borids are issued oh a taxable or tax-exempt
basis. An Authorized Officer shall confirm and transmit the applicable Miake-Whole Redemption
Price on such dales and to such parties as shall be necessary-to effectuate such redemption.

 21716

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

If fewer than all of the outstanding Bonds of a series are to be optionally redeemed, the
Bonds to be called shall be called from such maturities and interest rates of such series as may
be determined by an Authorized Officer.
Certain of the Bonds of a series may be made subject to mandatory redemption, at par
and accmed interest to the date fixed for redemption, as determined by an Authorized Officer at
the time of the sale thereof. Further, an Aulhorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell (at a
price determined by such Authorized Officer to-be in the best interests of the City) or waive any
right the City may have to call any of the Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness for optional
redemption, in whole or in part, and is hereby further aulhorized to expend the proceeds of any
such sales for any purpose for which the proceeds of the Bonds are authorized to be expended
and for the payment or prepayment of any City debt obligations, all as determined by an
Authorized Officer, provided however, lo the extent that interest on such Bonds or Outstanding
Indebtedness is excluded from gross intiome for federal income lax purposes, such
expenditures shall "not adversely affect such exclusion. If determined to be necessary or
appi'opriale. an Aulhorized Officer is aulhorized to solicit the consent of holders of Outstanding
Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness to any such sale or waiver.
Retail Bonds may be made subject to repurchase by the City upon the deniand of
certain holders thereof at a price of not to exceed-105 percent of par, as more fully described in
Secfion 12 hereof.
At the time of sale of Bonds of a "series, an Authorized Officer is authorized to determine
tfie manner of redeeming such Bonds, either by lot in the manner hereiriafter provided or
pro-rata in the manner determined by an Authorized Officer at the lime of sale, in the event less,
than all of the Bonds of the same series, maturity and interest rale are to be redeemed.
The Current Interest Bonds shall be redeemed only in amounts equal to the respective
minimum authorized denominations and integral multiples' thereof and the Capital Appreciation
Bonds shall be redeemed only in amounts represenling the respective minimum authorized
Maturily Amounts and integral multiples thereof. In the event of the redemption of fewer than all
the Bonds of the same series, maturity and interest rate by lot, the aggregate prindpal amount
or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) thereof to be redeemed shall be the minimum authorized
denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for such series or an integral multiple thereof,
arid the applicable Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of such series, maturity and
interest rale, a distinctive number for each minimum authorized denominafion or Maturity
Amount (as appropriate) of such Bond and shall select by lol from the numbers so assigned.as
many numtjers as, at such minimum authorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) for each number, shall equal the principal amount or. Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of such Bonds to l>e redeemed. In such case, the Bonds to be redeemed shall be
those to which were assigned numbers so selected; provided that only so much of the principal
amount or Maturily Amount (as appropriate) of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall equal
such minimum aulhorized denomination or Maturity Amounl (as appropriate) for each numtjer
assigned to it and so selected. In the event of the redemption of fewer than all Bonds of the
same series, maturity and inlerest rate on a pro-rata basis, if the Bonds are held in book-entry
fonn at the lime of redemption, at the lime of sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21717

authorized to direct the Bond Registrar to instruct the book-entry- depository to select the
specific Bonds within such maturity and inlerest rate for redemption pro-rata among such
Bonds. The City shall have no responsibility or obligation lo ensure that the book-enlry
depository properly selects such Bonds for redemption. The Cily shall, al least 45 days prior lo any optional redempfion dale (unless a shorter
time period shall be satisfactory to the applicable Bond Registrar), notify the applicable Bond
Registrar of such redemption dale and of the principal amounl or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of Bonds of such series to be redeemed.
In conriection with any mandatory redemption of Bonds of a series as authorized above,
the principal amounts of Bonds (or the Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appredation
Borids) of such series to be mandatorily redeemed in each year may be reduced through the
earlier'oplional redempliori thereof, with any partial optional redempfions of such Bonds of sutih
series' credited against future mandatory redemption requirements in such order- of the
mandatory redemption dates as an Authorized Officer may determine. In addition, on or prior to
the 60th day preceding any mandatory redemption date of Bonds of a series, the applicable
Bond Registrar may. and if directed by an Authorized Officer shall, purchase Bonds of such •
series 'required- lo tie retired on such mandatory redempfion dale at such prices as an
Authorized Officer shall determine. Any such Bonds so purchased shall be cancelled and the
principal amount (or Compound Accreled Value, as appropriate) thereof shall be credited
against Ihe payment required on such next mandatory redemption date wilh respect to suc:h
series of Bonds.
The appliciable Bond Registrar shall promptly notify the City in writing of the Bonds, or
portions thereof, selected for redemption and, in the case of any Bond selec:ted for partial
redemption, the principal amount. Compound Accreted Value or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) thereof, and the interest rate thereof to be redeemed.
Subject to the limitation on redemption price set forth above, in the.c:ase of redemption of
any Variable Rate Bonds, the terms of such redemption shall be determined by an Authorized
Officer .at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds and may be set forth in the trust
indenture securing such Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof.
Section 4. Except as may otherwise be determined as provided below for Variable
Rale Bonds, unless waived by any oviffier of Bonds lo be redeemed, notice of the call for any
such redemption shall be given by the applicable Bond Registrar on behalf of the Cily by mailing
the redemption notice by first class mail at least 30 days and not more than 60 days prior to the
date fixed for redemption to the registered owner of the Bond or Bonds to be redeemed al the
addreiss shown on the applicable Bond Register or at such other address as is furnished in
wriUng by sijch registered owner to such Bond Registrar, but the failure to mail any such notice
or any defect therein as to any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the
redemption of any other Bond. Any notice of redemption mailed as provided in this SecUbri
shall be conclusively presumed to have t)een given whether or not adually received by the
addressee. In the case of redempfion of any Variable Rale Bonds of a series, the time and
manner of giving such notice shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of

 21718

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

such Variable Rate Bonds and may be set forth in the trust indenture securing such Variable
Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof.
All notices of redemption shall state:
(1)

the series designation of the Bonds to be redeemed.

(2)

the redemption date.

(3)
the redemption price, or in the case of.a. redemption of Bonds at a
Make-Whole Redemption Price, a description gi the formula by which the redemption
price shall be delennined.
(4)
if less than all outstanding Bonds of a series are. to be redeemed, the
identification (and. in the case of partial redemption, the respective principal amounts
and inlerest rates. Compound Accreled Values or Maturily Amounts) of the Bonds to be
redeemed.
(5)
that on the redemption date the redemption price will become due and
payable upon each such Bond or.portion thereof called for redempfion, and that interest
thereon shall cease to accme or compound from and after said date.
(6)
the place where such Bonds are to be'sunrendered for payment of the
redemption price, which place of payment shall be the designated corpo.rale trust office
of the applic:able Bond Registrar, and
(7)
such other information as shall be deemecl. necessary by the applicable
Bond Registrar at the time such notice is given ib.comply with law. regulation or industry
standard.
With respect to an optional redemption of any series of Bonds, such notice may state
that said redemption is conditioned upon the receipt .by the applicable Bond Registrar on or prior
to the date fixed for redemption of moneys suffident to pay the redemption price of the Bonds of
such series. If such moneys are not so received, sucfi redemption'notice shall be of no force
and effect, the City shall not redeem such Bonds and the applicable Bond Registrar shall give
notice, in the same manner in which the notice of redemption was given, that such moneys were
not so received and that such Bonds will not be redeemed, llnless the notice of redemption
shall be made conditional as provided above, on or prior to any redemption date-for a series of
Bonds, the Cily shall deposit with the applicable Bond Registrar an amount of money sufficient
to pay the redemption price of all the Bonds or portions thereof of such series which are to be
redeemed on thai date.
NoUce of redemption having been given as aforesaid, the Borids. or portions thereof, so
lo be redeiemed shall, on the redempfion date, become due and payable at the redemption price
therein specified, and from and after such date (unless the City shall default in the payment of
the redemption price or unless, in the event of a conditional notice as described above, the

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21719

necessary moneys were not deposited) such Bonds, or portions thereof, shall cease lo bear,
accrue or compound interest. Upon surrender of such Bonds for redemption in accordance wilh
said notice, such Bonds shall be paid by the applicable Bond Registrar at the redemption price.
Installments of interest due on or prior to the redemption date shall be payable as herein
provided for payment of inlerest. Upon surrender for any partial redemption (i) of any Current
Inlerest Bond or Variable Rale Bond, there shall be prepared for the registered owner a new
Bond or Bonds of the same series, type (Current Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds),
interest rate or, in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of inlerest rale determination, and
maturity in the amount of the unpaid principal or (ii) of any Capital Appreciation Bond, there shall
be prepared for the registered owner a new Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same
series. Yield to Maturity and maturity date in the amount of the unpaid Maturity AmounL
If any Current Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond, or portion thereof, called for
redemption shall not be so paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the principal shall, until
paid, bear inlerest from the redemption date at the rale borne by such Bond, or portion thereof,
so called for redemption. If any Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof, called for
redemption shall not be so paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the Compound Accreted
Value al such redemption date shall continue to accrue interest from such redemption date at
the Yield to Maturity bome by such Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof, so called for
redemption. All Bonds which have been redeemed shall be cancelled and destroyed by the
applicable Bond Registrar and shall not be reissued.
If any Bond Is not presented for payment when the principal amount. Compound
Accreted Value or Maturity Amount thereof becomes due, either at maturity or al a dale fixed for
redemption thereof or otherwise, and "if moneys sufficient lo pay such Bond are held by the
applicable Bond Registrar for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond, such Bond
Registrar shall hold such moneys for Ihe benefit of the registered owner of such Bond without
liability lo the registered owner for interest. The registered owner of such Bond thereafter shall
be reslricted exclusively to such funds for satisfaction of any claims relating to such Bond.
Section 5.
The Capital Appreciation Bonds and the Current Interest Bonds of each
series shall be prepared in substantially the following forms with such insertions and revisions
as shall be necessary to refiect the lerms and provisions of the sale of the Bonds of such series
pursuant to Section 12 hereof; provided Ihat if the text of any Bond is to be printed in its entirety
on the front side of such Bond, then the text shown t5r appearing on the reverse side of such
Bond shall replace paragraph (2) and the legend, "See Reverse Side for Additional Provisions,"
shall be omitted. The Convertible Bonds shall be prepared incorporafing the provisions of the
forms of Capital Appreciation Bonds and Current Interest Bonds set forth below as necessary lo
refled the terms and provisions of the sale of the Convertible Bonds pursuant to Section 12
hereof. The Variable Rate Bonds shall t>e prepared in substantially the form of the Current
Interest Bonds set forth below, or as provided in the applicable trust indenture securing such
Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof, wilh such insertions and revisions as
shall be necessary to reflect the tenns and provisions of the sale of the Variable Rate Bonds
pursuant lo Seciion 12 hereof
All Bonds may be prepared wilh such insertions and revisions as shall be necessary in
connection with the issuance of such Bonds as Retail Bonds or Direct Purchase Bonds.

 21720

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(Fonn of Capital Appreciation Bond — Front Side]

REGISTERED

No.;

$
Compound Accreted
Value at Maturity
('Maturily Amount')
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

STATE OF ILLINOIS
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBUGATION BOND
SERIES

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT PER

$
MATURrrv
,20_

000

YIELD TO

MATURITY

DATED

MATURITY

AMOUNT:

DATE

%

CUSIP
20

Registered Owner:
The City of Chicago (the "City") hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for. value,
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date identified above, the Maturity Amount identified
above. The amount of interest payable on this Bond on the Maturily Date hereof is the amounl
of interest accrued from the Dated Date hereof at a semiannual compounding rate necessary to
produce the Yield to Maturity set forth above, compounded semiannually on each January 1 and
July 1. commencing
,
1. 20 . The Maturity Amount of this Bond is payable
in lawful riioney of the United States of America' upon presentafion and surrender of this Bond at
the designated corporate trust office of
, Chicago, Illinois, or its
successor, as bond regisfrar and paying agent (tf>e "Bond Registrar"). The Compound Accreted
Value of this Bond per $
.000 Maturity Amount on January 1 and July 1 of each year.
commencing
1, 20 , determined by the semiannual compounding described in
this paragraph shall be as set forth in the Table of Compound Accreted Value Per $
.000
of Compound Accreted Value at Maturity conlained herein.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21721

Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth at
this place.
.
. , II is hereby certified and recited thai all conditions, acts and things required by law to
exist or to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and diie fonm and tirne as required by law; that the
indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Bonds of which this is one. does'not exceed any
limitation imposed by law. and that provision has been made for the colledion of a direct annual
tax sufficient to pay the Maturity Amount hereof at maturity.
This Bond shall not be valid or become obligatory.for any purpose until the c:ertificate of
authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Bond Registrar.
I N WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by the. City Council has caused its corporate
seal to be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Bond lo be signed by the duly authorized
facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Clerk, all as
of the Dated Date identified above.

(Facsimile Signature!
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

' fFacsimile Siqnaturel
City Cleric
City of Chicago
[SEAL]
Date of Authentication-.
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION
This Bond is one of the Bonds described in the within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of the General Obligation Bonds. Series
, of the City of Chicago.

(Manual Signature!
Authorized Officer

 21722

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

[Form of Capital Appreciation Bond — Reverse Side]
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBUGATION BOND
SERIES

For the prompt payment of the Maturity Amount of this Bond as the same becomes due.
and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full faith, credit and resources of the City
are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the original principal amount of
$
•
issued pursuant to the constitutional home rule powers of the City for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Purposes described in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described, in the Bond Ordinance, and
(iii) paying expenses incidental to the issuance of the. Bonds, and was authorized by an
Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on
. 20
(the "Bond
Ordinance").
The Bonds maturing on or after January 1.
, are redeemable prior to maturily at the
option of the City, in whole or in part on any date on or after
1.
, and if
less than all of the outstanding Bonds are lo be redeemed, the Bonds to tie called shall be
called from such maturities as shall be determined by the City., and if less than all of the Bonds
of the same maturity and yield to maturity are to tie redeemed, then (by lot] [pro-rata] for the
Bonds of the same maturily and yield lo.maturity in the manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds
to be redeemed at the redempliori prices (being expressed as a percentage of the Compound
Accreted Value of the Bonds to be redeemed) set forth below:
DATES OF REDEMPTION

REDEMPTION PRICE

(Redemption by lot] In the event of Ihe redempfion of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and yield to maturity, the aggregate Maturity Amount thereof to tie redeemed shall be
$
000 or an integral multiple thereof, and the Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of
such maturily and yield lo maturity a distinctive number for each $
,000 Maturity Amount of
such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as. at
$
.000 for each number, shall equal the Maturity Amount of such Bonds to be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so selected;
provided that only so much of the Maturity Amount of each.Bond shall be redeemed as shall
equal $
,000 for each number assigned to it and so selected.
[Redemption pro-rata) In the event of the redemption of less than all Ihe Bonds of like
maturity and yield to maturity, the Bonds to be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
determined pursuant to Ihe Bond Ordinance.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21723

Notice of any such redempfion shall be sent by first class mail not fewer than 30 days
nor more than 60 days prior lo the date fixed for redemption to the Registered Owner of each •
Bond to be redeemed at the address shown on the registration books of the City maintained by
the Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner
to the Bond Registrar; provided thai the failure lo mail any such notice or any defect therein as
to any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Bond.
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease to accrue interest on the specified
redemption date; provided that funds for redemption are on deposit at the place of payment at
that lime, and shall not be deemed to be outstanding.
' This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly authorized iri writing at the designated corporate trust offic:e of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago. Illinois, but only- in the manner, subjed lo the limitations and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon such transfer a new Bond or Bonds of aulhorized denominations, of the same maturily
and yield lo maturity arid for the same aggregate Original Prindpal Artiount will be issued to the
transferee iri exchange therefor. The Bond Registrar shall not be required to transfei" or
exchange this Bond (A) after noticx calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of .15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.
• The Bonds are issued in fully registered form in Original Principal Amounts representing
$
,000 Maturity Amount or any integral multiple thereof. This Bond may be exchanged at
the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate Original Principal
Amount of- Bonds of the same series and maturity, upon the terms set forth in the Bond
Ordinance.
^
The City and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absdiute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving paymentof or on account of the Maturity
Amount hereof and redemption premium, if any, hereon and for all other purposes and neither
the City nor the Bond Registrar shall be affected by any notice to the contrary.-

TABLE OF COMPOUND ACCRETED VALUE
PER $

'

: .000 OF COMPOUND ACCRETED VALUE A T MATURITY

(ASSIGNMENT)

FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)
the within Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer (he said "Bond on the books kepi for registration thereof with full power of
substitution in the premises.

 21724

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

Dated:

3/14/2012

,

Signature guaranteed;
NOTICE:

The signature lo this assignment must correspond with the name of the Registered
Owner as It appears upon the (ace of the wilhin Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

[Form of Current Interest Bond — Front Side]
REGISTERED
NO.
._
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF ILUNOIS
• CITY OF CHICAGO •
GENERAL OBUGATION BOND
SERIES

-

.

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
Interest
Rate:

Maturity Dale:
%

January 1 . 2 0 _

Dated Date:
,20_

CUSIP:

Registered Owner.
Principal Amounl:
The Cily of Chicago (the "C(7/) hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for value
received promises lo pay lo the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Dale identified above, the Principal Amount idenfified
above-and to pay interest (computed on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months)
on such Principal Amounl from the later of the dale of this Bond or the most recent Interest
payment date to which interest has been paid at Ihe Inlerest Rate per annum set forth above on
January 1 and July 1 of each year commendng.;
1. 20 . unlil said Prindpal
Amounl is paid. Principal of this Bond and redemption premium, if any, shall be payable in
lawful money of the United Stales of America upon presentation and surreridei' at the
designated corporate trust office of
•
, Chicago. Illinois, .as bond
registrar and paying agenl (the "Bond Registrai'). Payment of the installments of interest shall
be made to the Registered Owner hereof as shovwn on' the registration books of Ihe City
maintained by the Bond Registrar at the close of business on the 15th day of the month nexl
preccxling each interest payment date and shall be paid by c^heck or draft of the Bond Registrar
mailed to the address of such Registered Owner as il appears on such registration txjoks or at
such other address furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to the Bond Registrar or. at
the option of any Registered Owner of $1,000,000 or more in aggregate principal amount of tfie
Bonds, by wire transfer of immediately available funds to such bank in the d)ntinental United
Slates of America as ttie Registered Owner hereof shall request in wnting to the Bond Registrar.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21725

Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth at
this place.
It is hereby certified and recited that all conditions, ads and things required by law to
exist or to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and due form and time as required by law. that the
indebtedness ofthe City, including the issue of Bonds of which this is one; does not exceed any
limitation imposed by law; and that provision has been made for the colledion.of a direct annual
tax sufficient to pay the interest hereon as it falls due and also to pay and discharge the
principal hereof at maturity.
This Bond shall not be valid or become obligatory for any purpose until the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Bond Registrar. • IN WrTNESS WHEREOF, the City of Chicago by the City Council has caused its corporate
seal to be imprinted by fac:simile hereon and this Bond to be signed'by the duly authorized
facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Clerk, all as'
of the Dated Date idenfified above.

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature)
City Clerk
City of Chicago
[SEAL]
Date of Authenficafion:
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Bond is one of the Bonds described in the wilhin-mentioned Boncl Ordinance and is
one of the General Obligation Bonds. Series
, of the City of Chicago.

By:

(Manual Signature)
Aulhorized Officer

 21726

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

[Form of Current Interest Bond — Reverse Side)
Crrv OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND
SERIES

For the pronipl payment of this Bond, both principal and interest, as aforesaid, as the
same become due, and for the levy of taxes sufficient for lhal piirpose. the full faith, credit and
resources of the City are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the principal amount of
$
issued pursuant to the constitutional home rule powers of the City for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Purposes desciribed in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described in the Bond Ordinance, and
(iii) paying expenses inddental to the issuance of the .Bonds, and was authorized by an
Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on
._, 20
(the 'Bond
Ordinance").
'
The Bonds maturing on or after January 1,
, are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the City, in whole or in part on ariy date on or after
1,"
, and if less
than all of the outstanding Bonds are to be redeemed, the Bonds to be called shall be called
from such maturities and interest rates as shall be determined by the City and if less than all of
the Bonds of" a single maturity and the same interest rate are to be redeemed then [by lot]
fprorrata] within such maturity and interest rate in the manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds to
be redeemed at the redempfion prices (being expressed as a percentage of the principal
amount) set forth below, plus accrued inlerest to the date of redemption:
DATES OF REDEMPTION

'

REDEMPTION PRICE

The Bonds maturing on January 1.
. are subject to mandatory redempfion prior to
maturity on January 1 of the->years ^
to
, inclusive, and the Bonds maturing on
January 1.
, are subject to mandatory redemption prior'to maturity on January 1 of the
years
to
. inclusive, in each case at par and accrued interest to the date fixed for

redemption.
[Redemption by lol) In the event of the redempfion of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the aggregate principal amounl thereof lo be redeemed shall be
$
,000 or an integral multiple thereof, and the Bond Regisfi-ar shall assign to each Bond of
such maturity and interest rate a distindive numl)er for eac:h $
000 principal amount of
such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as. at
$
.000 for each number, shall equal Ihe principal amount of such Bonds lo be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so seleded;
provided that only so much of the prindpal amount of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall
equal S
,000 for each number assigned to it and so selected.

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF C O M M I T T E E S

21727

[Redemption pro-rata] In the event of the redempfion of less than all of the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the Bonds to be redeemed,will be selected pro-rata in the manner
determined pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.

Notice of any such redemption shall be sent by first class mail not less than 30 days nor
more than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption to the Registered Owner of each Bond
to be redeemed at the address shown on the registration books of the City maintained by the
Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner lo
the Bond Registrar provided Ihat the failure to mail any such notice or any defect therein as to
any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Bond.
When so called for redempfion. this Bond shall cease to bear interest on the specified
redemption date, provided that funds for redemption are on deposit at the place of payment at
that time, and shall not be deemed to be outstanding.

This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly authorized in writing at the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago. Illinois, but only in the manner, subject to the fimitations and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon such transfer a new Bond or Bonds of authorized denominations, of the same interest
rate, series and maturity and for the same aggregate principal amount will be issued to the
transferee in exchange therefor. The Bond Registrar shall not be required to transfer or
exchange this Bond (A) after notice calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.

The Bonds are issued in fully registered form in the denomination of $
,000 each or
authorized integral multiples thereof. This Bond may be exchanged at the designated corporate
trust office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate principal amount of Bonds of the same
interest rate, series and maturity of other authorized denominations, upon the terms set forth in
the Bond Ordinance.

The Cily and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment of or on account of principal
hereof and interest due hereon and redempfion premium, if any.'and for all other purposes and
neither the City nor the Bond Registrar shall be affeded by any notice to the contrary.

 21728

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(ASSIGNMENT)

FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)
the wilhin Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Bond on the bcxiks kept for registration thereof wilh full power of
substitution in the premises.
Dated:
Signature guaranteed:
NOTICE:

The. signature to this assignment must correspond with the name of the Registered
Owner as it appears upon the face of the within Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

; Sections.
Each Bond shall be a direct and general obligation of the City for the
payment of which (as to Compound Accreted Value.. principal, interest and redempfion
premium, if any. as appropriate) the. Cily pledges its full faith and credit. Each Bond shall be
payable (as to Compound Accreted Value, prindpal. interest and redemption premium, if any,
as appropriate) from any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City legally
available for such purpose, including but not limited to the proceeds of the Pledged. Taxes (as
defined in Sedion 7 hereof).
Section 7. For the purpose of providing the funds required to pay as the same
become due (i) the principal of and interest and redemption premium,, if any, on the Bonds
(including .the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds).' (ii) the purchase
price of Bonds that are subjed to opfional or mandatory tender for purchase fay the owners
thereof, lo the extent not otherwise provided for. pursuant to the terms of a Credit Facility (as
defined in Sedion 12 hereoO, (iii) such amounts as may be payable under Interest Rate'
Exchange Agreements (as defined in Sedion 14 hereoQ from the direct annual tax described
below, (iv) amounts (other than periodic fees and expenses) payable to providers of Credit
Facilities as described in Sedion 12 hereof and (v) lo the extent determined by an Authorized
Officer to be necessary or desirable, periodic fees and expenses payable to parties involved in
the provision of ongoing services relafing to the Bonds, the Outstanding Indebtedness, the
Exisfing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements or Inlerest Rate Exchange Agreements, including
parties such as those identified by an Authorized Officer in a notification of sale as described in
Section 12 hereof and parties providing similar ongoing services, such as rafing agencies and
entities providing financial market information to be used in connection wilh the structuring and
sale of the Bonds (the 'Ongoing Financing Services'), there is hereby levied and there shall be
colleded a direct annual tax upon all taxable property'' in the City for the years and in the
amounts as follows:

 3/14/2012
YEAR

2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022.
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027.
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032

21729

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES
AMOUNT

YEAR

AMOUNT

$150,000,000
. 150.000.000
150.000.000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000.000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150,000.000
150,000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
' , 150,006.000
150.000.000
. 150,000.000
150,000.000.

2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
2051
2052

$150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150,000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150.000.000
150,000,000
150i000,000
150,6(50,000
150.000,000
150,000.000
150.000,000
150.000.000

; provided that collections of such levy for any year in an amounl in excess of that nec:essary to
make the payriients described in dauses (i). (ii). (iii), (iv) and (v) above (a) may be used for any
lawful public purpose designated by the City. Council or (b) may be reduced and abated by an
Authorized Officei" if such reducfion is deemed desirable by an Authorized Officer in connection
with the sale or sales of the Bonds, in each case as determined from time to time by an
Authorized Officer as provided in Sedion 12 hereof.
'
The tax levy made in this Sedion is not subject lo the 'Aggregafe Levy" limitation
contained in the Chicago Property Tax Limitation Ordinance conlained in Chapter 3-92 of the
Municipal Code of Chicago (the 'Municipal Code'), and Section 3-92-020 of the Municipal Code
is hereby superseded to exdude the tax levy herein from the definition of "Aggregate Levy"
contained therein.
.
The lerm 'Pledged Taxes' means (i) the taxes hereinabove levied for colledion for the
purpose of providing the funds necessary lo make the payments described in clauses (i). (ii),
(iii). (iv) and (v) of the first paragraph of Ihis Sedion 7. and (ii) sijbjed to the provisions of
Sedion 15 hereof, the proceeds of taxes levied for the years from and after 2011 in connection
with the issuance of the Outstanding Indebtedness to the extent such tax collections are not
necessary for the-payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein or pursuant to any other authorizafion, and the tenn "Pledged Taxes' shall
also indude any amounts deposited into the hereinafter-defined Bond Fund or deposited with

 21730

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

Ihe Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agenl (as hereinafter defined) by an Aulhorized Officer for the
purpose of paying principal of and interest on the Bonds and any accrued inlerest received and
deposited in the Bond Fund or the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Account, if established pursuant to
Section 9 hereof.
As provided in Sedion 12 or othenwise. the City resen/es the right to abate all or a
portion of the Pledged Taxes required to be levied in any year if and to Ihe extent on or before
March 31 ofthe next succeeding calendar year (or such earlier date as may be required by law),
the City has on hand amounts dedicated to the payments described in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of the first paragraph of this Sedion 7. due during the one-year period commendng on
Januao* 2 of such succeeding calendar year. The CUy may, but shall not be required to, cause
the levy or extension in any year of taxes for the payment pf the costs of Ongoing Financing
Servic:es.
Section 8. The City shall appropriate or otherwise provide amounts suffident to pay
(i) principal of ancl inlerest on the Bonds (including the Compound Accreled Value of any Capital
Appredation Bonds), (ii) amounts (other than periodic fees, and expenses) payable to providers
of Credit Facilities aS described in Section 12 hereof to the payment of which the City has
pledged ils full faith and credit and (iii) inlerest Rate Exchange Agreements to the payment of
which the City has pledged its full faith and credii for the years such amounts are due. and the
City hereby covenanis lo lake timely, action as required by law to carry out the provisions'of this
Sedion. but. if for any such year it fails lo do so-, this Ordinance shall constitute a confinuing
appropriafion ordinance of-such amounts without any further adion on the part of the City
Council.
.
•
Section9.
Each Authorized Officer is authorized lo establish one Or triore special
accounts, if determined to be necessary in eonneclion with the sale of any of the Bonds,
separate and segregated from all other funds and accounts of the Cily. which shall either be
(i) held by an Authorized-Officer (each a .'Bond Fund") or (ii) maintained with a bank or" trust
company to be designated by an Aulhorized Officer (each an 'Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Account") pursuant to an escrow agreement (each an 'Ad. Valorem Ta'x Escrow Agreement"),
between the City and the applicable Escrow Agent named therein (each an ' A d Valorem Tax
Escrow Agent"), and one or more of the Mayor or an Authorized Officer are hereby authorized to
• execute and deliver one or more Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreements in connedion with the
• sate of the Bonds in such form as. the officers so executing such agreement may deem
appropriate in accordance wilh the provisions of this Ordinance.
In lieu of the proceeds of such taxes t>eing deposited vwth the City Treasurer, any such
Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreement may authorize Ihe County Collectors of Cook and DuPage
Counfies. Illinois to deposit the proceeds of such taxes directly into the applicable Ad Valorem
Tax Escrow Account, if such Account has been created.
Section 10.
If the Pledged Taxes to be applied to the payment of the Bonds are not.
available in time to make any payments of prindpal of or inlerest on the Bonds when due, then
the appropriate fiscal officers of the City are hereby directed to make such paymenls from any
other moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City that are legally available

 3/14/2012

R E P O R T S OF COMMITTEES

21731

for thai purpose in advancement of the collection of such Pledged Taxes, and when the
proceeds thereof are received, such other funds shall be replenished, all to the end that the
credit ofthe City may be preserved by the prompt payment of the prindpal of and interest on the ,
Bonds as the same becxime due.
Section 11. A copy of this Ordinance, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed in
the respedive offices of the County Clerics of Cook and DuPage Counties. Illinois (the "County
Clerks"), and such filing shall consfilute the authority for and it shall be the duty of said County
Clerks, in each year beginning in 2013. to and including 2053, to extend the taxes levied
pursuant to Sedion 7 hereof for collectiori in such year, such taxes lo be in addition lo and in
excess of all other faxes heretofore or hereafter authorized to be levied by the City on its behalf.
A copy of this Ordinance, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall also be filed with , each
applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, if any. each applicable Bond Registrar, and if the
County Collectors of Cook and DuPage Counties are authorized Id deposit the proceedis of Ihe
taxes levied pursuant to Sedion 7 hereof direcfiy wilh an Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent
pursuant to Sedion 9 hereof, wilh such County Collectors.
Secfion 12. Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell all or any portion of the
Bonds, other than the Retail Bonds and the Dired Purchase Bonds whrch shall be sold as
provided in the following tvvo paragraphs, from time to lime to or at the diredion of an
undenwriter or group of underwriters to- be selected by such Authorized Officer (the"
'fndenvriifers'); with the concurrence of the Chaimnan of the Committee on Finance of the Cily
Council (the 'Chairrnan"), on such terms as such Aulhorized Officer may deem lo be in the best
interests of the City virithin the limitations set forth in this Ordinance. '
Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell Retail Bonds from time to time on
such tenms as such Authorized Officer may deem lo be in the. best interests of the City within
the limitations conlained in this Ordinance and, in connedion therewith, to. appoint an agent or
group of agents to be selected by such Authorized Officer (the "Selling Agents'), with the
concur"reric» of the Chairman, for the purpose of soliciting purchases of the Retail Bonds" liy
individual investors, each sale of Retail Bonds solicited by the Selling Agents to be made with
the concurrence of the Chairman.
The Bonds rhay tie sold as Direct Purchase Bonds in a manner and containing such
terms authorized, by an Authorized Officer, induding pursuant to a placement agent
arrangement, to a purchaser or purchasers other than the Underwriters (the "Direct
Purctiasers'), such Direct Purchasers to be selected by an Aulhorized Officer and such sale
t>eing permitted either at par or with a discount or premium. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer
is hereby authorized to do aM sOch things and lo execute and deliver such additional documents,
agreements and certificate's as shall be necessary in connection with the sale of Direct
Purchase Bonds.
The principal amount of and the interest on the Bonds (including the Compound
Accreted Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds and based on reasonable esfimates of the
interest to be paid on Variable Rale Bonds) sold of each series and maturity in the aggregate

 21732

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(after taking into account mandatory redemptions) shall not exceed the amount levied therefor
as spedfied in Secfion 7 hereof. The Bonds may be sold from time to time as an Authorized
Officer shall determine that the proceeds of such sales are needed.
Subsequent lo the sale of any series of Bonds or. in the case of the Retail Bonds,
subsequent to the sale of all Bonds that are the subjed of a Selling Agenl Agreement (as
hereinafter defined), an Authorized Officer shall file in the office of the City Clerk a notification of
sale directed to the City Coundl setting forth (i) the series designation, the aggregate principal
amounl and authorized denomiriations of. rnaturity schedule and redemption provisions for the
Bonds sold, (ii) Ihe principal amounts of the Bonds sold as Current- Interest BontJs. Capital
Appreciation Bonds, Convertible Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respecfively. and whether
any of the Bonds are sold as Retail Bonds, (iii) in the case of the sale of the Retail Bonds or
Direct Purchase Bonds, the principal amounts of such Bonds sold as Current Interest Bonds,
Capitalized Appredation Bonds. Convertible: Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respectively,
(iv) in the case of Bonds sold as Capital Appreciation Bonds. (A) the Original Principal Amounts
of and Yields to Maturity on the Capital Appreciation Bonds being sold and (B) a table of
Compourid Accreted Values per minimum aulhorized Compound Accreted Value at maturity for
any Capital Appredation Bonds tjeing sold, setting forth the Compound Accreled Value of each .
such Capital Appreciation Bond on each semiannual compounding dale, (v) the interest rates on
the Current Interest Bonds sold or. in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, a description of the
method of determining the interest rate applicable to such Variable Rate Bonds from fime to
lime, (vi) the specific maturities, series and amounts of the Outstanding Indebtedness to be
refunded with proceeds of the Bonds, (vii) a description of any Existing Interest Rate Exchange
Agreements lo tie terminated, amended or otherwise modified in connedion wilh the refunding
of such Qutstandirig Indebtedness and identifying any settlement, breakage or termination
amount to be. paid in corinediori with each such terminafiori, amendment or modificafion.
(viii) Ihe date on and price at which the Outstanding Indebtedness.seleded for refunding shall,
be redeemed (if such redempfion shall occur prior to stated maturity or pursuant to mandatory
sinking fund, redernpfion). (ix) the disposition pf the taxes levied for the years from and after
2011 for the payment-of the Outstanding Indebtedness or any Existing Interest Rate Exchange
Agreements as authorized by Section 15 hereof, (x) the identity of the insurer or insurers issuing
the insurance policy or polides, if any. refen-ed to below, and the identity of the provider or
providers of one or more Credit Facilities, if any. for such Bonds, (xi) the identity of the
Underwriters (or, in the case of Retail Bonds, the Selling Agents and in the case of Direct
Purchase Bonds, the Direct Purchasers) selected for such .Bonds, (xii) the identity of the
applicable Bond Registrar and any trustee or trustees selected by an Authorized Officer for such
Bonds, (xiii) the identity of any remarkefing agent retained iri connection wilh the issuance of
Variable Rale Bonds, if any, (xiv) the compensafion paid to the Undenwriters (or. in the case of
Retail Bonds, the Selling Agents) in connedion wilh such sale, (xv) the identity of any Refunding
Escrow Agent (as defined in Sedion 13(b) hereoO appointed by an Authorized Officer in
connection with Ihe refunding of Outstanding Indebtedness, and (xvi) any other matter
authorized by this Ordinance to be detennined by an Authorized Officer at ttie time of the sale of
the Bonds of each series.
Either Authorized Officer is hereby authorized and directed to cause all necessary
notices of redemption of the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding as provided

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21733

above to be given-in accordance wilh the lerms of the respective ordinances or indentures, as
applicable, authorizing the Outstanding Indebtedness.
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby aulhorized to execute and deliver a
contrad of purchase wilh resped to each sale of the Bonds to, or at the direction of, the
Underwriters in substantially the form previously used for similar general obligalion lx)nds of the
City or to the Dired Purchasers, with appropriate revisions-to reflect the terms and provisions of
the Bonds and such other revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer shall determine
are necessary or desirable in connection with the sale of the Bonds. The compensation paid to
the Underwriters in connection wilh any sale of Bonds shall not exceed three percent of the
prindpal amount of the Bonds being sold. Nothing' contained in this Ordinance shall limit the
sale of the Bonds or any maturily or maturities thereof at a price or prices in excess of the
principal amount thereof.
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver a
contract wilh Selling Agents pursuant to which the Selling Agents shall solicit purchases of the
Retail Bonds by individual investors (a "Selling Agent Agmement") substantially in the form of
the selling agent agreement previously entered into by the City in connection with the sale of
Retail Borids, but with such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer executing the
same shall determine are necessary or "desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or such
Authorized Officer to evidence the City Council's'approval of all such revisions. The aggregate
compensation paid'to the Selling Agents pursuant to any Selling Agent Agreement shall not
exceed three percent of the prindpal amount of the Retail Bonds sold pursuant to such Selling
Agent Agreeririent. The terms of any Selling Agent Agreement may provide for the delegation by
an Authorized Officer to one or more Deputy Comptrollers of authority to approve the final terrns
of sale of any Retail Bonds pursuant to such Selling Agent Agreement within parameters
established by an Authorized Officer consistent with the terms and limitations of this Ordinance.
Any Selling Agent Agreement may also contain provisions pursuant to which a person receiving
an ownership interest in ariy Retail Bonds through the death of a Bondholder shall have the right
to sell such Retail Bonds back to the City at a price of not to exceed 105 percent of par and
setting forth the tenns and conditions of the exercise of such right: The Mayor or an Authorized
Officer (or. delegate as authorized above) is hereby authorized to do all such things and to
execute and deliver such additional documents, agreements and certificates as shall be
necessary in connecfion with the sale of Retail Bonds from time to lime pursuant to a Selling
Agent Agreement, induding any such document, agreement or certificate necessary to describe
the terms of Retail Bonds then being sold.
In connedion with any sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is hereby aulhorized to
obtain one or more policies of bond in5uranc:e from recognized bond insurers seleded by an
Aulhorized Officer, if such Authorized Officer detennines such bond insurance lo be desirable in
corineclion with such sale of the Bonds. Either Authorized Officer may. on behalf of the Cily.
make covenanis wilh such bond insurer that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance and are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance.
In connection virith any sale of the Bonds, the Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby
aulhorized to obtain one or more letters of credii. lines of credit, standby bond purchase

 21734

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

agreements, or similar credit or liquidity facilities (a 'Credit Facility') with one or more financial
institutions. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into a
reimbursement agreemeni and/or standby bond purchase agreement and lo execute and issue
a promissory note in connection wilh the provisions of each Credit Fadlity. Any Credit Facility,
reimbursemenl agreement or standby bond purchase agreemeni shall tie' in substantially Ihe
form of the credit facilities, reimbursemenl agreements and standby bond purchase agreements
previously entered into by the City in connection wilh the sale of general obligafion bonds or
notes, but wilh such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer executing the same
shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or an Aulhorized
Officer to evidence Ihe City Council's approval of all such revisions. The annual fee paid to any
financial insfitulion that provides a Credit Facility wilh respect to all or a portion of a series of the
Bonds shall not exceed one and one-half percent of the average principal amount of such
Bonds outstanding during such annual period. The final fonn of any reimbursement agreement
and/or standby bond purchase agreemeni entered into by the City with respect to the Bonds
shall be aftached to the notification of sale filed in the office of the City Clerk pursuant to this
section. Each such promissory note shall be a general obligalion of the Cily for the payment of
which, both principal and inlerest, the City pledges its full faith, credit and resources. Each
promissory note, and any Bond owned or held as collateral by any such financial insfitulion in ils
capacity as a provider of a Credit Facility shall bear inlerest at a rate not exceeding 15 percent
per annum and shall mature not later than the final maturity date of the related Bonds secured
by such reimbursement agreement or standby bond purchase agreemeni. The Mayor or an
Aulhorized Officfer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver any such reimbursement
agreement or standby bond purchase agreement, and any amendment Ihereto or replacement
thereof, under the seal of the City affixed arid attested by the City Cleric.
In the event that Bonds are sold so as lo require the levy of taxes for any year specified
in Section 7 hereof for the purpose of making the payments described in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of the first paragraph of Sedion 7 hereof in an amount less than the amount specified for
s u d i year in the first paragraph of Sedion 7 hereof, then an Authorized Officer shall, on or prior
to' March 31 of the calendar year next succeeding such year, notify the City Council of the
determination made pursuant to clauses (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Seciion 7 hereof
regarding the.applit:ation of any resulting excess levy c»lledions. and, in addition, in connection
with a determination made pursuant to clause (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, an
Authorized Officer shall file in the respedive offices of Ihe County Clerks certificates of tax
abatement for such year. In the event that upon the final sale of the Bonds- of all series, such
Bonds have been sold so.as to require the levy of taxes in any year specified in Section 7
hereof for the purpose of making the payments described in clauses (i). (ii). (iii) and (iv) of the
first paragraph of Sedion 7 hereof in an amount less than the amount specified for such year in
Section 7 hereof, then there shall be.included, in the final notification of sale to the City Council
described iri Ihe fourth (4"') paragraph of this Sedion 12. the detenmination made pursuant to
cilauses (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Sedion 7 hereof regarding the application of any
resulfihg excess levy collections for such year and any succeeding year and, in addition, in
connedion with a detenmination made pursuant to dause (b) of the first paragraph of Sedion 7
hereof, an Authorized Officer shall file in the respective offices of the County Cleric certificates
of lax abatement for such year or years. If any of the Bonds are not to be sold and issued as
provided herein and no levy collections are to be applied for the purposes of paying the costs of

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21735

Ongoing Financing Services as detennined by an- Authorized Officer, the corresponding taxes
herein levied to pay debt service thereon shall be abated in full. Any certificate of abatement
delivered pursuant to this paragraph shall refer to the amount of taxes levied pursuant to
Sedion 7 hereof, shall indicate the amount of reduction in the amounl of taxes levied by the City
resulting from the sale or sales of the Bonds or the non-issuance thereof, which reduced
amount is to be abated from such taxes, and shall further indicate the remainder of such taxes
vvhich is lo be extended for collection by said County Clerks.
The preparafion, use and distribufion of a preliminary offidal statement, an official
statement or any other disclosure document relafing to each sale arid issuance of the Bonds are
hereby ratified and approved. The Mayor and each Authorized. Officer are each hereby
authorized to execute and deliver an official statement or other disclosure document relating to
each sale and issuance of the Bonds on behalf of the City. The preliminary official statement,
official statement and other disdosure documents herein authorized shall be substantially
similar to those previously used for general obligafion bonds of Ihe City.'and shall contain the
tenms and provisions of the Bonds, the mariner in which the Bonds shall be sold, the use of
proceeds "of the Bonds, financial informafion for the City, and such other information as the
Mayor or any Authorized Officer determines to be advisable under the.circumstances.
In connection with any sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized lo
execute and deliver one or- more Continuing Disclosure Undertakings (each a "Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking') evidencing the City's agreement to comply with the requirements of
Secfion (b)(5) .of Rule 15c2-12. adopted b y t h e Securifies and Exchange Commission (the
'SEC") under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. in a form approved by.the Corporafion
Counsel. Upon its execufion and delivery on behalf of the Cily as herein provided, each
Coritinuing'Disclosure Undertaking will be binding on the,Cily, and the officiers, employees and
agents of the City are hereby authorized to do all such acts and things and to execute all such
documents.as may be necessary to carry out and comply wilh.the provisions of each Confinuing
Disclosure Undertaking as executed. Either Aulhorized Officer is hereby further authorized to
amend each Continuing Disclosure Undertaking in accordance wfth its. respedive terms from
time to time following its execution and delivery as said oHicer shall deem necessary. In
addition, an Authorized" Officer is authorized, to make all future filings with the Electronic
Municipal Market Access system operated by the Municipal Securifies Rulemaking Board or
such other municipal securities information repository as shall be designated by the SEC. all in
accordance with the provisions of Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 15c2-12(b)(5)
promulgated under the Securities Exchange A d of 1934. • Nohwithstanding any other provision
of this Ordinance, -the sole remedies for any failure by the City lo comply with any Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking shall be the ability of the beneficial owner of any applicable Bond to
seek rnandamus or specific performance by court order to cause the City to comply with its
otHigafions uncler such Confinuing Disdosure Undertaking.
The Bonds shall tie duly prepared and executed in the form and manner provided herein
and delivered to Ihe purchasers in accordance wilh the applicable terms of sale.
The Mayor, each Aulhorized Officer, the Cily Treasurer and the City Cleric are each
hereby authorized lo execute and deliver such other documents and agreements (including

 21736

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

such contracts, such intergovernmental agreements or such grant agreements with not-for-profit
organizafions. educational or cultural institutions or for-profit organizations or to assist the State
of Illinois, the United States of America, or other munidpal corporafions, units of local
govemment or school districts in the State of Illinois, receiving proceeds of the Bonds as an
Aulhorized Officer shall deem necessary and appropriate) and perfomn such other ads prior to
or following the issuance of the Bonds as may be necessary or desirable in connection with the
issuance of the Bonds and any transactions contemplated herein related to Ihe application of
the proceeds of the Bonds or collections or application of taxes levied for the payment of the Bonds or the Outstanding Indebtedness or other purposes hereunder, but subject to any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth, and any such adions
heretofore taken by the Mayor, an Aulhorized Officer, the City Treasurer or the City Clerk in
, accordance with the provisions hereof are hereby ratified and approved. With resped to each
grant of Bond proceeds, each Authorized Officer is hereby aiithorized to designate in wrifing,
wilh the written coricun-ence of the Budget Director of the City (the 'Budget Directoi"), (i) one or
more City • departments or agencies to administer such grant, and (ii) the head of the City
department or agency who shall be authorized to execute a grant agreement and such other
documents, agreements or iristrumerits as shall be deemed necessary or desirable by such City
departiTient or'agency head. Upon any such written designation by an Aulhorized Officer with
resped to a grant of Bond proceeds, such City department or agency shall be authorized to
administer such grant and the head of such City department or agency shall be authorized lo
execute a grant agreenient and such other documents, agreements or instruments as such
offidal shall deem necessary or desirable.
Secdon 13.
follows:

The proceeds from the sale of any series of the Bonds shall be used as

(a) " The sum representing the accrued inlerest received; if any, shall be used
to pay the first interest becoming due on the Bonds sold, and to that end. shall be
deposited in the applicable Bond Fund or the applicable "Ad" Valorem Tax Escrow
Account, if established.
(b)
From the sale proceeds derived from any such sale "of a series of the
Bonds', (i) such sum as may be determined by ah Authorized Officer to be necessary to
pay not more than three years of inlerest on the Bonds issued lo pay costs of the Projed
maybe used to pay such interest, and to that end. may be deposited in the applicable
Bond Fund or the applicable Ad Valoreiiri Tax Escrow Account, if established: (ii) the
sum determined tjy an Authorized Officer to be necessary lo pay the costs of the Project
shall be set aside, held and invested at the direction of an Authorized Officer, as
separate funds of the City pending such payment, provided that proceeds of the Bonds
issued lo finaricis the Pension Contributions shall be paid into the Pension Funds as and
when required by law; (iii) the sum determined by an Authorized Officer to capitalize or
ftjnd ihterest on Outstanding Indebtedness shall be deposited into the respedive debt
service funds established for the Outstanding Indebtedness; (iv) the sum determined by
an Authorized Officer to be sufficient lb pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being
refunded at or prior to their respec:1ive maturities, al a price of par. the applicable
redemption premium and accrued interest thereon up to and including said redemption

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21737

or maturity dates shall be deposited into the respective debt sen/ice funds established
for Ihe Outstanding Indebtedness or into one or more "Refunded Bonds Escrow
Accounts" to be held by one or more banks or trust companies to be designated by an
Authorized Officer (each a 'Refunding Escrow Agent'), each pursuant lo the terms of an
- escrow agreement (each a 'Refunding Escrow Agreement"), and the Mayor, an
Aulhorized Officer and the City Cleric, or any of them, are hereby authorized to execute
and deliver each Refunding Escrow Agreement, and any amendment thereto, in such
fonn as the officer so executing shall deem appropriate to effect the refunding or
refundings described in this .paragraph and (v) the sum delermined by an Authorized
Officer lo be sufficient to provide for the payment of any settlement, breakage or
termination amount payable in connection wilh the termination, amendment or
•- modification of an Existing Interest Rale Exchange Agreemeni shall be paid lo the City's
cbiinlerparty or counterparties thereunder.
Notwithstanding any provision of the
Municipal Code, investments acquired with proceeds of the Bonds or inveslrinenl income
thereon may mature beyond ten years from the date of acquisition, and may include but
are..riot limited lo agreements entered into behveen the City and providers of securities
under which agreements such providers agree to purchase from or sell to the City
specified securities on specific dates at predetermined prices, all as established at the
time of execution of any such agreement and as set forth in such agreement, and
guaranteed investment contracts, forward purchase agreements and other similar
investment vehicles.
Such guaranteed investment contrads, forward purchase
agreements and other similar investment vehicles may, to the extent pennitted by
operative authorizing documents and by applicable law, be assigned or transferred from
one bond transaction to another or apply to the proceeds of more than one txind'^
transadion on a commingled or non-commingled basis, as determined by an Authc>rized
Officer; • The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized lo enter into any
amendments to or restatements of exisfing documents or'lo execute new documents, to
consent to adions being taken by others or to obtain the consent of other parties, as
may be necessary or desirable in this respect. Investment income derived from Bond
proi;eeds may be .(w) expended for the same purposes for which Bond proceeds may be
expended, (x) used for the payment or prepayment of City debt obligations, (y) deposited
in the Corporate Fund of the City or (z) rebated to the United States of America as
provided in Sedion 16 hereof, ail as determined by an Authorized Officer or the Budget
Director; Any commingled investment income from guaranteed investment contracts,
fonvard purchase agreements and other similar investment vehicles shall be apportioned
among bond transadions as delermined by an Aulhorized Officer or as otherwise
required by operative authorizing documents and applicable law.
(c)
From the sale proceeds of a series of the Bonds not applied as provided
in paragraphs (a) and (b). above, the amount deemed necessary by an Authorized
Officer shall be applied to the payment of the costs of issuance of such Bonds, including
the premium or fee for bond insurance or other credit or liquidity enhancement, if any,
and any unexpended portion of the sale proceeds shall be paid to the Cily.
The costs of the Projed may be paid directly by the City or may be financed by the
making of grants for the implementation of the Projed to (i) not-for-profit organizations,

 21738

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

educafional or cultural insfitulions or for-profit organizations, (ii) the United States of America,
(iii) the Stale of Illinois or (iv) other units of local government, political subdivisions, municipal
corporafions or school districts in the Stale of Illinois, including any operating division thereof, all
as delermined by an Aulhorized Ofticer.
An Aulhorized Officer shall report to the City Council wilh resped to the expenditure of
Ihe proceeds of each series of the Bonds issued hereunder to pay the liosls of the Projed.
Such reports shall be made no later than August 1 of each year, commencing August 1. 2013.
with respect to expenditures.made diiring the preceding calendar year. No report shall be
. required hereunder following any calendar year in which no proceeds of any series of the Bonds
are expended lo "pay costs of the Project.
Seciion 14. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby" authorized to execute and
deliver, with, i-especf to all or any portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness, the Bonds, and any
General Obligafion Indebtedness (as defined below) that may be issued' in the future
(collectively. 'City 'Indebtedness"), from time to time one or more agreements, or options to
enter into such agreements, with counterparties selected by an Aulhorized Officer, the purpose
of which'is to provide to the City (i) an interest rate basis, cash flow basis.- or other basis
differeiit from that provided in the related Cily Indebtedness for the payment of interest or
(ii)with resped to a future delivery of general obligafion bonds, notes or commercial paper
(collectively.. 'General Obligation Indebtedness"), one or more of a guaranteed interest rate,
interest rale basis. c:ash flow basis, or purchase price (such agreements or options to enter into
such agreements being collectively referred "to as "Interest Rate Exchange Agreements').
Interest Rate Exchange Agreements include without limitation agreements or contrads
commonly known as'interest rale exchange, swaps, induding forwarid starting swaps, collar,
caps.' or- derivative. agreements, forward payment conversion agreeirienls. interest rate locks,
forward bond - purchase agreements, bond warrant agreeriients, or bond purchase option
agreeriients and also Include agreements granting to the Cily or a counterparty an option to
enter into any of the foregoing and agreements or contrads providing for paymenls based on
levels of.or changes in interest rates, induding a change in an inlerest i-ale index, to exchange
cash flows or a series of payments, or to hedge payment, rate spread, or similar exposure. The
slated aggregate notional amount (net of .offsetting transactions) under all Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements related to certain City Indebtedness shall not exceed the principal
amount of such Cily Indebtedness to which such Interest Rate Exchange Agreements relate.
For purposes of f he immediately preceding sentence, 'offsetting transadions' shall include any
transadion which is intended lo hedge, modify or otherwise affect another outstanding
transaction or its economic results. The offsetting transadion need not be based on the same
index or rale option as the related City Indebtedness or the transadion being offset and need
not be with the same counterparty as Ihe transaction being offset. Examples of offsetting
transadions include, without limitafion. a floaling-to-fixed rate inlerest rate swap being offset by
a fixed-to-fioating rate interest rate swap, and a fixed-to-fioafing rate interest rate swap being
offset by a floating-to-fixed rate interest rate swap or an interest rate cap or floor or a
floating-to-floating interest rate swap.
Any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement lo the extent practicable shall be in substantially
the form of either the 2002 ISDA Master Agreement or the Local Currency — Single Jurisdiction

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21739

version or the Mulficurrency — Cross Border version of the 1992 ISDA Master Agreement
(including a Schedule and/or a Credii Support Annex to such Schedule, if applicable) published
by the International Swaps and Derivatives Associaliort. Inc. ("ISDA') or any successor form to^
either published by ISDA. and in the appropriate confirmations of transactions govemed by Ihe
applicable agreement, wilh such insertions, completions and modifications thereof as shall be
approved by the officer of the City executing the. same, his or her execution to constitute
conclusive evidence of the City Council's approval of such insertions, completions and
modifications thereof. Should any ISDA form not be the appropriate form to accomplish the
objectives of the City under this Section 14. then such other agreement as may be appropriate
is hereby approved, the" execution by the Mayor or an Aulhorized Ofticer being conclusive
evidence of the Ciity Council's approval of such insertions, completions and modificafions
thereof. Amounts payable by the Cily under any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement shall
(i) constitute a general obligation of the Cily for which is pledged its full faith and credit, (ii) be
payable from a tax unlimited as to rate or amount that may have heretofore or shall be hereafter
levied bythe City Council (including, with resped only to an Inlerest Rate Exchange Agreenient
relating to the Bonds, the lax levy described in Secfion? hereof), (iii) constilirte operating
expenses of the Cily payable from any monies, revenues, income, assets or funds of the City
available for such purpose, or (iv) ccinstilute any combination of (i). (ii). and (iii); all as shail be
determined by an Aulhorized Officer. Nothing cxintained in this Secfion 14 shall limit or restrict
the. authority of the Mayor or an Authorized Officer to enter into similar agreements pursuant to
prior or subsequent authorization of the City Council..
The Mayor and an Authorized Officer are hereby authorized to take all actions necessary
to assign, terminate, amend or modify all or a portion of any Interest Rate Exchange Agreemeni
upon a detennination that, such assignment, terminafion. amendmenl'or modification is in the
best finandal interest of the Cily. Any settlement, breakage or termination amount payable as a
result of such assignment, terrriination. amendment or mcxlification may be paid from proceeds
of sale, of the Bonds or General Obligation Indebtedness or from any lawfully, available funds of
the City.
" Any amounts received by the City pursuant lo any Inlerest Rate Exchange Agreement
(other than regularly scheduled'paynient ahriounts) are hereby authorized to be expended for
any purpose for w/hich the proceeds of the relaled City Indebtedness are authorized to be
expended and for the payment or prepayment of any City Indebtedness, all as delermined by an
Authorized Officer.
In addifion lo the foregoing, the Mayor and an Authorized Officer are hereby aulhorized
to take all actions necessary to assign, terminate. amerxJ or mcxlify all or a portion of any
agreement of the type described herein as an Interest Rate Exchange Agreemeni with respect
lo any Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness upon a determination that such assignment,
termination, amendment or modification is in the best financial interest of the City. Any
settJement. breakage or termination amount payable as a result of such assignment,
termination, amendment or modification may be paid from the sources provided for the payment
of such agreements in the proceedings authorizing the Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness to
which such agreements relate or from any other lawfully available funds of the City.

 21740

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

Sedion 15. The taxes levied for the years from and after 2011 for the payment of the
Outstanding Indebtedness or amounts due under any Exisfing Interest Rate Exctiange
Agreement, to the extent the collection of such taxes is not necessary for the payment of all or a
portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof or for the payment of
- amounts due under an Exisfing Inlerest Rate Exchange Agreement due to the termination of
such Existing Interest Rale Exchange Agreement as authorized herein or pursuant to any other
authorization, may. at the diredion of an Authorized Officer, be applied (A) as set forth in the
next paragraph or (B) to any other lawful public purpose of Ihe City designated by the City
Council induding (i) the purposes set forth in clauses (i). (ii). (iii) and (iv) of the first paragraph of.
-Sedion 7 of Ihis Ordinance, (ii) the payment of the costs of any capital projects for which funds
have been lawfully appropriated or (iii) the abatement of such taxes. There shall be prepared by
an A.uthorized Officer and filed with Ihe County Clerks.a certificate of reduction of taxgs
heretofore levied for ihe payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness seleded for refunding by an
Authorized Officer as provided in Sections 12 and 13 hereof and direding the abatement of the
taxes heretofore levied to pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being refunded, induding the taxes
levied for the years from and after 2012. if so determined by an Authonzed Officer as provided
in the. preceding senlence.\ In addition, any proceeds of the Outstanding Indebtedness being
held for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness, lo the extent such proceeds are not
necessary for the payment-of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein or pursuant lo any other authorization, may. at the diredion of an Authorized
Officer, be applied to any lawful public purpose of the City designated by the City Coundl.
induding the payment of the Bonds (but in the case of Bonds the inlerest on which is excluded
from gross income for federal income tax purposes, only upon receipt by the City of an opinion
. of Bond Counsel to the effed that such will not adversely affect the tax-exempt status of the"
Bonds).
Furthemnore. notwithstanding any other provision hereof, taxes levied for the years 2011
to 2013, indusive. for the payment of Outstanding Indebtedness, to the extent the collection of
such taxes is not necessary for the payment of all or a portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness
due to the refunding thereof with the proceeds of the Bonds may. in addition to the other
purposes set forth above, be applied to the payment of the principal of and inlerest due on
general obligation commerdal paper notes dOe on or before January 31. 2016. at the diredion
of an Authorized Officer. Any direcfipns or determinafions by an Authorized Officer pursuant to
this paragraph shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than the dale a levy is applied to the
payment of commercial paper as provided herein.
Seciion 16. The City covenants that it will take no acfion in the investment of the
proceeds of the Bonds (other than Bonds issued as bonds the interest on which is not
excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes) which
would result in making the interest payable on any of such Bonds subject to federal income
taxes by reason of such Bonds being classified as "arbitrage bonds" within the meaning of
Secfion 148 of the Code.
The City further covenanis lhal it will a d with respect to the proceeds of Bonds (other
than Bonds issued as bonds the interest on which is not excludable from the gross income of
the owner thereof for federal income lax purposes). Iheearnings on the proceeds of such Bonds

 3/14/2012

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

21741

and any other moneys on deposit in any fund or account maintained in respect of such Bonds,
including, if necessary, a rebate of such earnings to the United States of America, in a manner
which would cause the interest on such Bonds to continue to be exempt from federal income
taxation under Section 103(a) of the Code.
Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute such certifications, lax returns,
covenants and agreements as shall be necessary, in the opinion of nationally recognized bond
counsel, or in the best interest of the Cily. as determined by an Authorized Officer, to evidence
the City's compliance wilh the covenants contained in this sedion. Each Aulhorized Officer is
hereby aulhorized to execute one or more declarations of intent to reimburse costs of the
Project in accordance with the Code and the Treasury Regulafions thereunder
Sedion 17. This Ordinance is prepared in accordance with the powers of the City as a
home rule unit under Article Vll of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. The appropriate officers of the
City are hereby aUthonzed to take such acfions and do such things as shall t>e necessary to
. perform, carry out. give effed to and consummate the transactions contemplated by this
Ordinance and the Bonds, induding. but not limited lo, the exerdse following the delivery date
of any of the Bonds of any power or authority delegated to sucK offidal of the City under this"
Ordinance with respect lo the Bonds upon the initial issuance thereof, but subject to any
limitations on or, restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth, and any acfions
heretofore taken by such officers of the City in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby ratified and approved.
Section 18. The Mayor and each Authorized Officer may each designate another to act
as their respective proxy and. as applicable, lo affix their respedive signatures to the Bonds
whetheir in temporary or definitive form, and any other instruriienl. certificate or document
required to be signed by the Mayor or-art Authorized Officer pursuant to this . Ordinance: and any
instrument, certificate or document required thereby. In such case, each shall.send to the City
Council written notice of the person so designated by each, such notice stating ttie name of the
•person so seleded and identifying the instruments, certificates and documents which such
person shall be authorized lo sign as proxy for the Mayor and each Authorized Officer,
respectively. .A written signature of the Mayor or of an Authorized OHicer. respectively,
executed by the person so designated underneath, shall be attached to each notice. Each
notice, with the signatures attached, shall be recorded in the Journal of Proceedings of the.Cily
Coundl for such date and filed in the office of the Cily Clerk. When the signature of the Mayor
is placed on an instrument, certificate or document at the direcfion of the Mayor in the specified
manner, the sarrie. in all respects, shall be .as binding on the Cily as if signed by the Mayor in
person. When the signature of an Authorized Officer is so affixed to an instrument, certificate or
document at the diredion of such Authorized Officer, the same, in all respeds. shall be as
binding on the Cily as if signed by such Authorized Officer in person.
Section 19.
If requested by the Bond Registrar, the Mayor, each Authorized Officer and
the City Clerk are each authorized to execute the standard form of agreemeni between the Cily
and the Bond Registrar wilh resped lo the obligations and duties thereof

 21742

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

Section 20. If payment or provision for payment is made, to or for the registered
owners of all or a portion of the Bonds, of the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital..
Appreciation Bond and the principal of and interest due and to becoine due on any Current'
Interest Bond or Variable Rate-Bond al the times and in the manner sfipulaled therein, and there
is paid or caused to be paid to the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax
Escrow Agent as provided in Sedion 9 hereof or such bank or trust company as shall be
designated by an Aulhorized Officer (such bank or trust company hereinafter referred to as a
"Defeasance Escrow Agent"), all sums of money due and to become due according to the
provisions hereof, then these presents and the estate and rights hereby granted shall cease, .
lermiriate and be void as to those Bonds or portions thereof except for purposes of registration,
transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such.payment from such moneys or obligafions. Any
Bond shall be deemed to be paid wilhin the meaning of this seciion when payment of- the
Compound Acczreled Value of any such Capital Appredation Borid or the principal of any such
Current Interest Bond, plus interest Ihereon to the due date thereof (whether such due date be
. by reason of maturily or upon redemption as provided in this Ordinance or otherwise), either
(a) shall have been rhiade or caused to have been made in accordance with the terms thereof,
or (b) shall have been provided for by irrevocably depositing with the applicable Bond Registrar,
the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent as provided 1n Section 9 hereof or a Defeasance
Escrow Agent, in trust and exclusively for such payment. (1) moneys sufficient to make such
payment or (2)(A) dired obligations ofthe United Slates of America; (B) obligations of agencies
of the United States of America, Ihe timely payment of principal of and inlerest on which are
.guaranteed by the United Slates of America; (C) obligations of the follov«/ing agencies: Federal
Home Loan Mortgage'Corp.: (FHLMC) debt obligafions. Farm Credit System (formerty: Federal
Land Banks, Federal Intermediate Credit Banks, and Banks for Cooperatives) debt obligations.
Federal Home Loan Banks (FHL Banks) debt obligafions. Fannie Mae debt 'Obligations.
Finandng Corp. (FICO) debt obligations. Resolution Funding Corp. (REFCORP) debt
obligations, and U.S. Agency for International Developrrienl (U.S. A.I.D.) Guaranteed note's;
(D) pre-refunded municipal obligations defined as follows: any bonds or other obligations of any
state of the United States of America or of any agency, instrumentality or local govemmental
unit of any such state which are not callable at the option of Uie obligor prior to maturity or as to
. which irrevocable instructions have been given by the obligor lo call on the date specified in the
notice; or (E) insti^uments evidencing an ownership inlerest in obligations described in the
preceding clauses (A). (B) and (C). or (3) a combination of the investments described in
clauses (1) and (2) above, such amounts so deposited being available or maturing as to
principal and interest in such amounts and at suc^h times, without consideration of any
reinvestment thereof, as will insure the availability of sufficient moneys to make such payment
(air as confirmed by a nationally recognized firm of independent public accountants). At such
limes as a Bond shall be deemed to be paid hereunder, as aforesaid, it shall no longer be
secured by or entitled to the benefits of this Ordinance, except for the purposes of registration,
transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations.
No such deposit under this section shall be made or accepted hereunder and no use
made of any suc:h deposit unless, in the case of Bonds (other than Bonds issued as bonds the
interest on which is not excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal
income lax purposes), the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Agenl or the applicable Defeasance Escrow Agenl. as the case may be, shall have received an

 3/14/2012

R E P O R T S OF C O M M I T T E E S

21743

opinion of nafionally recognized municipal bond counsel lo the effed lhal such deposit and use
would not cause any of such Bonds to be b'eated as 'arbitrage bonds" within the meaning of
Section 148 of the Code or any successor provision Ihereto.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit a defeasance deposit of escrow securities as
provided in this seciion or a defeasance deposit wilh respect to the Outstanding Indebtedness
pursuant to any Refunding Escrow Agreement authorized by Section 13(b) hereof, frcim being
subject lo a subsequent sale of such escrow securities and reinvestment of all or a portion of
the proceeds of that sale in escrow securities which, together with money to remain so held in
trust, shall be sufficient to provide for payment of principal, redemption premium, if any. and
interest on any of the defeased Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness, as appropriate. Amounts
held by the applicable Bond Registrar,' the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, any
Defeasance Escrow Agent or any Refunding Escrow Agent in excess of the amourits needed so
. to provide for payment of the defeased Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness, as. appropriate.
. rnay be subjed to withdrawal by the City. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver from time to time one or more agreements (and amendments
thereto) wrilh counterparties selected by an Authorized Officer, with respect to the investment
and use of such excess amounts held by the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad
Valorem Tax Escrow Agenl. a Defeasance Escrow Agent or a Refunding Escrow Agent. •
Sectiori 21.
NoKvithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, the terms and
provisions of the trust indenture securing a series of Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in
Sedion 2 hereof wilh respect to (a) the authentication, registration, transfer and destruction or .
loss of such Variable Rate Bonds, (b) subject to the limitation on redemption price set forth in
Section 3(d) hereof, the redemption of such Variable Rate Bonds, oi- (c) the method of payment
or defeasance of such Variable Rale Bonds, shall apply to such Variable Rate- Bonds issued
pursuant to this Ordinance. With resped to the'Direct Purchase Bonds, an" Authorized Officer is
authorized to negotiate the terms and provisions of such Dired Purchase Bonds in addition, to or
as an alternative to the terms and provisions of the trust indenture securing a series of Variable
Rate Bonds.
Section 22. Any series of the Bonds, the Outstanding Indebtedness or the Outstanding
Revenue Indebtedness may be restrudured in a manner authorized by the Mayor or an
Authorized Officer, including bul not limited lo (a) terminating credit enhancement or liquidity
facilities for. a series of Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness, (b) replacing credii enhancement or liquidity facilities for a series of Bonds,
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness wilh similar credii
enhancement or liquidity from a different" provider, (c) replacing credit enhancement or" liquidity
facilities for a series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness with different fonns of credit enhancement or liquidity from the same or a different
provider, (d) adding additional credii enhancement or liquidity supplemental to that securing a
series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness,
(e) removing or amending provisions for a series of Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness, or in financing documents related thereto, to or for the
benefit of credii enhancers or liquidity providers or adding provisions for the benefit of new of
replacement credii enhancers or liquidity providers, (f) replacing an existing remariceting agent

 21744

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

or remarketing agents for Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness with a remarketing agent or remarketing agents selected by an Authorized Officer
or assigning an existing remarketing agreement to a remarketing agent or remarketing agents
selected by an Authorized Officer, (g) converting to or adding a different interest rate mode or
modes under the documents pursuant to which such Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness were issued, (h) adding a floating rale note (FRN) mode to
any document pursuant to vyhich such Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding
Revenue Indebtedness were issued or refunding such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness using an FRN structure, or (i) selling or remarketing
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness pursuant to a dired purchase
arrangement to one or more purchasers seleded by an Authorized Officer either at par or with a
discount or premium, subjed to any limilations or reslridions wilh respect to such adions being
taken contained in this Ordinance with respect to the Bonds or an ordinance pursuant to which
such Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued, but.
provided, that if determined by an Aulhorized Officer to be necessary to achieve the financial
interests.of the City, such limitations or reslridions contained in an ordinance pursuant to which
such Outstanding Indebtedness, or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued may be
exceeded; but not in excess of the comparable limitations set forth in this Ordinance. The
Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby aulhorized to enter into any amendments to or
restatements of existing documents or to execute new documents, to consent to actions being
^ taken by others or to obtain the consent of other parties, and to cause to be prepared such
remarketing documents, including disdosure documents, as may be necessary or desirable to
effed any such debt restruduring and facilitate the remariceting. of the Bonds, Outstanding
Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness, and to pay the fees, costs arrd expenses
relating thereto, as the Mayor or an Aiithorized Officer executing the same determines is
necessary and desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or an Authorized Officer to
evidence the City Council's approval of all such amendments.
Sedion 23. Any funds heretofore or hereafter received by the City, pursuant to any
Interest Rate Exchange Agreement and in connedion wilh Outstanding Indebtedness, are
hereby authorized to t>e expended for the payment or prepayment of any Cily Indebtedness;
provided however, nohwithstanding the foregoing, such authorization shall not apply to any
funds the expenditure of which shall have been heretofore authorized by olher applicable law.
Section 24.
For purposes of Treasury Regulation Section 1.150-2. the City Council
hereby states its intent to finance, or lo reimburse the Cily for the. payment of the costs
described in Exhibit A attached hereto by the issuance of tax-exempt obligations in an amount
not to exceed $200,000,000. No funds from sources other than such obligations are. or are
expeded to be, reserved or allocated, or otherwise set aside, for the payment of such costs,
except as permitted by the Code This declaration is consistent with the budgetary practices of
the City.
Section 25.
read as follows;

A. Seciion 3 of the 2002 Ordinance is hereby amended in its entirety to

 3/14/2012

REPORTS O F C O M M I T T E E S

21745

Section 3.. Maximum Amount and Term. Without further authorization of this City
Council, the maximum aggregate principial amount of all Authorized Debt outstanding
under this ordinance at any'time shall not exceed Five Hundred Million Dollars
($500,000,000) (exclusive of unpaid inlerest and fees). All Aulhorized Debt shall mature
on or prior to January 1, 2030.
B.

Section 18 of the 2002 Ordinance is hereby amended in its entirety to read

as follows:

-

Section 18. The Line of Credit Program, (a) The Mayor or the City's Chief
Financial Officer or the Cily Comptroller (the Chief Financiaf Officer and the City
Comptroller each being hereinafter referred lo as an "Aulhorized Officer") is hereby
authorized lo execute ancl deliver one (1) or more line of credit agreements (each, a
"Line of Credit Agreement") with one (1) or more commercial banks and other financial
institutions and in the form customarily used to provide governmental borrowers with a
revolving line of credii lo meet their need for working capital or interim financing for
capital projeds and with such terms and provisions as an Authorized Officer shall
determine to be in the best interest of the City. The City Clerk is authorized to attest the
same and affix thereto the corporate seal of the City or a facsimile thereof, the execution
and delivery thereof to constitute condusive evidence of this City Council's approval of
each such Line of Credit Agreement
(b) To evidence borrowings under each Line of Credit Agreement, the Cily is
authorized to issue from time to.time one (1) or more Line of Credit Notes, each to be
designated "Line of Credit Note". Each Line of Credit Note shall bear interest from its
date at a rate or rates not in excess of eighteen percent (18%) per annum. As
determined by-an Authorized Officer at the lime of issuance of each-Line of Credit Note,
the Une of Credit Notes may be issued as notes the interest on which is either indudible
or excludable from gross income for federal income tax purposes under Section 103 of
the Intemal Revenue Code of 1986. as amended (the "Code").
(c) The Line of Credit Notes shall be executed on behalf of the City with the
manual or fac:simile signature of the Mayor of the Cily, and shall be attested wilh the
manual or facsimile signature of the City Cleric of the Cily, and shall have impressed or
imprinted thereon the official seal of the City (or a facsimile thereof). In case any officer
of the City whose signature or facsimile signature shall appear on the Line of Credit
Notes shall cease lo be such officer before the delivery of such Line of Credit Notes,
such signature or facsimile signature thereof shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for
all purposes the same as if such officer had remained in office unlil delivery.
(d) Subjed to the limitations contained in this ordinance, authority is hereby
delegated to the Mayor or an Authorized OHicer lo determine (i) the aggregate principal
amount of each Line of Credii Note to be issued, (ii) the date or dates thereof, (iii) the
maturities thereof, (iv) the rate or rates of inlerest payable thereon or the method for
delenmining such rate or rales, and (v) the one (1) or more commercial banks and other
financial institutions to provide the credit under each Line of Credit Agreement.

 21746

JOURNAL-CITY COUNCIL-CHICAGO

3/14/2012

(e) To evkJence the exercise of the authority delegated to the Mayor or an
Authorized Officer by this ordinance, the Mayor or an Authorized Officer, as the case
may be. is hereby directed to execute and file with Ihe City Clerk a copy of each Line of
Credit' Agreement, each Line of Credit Note issued in connedion with each borrowing
under any Line of Credit Agreement, and a certificate setting forth the determinations
made pursuant to the authority granted herein, which certificate shall constitute
conclusive evidence of the proper exercise by them of such authority. Upon the filing of
such Line of Credit Agreemeni. Line of Credit Note and. such certificate, the City Clerk
shall direct a copy of such filing to the City Council,
Sedion 26. To the extent that any ordinance, resolution, rule, order or provision of the
Municipal Code, or part thereof, is in conflict wnth the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions
of this Ordinance shall be controlling. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity, of such sedion. paragraph., clause or provision
shall not qffect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance. No provision of the Municipal
Code or violation of any provision of the Municipal Code shall be deemed to render voidatile at
the option of the City any document, instrument or agreement authorized hereunder or to impair
the validity of this Ordinance or the instruments authorized by this Ordinance or. to impair the
rights of the owners of the Bonds lo receive payment of the pnncipal of or interest on the Bonds
or to impair the security for the Bonds; provided further that the focegoing shall not be deemed
to affect the availability of any other remedy or penalty for any violation of any provision of the
Municipal Code.
Section 27. This Ordinance shall be published by the City "Clerk, by causing to be
printed in spedal pamphlet form at least five copies hereof, which copies are to tie made
available in her office for public inspection and distribution to members of the public who may
wish to avail themselves of a copy of this Ordinance.

Section 28. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after rts adoption,
approval by the Mayor and public;ation as provided herein.

Exhibit 'A" referred to in this ordinance reads as follows

 3/14/2012

R E P O R T S OF COMMITTEES

21747

Exhibit "A",
( l o Ordinance)
Section 24 Costs.

1. Public right-of-way infrastructure improvements in City neighborhoods, including street
and alley conslnjclion and improvements. lighting improvements, sidewalk improvements and
replacement, and curb and gutter repairs and replacement.
2. Infrastructure improvements to enhance the development of economic activity, including
industrial street construction and improvements, streetscaping. median landscaping,
demolition of hazardous, vacant or dilapidated buildings that pose a threat to public safety
and welfare, shoreline reconstruction, riverbank stabilization, residential and commercial
infrastructure redevelopment and railroad viaduct clearance improvements.
3. Transportation improvements (to City facilities and to facilifies located within the City
limits which are owned by other governmental entities), including street resurfacing, bridge
and freight tunnel rehabilitation, traffic signal modernization, new traffic signal installation,
intersection safety improvements and transit facility improvements.
4. Grants or loans to assist not-for-profit organizations or educational or cultural
institutions, or to assist other municipal corporations, units of local government, school
districts, the Slate of Illinois or the United Slates of America.
5. Cash flow needs of the City.
6. The acquisifion of personal property, induding, but not limited to, computer hardware
and software, vehicles or other capital items useful or necessary for Cily purposes.
7. The duly authorized acquisition of improved and unimproved real property within the City
for municipal, industrial, commercial or residential purposes, or any combination thereof, and
the improvement, demolition and/or remediation of any such property.
8. Conslruding. equipping, altering and repairing various municipal facilities including fire
stations, police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and olher municipal facilities.
9 The enhancement of economic development wilhin the City by making direct grants or
loans to. or deposits to funds or accounts lo secure the obligations of. not-for-profit or
for-profit organizations doing business or seeking to do business in the Cily.
10. The funding of (a) judgments entered against the City, (b) certain settlements or other
payments required to be made by the City as a condition to the resolution of litigation or
threatened litigation and (c) such escrow accounts or other reserves as shall be deemed
necessary for any of said purposes.

 11. The payment of certain contributions to the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund, the
Firemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund, the Municipal Employees*. Officers' and Officials'
Annuity and Benefit Fund, and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and
Benefit Fund.
12. The provision of facilities, services and equipment to protect and enhance public safety,
including, but not limited lo, increased costs for police andfireprotedion services, emergency
medical services, staffing at the City's emergency call center and olher City facilities, and
enhanced security measures at airports and other City facilities.

  

 

 

 

 

SUSANA A. MENDOZA
CITY CLERK'S OB^FICE-CITY OF CHICAGO

STATE OF ILLINOIS )
)SS.
COUNTY OF COOK )

I , SUSANA A. MENDOZA, City Clerk ofthe City of Chicago in the County of Cook and State
of Illinois, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the annexed and foregoing is a true and correct copy of that
certain ordinance now on file in my office authorizing Issuance of General Obligation and Refimding
Bonds and Associated Amendment regarding Commercial Paper Debt arid Amendment of Municipal
Code Section 2-32-031 regarding Debt Management Policies.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that die said ordinance was passed by the City Council of die said
City of Chicago on fifth (S"^ day of February. 2014.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the vote on the question ofthe passage ofthe said ordinance by
the said City Council was taken by yeas and nays and recorded in the Journal of the Proceedings of
the said City Council, and that the result of said vote so taken was as follows, to wit:
Yeas 44 Nays 4
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the said ordinance was delivered to the Mayor ofthe said City of
Chicago after the passage thereof by the said City Council, without delay, by the City Clerk of the said
City of Chicago, and that the said Mayor did approve and sign said ordinance on the seventh f?"*) day
of February. 2014.
I DO FURTHER CERTIFY that the original, of which die foregoing is a true copy, is entrusted to
my care for safekeeping, and that I am the lawful keeper of the same.

IN \yiTNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my
hand and affixed the corporate seal of the City of
Chicago aforesaid, at the said City, in the County and
State aforesaid, this nineteenth (19"^) day of February,
2014.
[T.P.]

.SI ISANA A^vlENDOZA. Citv cLrk

^

 ORDINANCE

AN Of^DlNANCE providing for the issuance of General Obligalion
Bonds of the City of Chicago, for the levy and collection of a direct
annual tax sufficient to pay the principal of and interest on said
Bonds, for the selection and retention of one or more Qualified
Independent Representatives in connection with certain Interest
Rate Exchange Agreements as described herein; authorizing the
execution and delivery of certain financial security and credii
enhancement agreements in connection wilh existing agreements
and transacfions involving City assets; and providing for the
amendment of certain provisions of the Municipal Code and
existing ordinances and financing documents, including bul not
limited to the ordinance adopted by the City Council on May 1.
2002, which proposed the establishment of a commercial paper
program, an auction rate securities program, a variable rate
securities program and a line of credit program.
WHEREAS, the City of Chicago (the "City") is a body politic and corporate under the laws
of the State of Illinois and a home rule unit under Article Vll of the Illinois Constitution of 1970;
and
WHEREAS, the City has heretofore (i) authorized the issuance of its general obligation
bonds and notes (the 'Authorized General Obligalion Bonds and Notes"), (ii) authorized the
borrowing of money pursuant to one or more line of credit agreements to provide funds for
working capital or interim financing for capital projects, including the Revolving Line of Credit
Agreement dated as of March 1, 2013 between the City and Bank of America. N.A. (the 'Line of
Credit Indebtedness") and (iii) established a commercial paper program authorizing the
issuance of its general obligation commercial paper notes from time to time (the 'General
Obligation Commercial Paper Notes'); and
WHEREAS, (i) the Authorized General Obligalion Bonds and Notes currently outstanding,
(ii) the Line of Credit Indebtedness incurred and outstanding from time to time and (iii) the
General Obligation Commercial Paper Notes currently or hereafter outstanding from time to time
(collectively, the "Oufstand/ng /ndebledness") mature and are subject to optional and mandatory
redemption as provided in the respective proceedings authorizing the Outstanding
Indebtedness; and

the City has heretofore entered into Interest Rate Exchange Agreements (as
described and defined in Sectiori 14(a) hereof) which are in existence as of the dale of adoption
of this Ordinance (the 'Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements'); and
WHEREAS,

WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of the inhabitants of the City and necessary for the
welfare of the government and affairs of the Cily to authorize (i) refunding all or a portion of the
Outstanding Indebtedness and (ii) terminating, amending or otherwise modifying all or any
portion of the Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements and paying any settlement.

General Obligalion Bond ordinance (final)

 breakage or termination amounts that may be due and owing in connection.therewith. in order to
achieve debt service savings for the City, restructure debt service of the Outstanding
Indebtedriess or reduce, limit or manage the City's exposure to interest rate risk (collectively,
the 'Refunding Purposes'); and
WHER.EAS, it is in the best interests of the inhabitants of the City and necessary for the
welfare of the government and affairs of the City to finance (i) public right-ofrway infrastructure
iniprovements in City neighborhoods, including street and alley construction and improvements,
lighting improvements, sidewalk improvements and replacement, and curb and gutter repairs
and replacement; (ii) infrastructure improvements to enhance the development of economic
activity, including industrial street construction and improvements, streetscaping, rriedian
landscaping, demolition of hazardous, vacant or dilapidated buildings that pose a threat to
public safety and welfare, shoreline reconstruction, riverbank stabilization, residential and
commercial infrastructure redevelopment and railroad viaduct clearance improvements;
(iii) transportation improvements to City property and facilities and to propierty and facilities
located within the City limits which are owned by other governmental entities, including street
resurfacing, bridge and freight tunnel rehabilitation, traffic signal modernization, new traffic
signal installation, intersection safety improvements and transit facility improvements; (iv) grants
or loans to assist not-for-profit organizations or educational or cultural institutions, or to assist
olher municipal corporations, units of local government, school districts, the Stale of Illinois or
the United States of America; (v) cash flow needs of the City; (vi) the acquisition, of personal
property, including, but not limiied to, computer hardware and software, vehicles or other capital
items useful or necessary for City purposes; (vii) the duly authorized acquisition of improved and
ijnimproved real property within the Cily for municipal, industrial, commercial or residential
purposes, or any combination thereof, and the improvement, demolition and/or remediatiorr of
any such property; (viii) constructing, equipping, altering and repairing various municipal
facilities including fire stations, police stations, libraries, senior and health centers and' other
municipal facilities; (ix) the enhancement of economic, development within the City by making
direct grants or loans to. or deposits to funds or accounts to secure the obligations of.
not-for-profit or for-profit organizations doing business or seeking to do business in the City;
(x) the funding of (A) judgments entered against the City, (B) certain settlements or other
payments required to be made by the City as a condition to the resolution of litigation or
threatened litigation or arbitration and (C)such escrow accounts or other reserves as shall be
deemed necessary for any of said purposes; (xi) the payment of certain contributions (the
"Pension Contributions") to the Policemen's Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Firemen's
Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, the Municipal Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of
Chicago and the Laborers' and Retirement Board Employees' Annuity and Benefit Fund of
Chicago (collectively, the "Pension Funds'); (xii) the provision of facilities, services and
equipment to protect and enhance public safety, including, but not limited to. increased costs for
police and fire protection services, emergency medical services, staffing at the City's emergency
call center and other City facilities, and enhanced security measures at airports and other major
City facilities; and (xiii) acquiring motor vehicles for a term of years or lease period (the
purposes described in clauses (i) through (xiii) above being referred to herein as the "Projed");
and

General Obligatjon Bonds ordinance (final)

-2-

 the cost of the Refunding Purposes and the Project is estimated to be not
less than $900,000,000 and, the City expects to pay a portion of such costs by bonrowing money
and issuing its general obligation bonds in one or more series and at one or more times in the
aggregate principal amount of not to exceed $900,000,000 (plus the amount of any original
issue discount as herein provided); and
WHEREAS,

WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is advisable and necessary to authorize the
borrowing of the sum necessary at this time for any or all of the purposes of (i) paying costs of
the Refunding Purposes, (ii) paying costs of the Project, including capitalizing or funding such
interest on the bonds herein authorized for said purpose as may be necessary, (iii) capitalizing
or funding interest on Outstanding Indebtedness and (iv) paying the expenses of issuing the
bonds herein authorized for the purposes described herein, and in evidence thereof to authorize
the issuance of its General Obligation Bonds (the "Bonds"), in one or more series and at one or
.more times as herein provided, such borrowing being for a proper public purpose and in the
public interest, and the City, by virtue of its constitutional home rule powers and all laws
applicable thereto, has the power to issue such Bonds; and
WHEREAS, the Bonds may include one or more series of bonds the interest on which is,
as designated by series, either incliidible or excludable from gross income for federal income
tax purposes under Section 103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the
"Code"'); and.
WHEREAS, the City has authorized the. issuance of certain bonds, notes and commercial
paper of the City secured by and payable from a specified revenue source, including, without
limitation, airport revenues, sales tax revenues, motor fuel tax revenues, water system revenues
and sewer system revenues (such bonds and notes being hereinafter referred to as 'Revenue
Bonds and Notes' and such commercial paper being hereinafter referred to as "Revenue
Comrnercial Paper'); and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is necessary to provide for various
restructuring amendments (i) to the Outstanding Indebtedness, (ii) to the Revenue Bonds arid
Notes currently outstanding and the Revenue Commercial Paper currently or hereafter
outstanding from time to time (collectively, the "Outstanding Revenue indebtedness") and (iii) to
the extent issued and outstanding from lime to time in the future, the Bonds; and
WHEREAS. Title Vll of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
(the "Dodd-Frank Ad") addresses the regulation of swap and other derivatives transactions
such as the Interest Rate Exchange Agreements and pursuant to whicih the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission (the 'CFTC') has promulgated regulations, including new business
conduct standards (the °CFTC Regulations'), applicable to providers of Interest Rate Exchange
Agreements (the 'Sivap Providers'); and
WHEREAS, for purposes of the CFTC Regulations, the City is a "Special Entity," entitled
to certain duties from the Swap Providers with whom they conduct or propose to conduct
business; and

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-3-

 /
/
/
WHEREAS, in order lo avail itself of the services of Swap Providers and other financial
advisors under the istatutory and regulatory regime contained in the Dodd-Frank Act and the
CFTC Regulations, whether in connection with amendments, terminations or other modifications
of Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements, the negotiation or execution of Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements as authorized in Section 14 hereof, or to provide advice with respect to
financial products and debt obligations purchased, entered into and/or issued by the City, it is
necessary for the City to, amorig other things, (i) rely on advice from a Qualified Independent
Representative, being an independent professional having derhonstrated experience in the field
of swap and other derivative transactions executed by States, State agencies, municipalities or
olher units of local government or political subdivisions and meeting tfie applicable qualifications
of the Dodd-Frank Act and the CFTC Regulations (a. 'QIR'), (ii) approve the retention of one or
more advisors to serve as QIRs and financial advisors in accordance v/ilh the applicable
provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act and the CFTC Regulations and (iii) approve and authorize the
execution of agreements with QIRs and other financial advisors, including but not limited to
certain documents and agreements published by the International Swaps and Derivatives
Association, Inc. ("ISDA') as part of its Dodd-Frank Documenlation Initiative to assist swap
market participants in complying, with the CFTC Regulations (the "ISDA Protocol
Documentation') and certain bilateral agreernents wilh the City's counterparties on the Existing
Interest Rate Exchange Agreements; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is advisable and necessary in furtherance of
compliance with federal securities arid tax laws to adopt written policies which shall address the
management of the City's bond, note and other debt issuances, including the entering into of
Inlerest Rate Exchange Agreements and hiririg QIRs in connection therewith; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is advisable and necessary, in order to provide
increased financial flexibility and protedion to the City in connection with existing long-term
concession agreements for City assets and existing sale/leaseback and lease/leaseback
transactioris involving Cily assets (each, a "Financing Transaction"), to authorize the execution
and delivery of certain financial.security and credit enhancement agreements to secure payment
of amounts due from the City in connection with each such Finaricing Transaction and the
incurrence of general obligation indebtedness in connection therewith; and
WHEREAS, the City has determined that it is necessary to amend Section 3 of the
ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City of Chicago on May 1, 2002, as heretofore
amended (the "2002 Ordinance"), which authorizes the issuance of Commercial Paper Notes
Series A and Series B in an amount not to exceed $500,000,000 and pursuant to which the City
proposed to establish a commercial paper program, an auction rate securities program, a
variable rate securities program and a line of credit program (collectively, the "Borrowing Plan');
and

the Borrowing Plan authorizes the issuance of one or more series of
Authorized Debt (as defined in the 2002 Ordinance) for (i) the payment, or reimbursemenl of the
City for the payment, of the cost of all or any portion of any capital project approved by City
Council, (ii) cash flow needs of the City, (iii) the deposit of monies into funds and accounts as
WHEREAS,

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)
-4-

 are provided for in any indenture entered into under the Borrowing Plan, and (iv) the payment of
costs of issuance incurred in connection with each series of Authorized Debt; and
WHEREAS, the City desires to amend Section 3 of the 20.02 Ordinance in order to (i)
increase the maximum aggregate principal amount of Authorized Debt to be outstanding under
the 2002 Ordinance from $500,000,000 to $1 billion and (ii) extend the maximum maturity of
Authorized Debt outstanding under the 2002 Ordinance from January 1, 2030 to January 1,
2032; now, therefore,
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHICAGO:

Section 1. The City Council of the City (the "City Council'), after a public meeting
heretofore held on this Ordinance by the Committee on Finance of the City Council, pursuant to
proper notice and in accordance with the findings and recommendations of such Committee,
hereby finds that all ofthe recitals contained in the preambles to this Ordinance are full, true and
correct and does incorporate them into this Ordinance by this reference.
Section 2. There shall be borrowed on the credit of and for and on behalf of the City in
one or more series and at one or more times the sum of not to exceed $900,000,000 plus, an
amount equal to the amount of any net original issue discount used in the marketing of the
Bonds (not to exceed 10 percent of the principal amount of each series thereof) for the
purposes aforesaid; and the Bonds shall be issued from time to time in said aggregate principal
amount, or such lesser amount, as may be determined by the City's Chief Financial Officer or
the City Comptroller (each such officer being hereinafter referred to as an "Authorized Officer^.
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds payable in one payment on a
fixed date ("Capital Appreciation Bonds'). Each series of Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be
dated the date of issuance thereof and shall also bear the date of authentication, shall be in fully
registered form, shall be numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar (as
hereinafter defined), and shall be in denominations equal to the original principal amounts of
such Capital Appreciation Bonds or any integral multiple thereof, each such original priricipal
amount representing Compound Accreted Value (as hereinafter defined) at maturily (the
"Maturity Amount") of such minimum amounts and integral multiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Capital Appreciation Bonds (but no
single Bond shall represent Compound Accreted Value maturing on more than one date). As
used herein, the "Compound Accreted Value" of a Capital Appreciation Bond on any date of
determination shall be an amount equal to the original principal amount (or integral multiple
thereof) plus an investment return accrued to the date of such determination at a semiannual
compounding rate which is necessary to produce the yield to maturity borne by such Capital
Appreciation Bond (the "Yield to Maturity').
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at fixed rales
and paying interest semiannually as described below (Ihe "Cun-ent Interest Bonds'). Each
series of Current Interest Bonds shall be dated such date as shall be agreed upon by an
Aulhorized Officer and the purchasers of such Current Interest Bonds, shall be in fully registered

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-5-

 form, shall be in such minimum denominations and integral multiples thereof as shall be agreed
upon by an Authorized Officer and the purchasers of such Current Interest Bonds (but no single
Current Interest Bond shall represent installments of principal maturing on more than one date),
and shall be numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar.
The Bonds may be initially issued as Capital Appreciation Bonds containing provisions
for the conversion of the Compound Accreted Value of such Bonds into Current Interest Bonds
(the "Convertible Bonds") at such time following the initial issuance as shall be approved by an
Authorized Officer. While in the form of Capital Appreciation Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shajl be subject lo all of the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance relating to Capital
Appredation Bonds, and while in the form of Current Interest Bonds, such Convertible Bonds
shall be subject to all of the provisions and limitations of this Ordinance relating to Current
Interest Bonds. In particular, when Convertible Bonds are in the form of Capital Appreciation
Bonds prior to their conversion to Current Interest Bonds, the transfer, exchange and
replacement provisions of this Ordinance with respect to Capital Appreciation Bonds shall apply
to such Convertible Bonds; provided that the Convertible Bonds delivered in the form of Capital
Appreciation Bonds in connection with any such transfer, exchange or replacement shall have
identical provisions for conversion to Current Interest Bonds as set forth in the Convertible
Bonds being transferred, exchanged or replaced. In connection with the issuance and sale of
any Convertible Bonds, the terms and provisions relating to the conversion of the Compound
Accreted Value of such Convertible Bonds into Current Interest Bonds shall be as approved by
an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Convertible Bonds. Notwithstanding any other
provision hereof, any series of Bonds may be issued as Capital Appreciation Bonds, Current
Interest Bonds, Convertible Bonds or any combination thereof.
All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued as Bonds bearing interest at variable rates
established by reference to such indices or otherwise and adjustable and payable from time to
time as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer and as agreed upon by an Authorized
Officer and the purchaser of the Bonds (the "Variable Rate Bonds!), Each series of Variable
Rate Bonds shall be dated such date as shall be agreed upon by an Authorized Officer and the
purchasers of such Bonds, shall be in fully registered form, shall be in such denominations as
shall be agreed upon by an Aulhorized Officer and the purchasers of the Bonds (but no single
Bond shall represent installments of principal maturing on more than one date), and shall be
numbered as determined by the applicable Bond Registrar. Each series of Variable Rate Bonds
may be issued pursuant to. and have such terms and provisions as are set forth in, a trust
indenture between the City and a bank or trust company selected by an Authorized Officer. The
Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into one or more such trust
indentures on behalf of the City. Each such trust indenture shall be in substanfially the form of
trust indentures previously entered into by the City in connection wilh the sale of general
obligation bonds or notes bearing interest at variable rates, but wilh such revisions in text as the
Mayor or the Authorized Officer executing the same shall determine are necessary or desirable,
including such revisions as shall be necessary to incorporate provisions relating to the manner
of establishing the interest rate and the payment of interest from time to time on the Variable
Rate Bonds, the execution thereof, and any amendment thereto, by the Mayor or such
Authorized Officer to evidence the Cily Council's approval of all such revisions.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-6-

 All or any portion of the Bonds may be issued and sold from time to time on a retail basis
to individual investors (the "Retail Bonds') or as a direct purchase to holders (the "Direct
Purchase Bonds'). The Retail Bonds and the Direct Purchase Bonds shall be sold as provided
in Section 12 hereof.
The principal of the Bonds of each series shall become due and payable on or before
the eariier of (i) January 1, 2056. or (ii) 40 years after the date of issuance thereof. Each series
of Current Interest Bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates and each series of Capital
Appreciation Bonds :shall have Yields to Maturily not to exceed 15 percent per annum. Each
series of Variable Rate Bonds shall bear interest from time to time at such rates determined by
such remarketing or other indexing agent as shall be selected by an Authorized Officer for that
purpose or as: provided in the related trust indenture referred to above not to exceed 15 percent
per annum. Any portion of the Bonds may be issued as bonds the interest on which is not
excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal income tax purpcises if
determined by an Authorized Officer to be beneficial to the City.
Each Capital Appreciation Bond shall accrue interest from its date at the rate per annum
compounded semiannually on each January 1 and. July 1, commencing on such January 1 or
July 1 as determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Capital Appreciation
Bonds, which will produce the Yield to Maturity identified therein until the maturity date thereof
Interest on the Capital Appreciation Bonds shall be payable only at the respective maturity dates
thereof.
Each Current Interest Bond shall bear interest from the later of its date or the most
recent interest payment date to which interest has been paid or duly provided for, until the
principal amount of such Bond is paid, such interest (computed upon the basis of a 360-day
period of twelve 3G-day months) being payable on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
commencing on such January 1 or July 1 as shall be detemiined by an Authorized Officer at the
time of the sale of each series of Current Interest Bonds.- Interest on each Current Interest
Bond shall be paid to the person in whose name such Bond is registered at the close of
business on the 15th day of the month nexl preceding the interest payment date, by check or
draft of the applicable Bond Registrar, or, at the option of any registered owner of $1,000,000 or
more in aggregate principal amount of Current Interest Bonds of a series, by wire transfer of
immediately available funds to such bank in the continental United States of America as the
registered owner of such Bonds shall request in writing to the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each series of Variable Rate Bonds shall bear interest (computed from time to time at
such rates and on such basis as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer or at the time of
sale of such series of Variable Rate Bonds) payable on such dates as shall be determined by an
Authorized Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds. Any Variable Rate Bonds
may be made subject to optional or mandatory tender for purchase by the owners thereof at
such times and at such prices (not to exceed 105 percent of the principal amount thereof) as
shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the lime of sale of such Variable Rate Bonds. In
connedion with the remarketing of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series so tendered for
purchase under the terms and conditions so specified by an Authorized Officer, the Mayor and

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-7-

 each Authorized Officer are hereby authorized to execute on behalf of the City a remarketing
agreement, and any amendment thereto, with respect to such series of Variable Rate Bonds in
substantially the form previously used for variable rate financings of the City with appropriate
revisions to reflect the terms and provisions of such Bonds sold as Variable Rate Bonds arid
such other revisions in text as an Authorized Officer shall determine are necessary or desirable
in connection with the sale of such Bonds as Variable. Rate Bonds. The annual fee paid to any
remarketing agent serving in such capacity pursuant to any such remarketing agreement with
respect to a series of Variable Rate Bonds shall not exceed one-quarter of one percent (0.25%)
of the average principal amount of such Variable Rate Bonds of such series outstanding during
such annual period.
The Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appreciation Bonds, the principal of the
Cunrent Inlerest Bonds and the Variable Rate Bonds and any redemption, premium shall be
payable in lawrful money of the United States of America upon presentation and surrender
thereof al the designated corporate trust office of the applicable Bond Registrar.
Each of the Bonds shall be designated "General Obligation Bonds, Series
,° with
such additions, modifications or revisions as shall be determined to be necessary by an
Aulhorized Officer at the time of the sale of such Bonds to reflect the calendar year of issuance
of the Bonds, the order of sale of the Bonds, the specific series of the Bonds, whether the
Bonds are being issued on a taxable basis, whether the Bonds are Capital Appreciation Bonds,
Current Interest Bonds, Convertible Bonds, Variable Rate Bonds, Retail Bonds or Direct
Purchase Bonds, whether the Bonds are being issued and sold for the purpose of paying costs
of the Refunding Purposes, paying costs of the Project or a combination thereof and any other
authorized features of the Bonds determined by an Authorized Officer as desirable to be.
reflected in the title of the Bonds being issued and sold.
The seal of the City or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed to or printed on each of the
Bonds, and the Bonds shall be executed by the manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor and
attested by the manual or facsimile signature of the City Clerk, and in case any officer whose
signature shall appear on any Bond shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such
Bond, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all proposes, the same as if
such officer had remained in office until delivery. As used in this Ordinance, "City Clerk" shall
mean the du y qualified and acting City Clerk of the City or any Deputy City Clerk or other
person that may lawfully take a specific action or perform a specific duty prescribed for the City
Clerk pursuant to this Ordinance.
All Bonds shall have thereon a certificate of authentication substantially in the form
hereinafter set forth duly executed by the applicable Bond Registrar as authenticating agent of
the City and showing the date of authentication. No Bond shall be valid or obligatory for any
purpose or be entitled to any security or benefit under this Ordinance unless and until such
certificate of authentication shall have been duly executed by the applicable Bond Registrar by
manual signature, and such certificate of authentication upon any such Bond shall be conclusive
evidence that such Bond has been authenticated and delivered under this Ordinance. The
certificate of authentication on any Bond shall be deemed to have been executed by the

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-8-

 applicable Bond Registrar if signed by an authorized officer of such Bond Registrar, but it shall
not be necessary that the same officer sign the certificate of authentication on all of the Bonds
issued hereunder.
Section 3.
(a) Registration and Transfer The City shall cause books (the "Bond
Register') for the registration and for the transfer of each series of Bonds as provided in this
Ordinance to be kept al the designated corporate trust office of a bank or trust company
designated by an Authorized Officier (the "Bond Registrar"), as the registrar for the City in
connection with such series of Bonds. The City is authorized to prepare multiple Bond blanks
executed by the City for use. in the transfer and exchange of Bonds.
Upon surrender for transfer of any Bond at the designated corporate trust office of the
applicable Bond Registrar, duly endorsed by, or accompanied by a written instrument or
instruriients of transfer in form satisfactory to such Bond Registrar and duly executed by the
registered owner or its attorney duly authorized in writing, the City shall execute and such Bond
Registrar shall authenticate, date and deliver in the name of the transferee or transferees (a) in
the case of any Capital Appreciation Bond, a new fully registered Capital Appreciation Bond or
Bonds of the same series, maturity and yield to rnaturity of authorized denominations, for a like
aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same series,
maturity and yield to maturity of other authorized denominations, or (b) in the case of any other
Bonds, one or more fully registered Bonds of the same series, type (Current Interest Bonds or
Variable Rate Bonds), interest rate (or in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of interest
rate determination) and maturity of authorized denominations, for a like principal amount. Any
Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds may be exchanged at said office of the applicable Bond
Registrar for.a like aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of
the sarrie series, maturily and yield to maturity of other authorized denominations. Any other
Bond or Bonds may be exchanged at said office of the applicable Bond Registrar for a like
aggregate principal amount of Bonds of the same series, type, interest rate and maturity of other
authorized denominations. The execution by the City of any fully registered Bond shall
constitute full and due authorization of such Bond, and the applicable Bond Registrar shall
thereby be authorized to autheriticate. date and deliver such Bond; provided that (a) the
aggregate original principal amount of outstanding Capital Appreciation Bonds of each series,
maturity and yield to maturity authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall not exceed
the authorized aggregate original principal amount of Capital Appreciation Bonds of such series
and maturity less previous retirements and (b) the principal amount of Current Interest Bonds or
Variable Rate Bonds of each series, maturity and interest rate (or interest rate determination
method) authenticated by the applicable Bond Registrar shall not exceed the authorized
principal amount of Current Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds for such series, maturity and
interest rate (or interest rate determination method) less previous retirements.
The applicable Bond Regisfrar shall not be required to transfer or exchange (a) any
Bond after notice calling such Bond for redemption has been mailed, or (b) any Bond during a
period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of such Bond; provided,
however, that provisions relating lo the transfer or exchange of Variable Rate Bonds of a series
shall be as determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale thereof and may be set

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-9-

 forth in the trust indenture securing such series of Variable Rate Bonds as aulhorized in
Section 2 hereof.
The person in whose name any Bond shall be registered shall be deemed and regarded
as the absolute owner thereof for all purposes, and payment of the Compound Accreted Value
of, principal of. redemption premium, if any. or interest on any Bond, as appropriate, shall be
made only to or upon the order of the registered owner thereof or its legal representative. All
such payments shall be valid and effectual to satisfy and discharge the liability upon such Bond
to the extent of the sum or sums so paid.
No service charge shall be made for any fransfer or .exchange of Bonds, but the City or
the applicable Bond Registrar may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or other
governmental charge that may be imposed in connection with any transfer or exchange of
Bonds, except that no such payment may be required in the case of the issuance of a Bond or
Bonds for the unredeemed portion of a Bond surrendered for redemption.
(b) Book-Entry Only System. If so determined and directed by an Authorized Officer in
connection with the sale of any of the Bonds, such Bonds may be issued in. book-entry only
form. In connection with the issuance of Bonds in book-entry only form, an Authorized Officer is
aulhorized to execute and deliver to the book-entry depository selected by such Authorized
Officer such depository's standard forni of representation letter. If any of the Bonds are
registered in the name of a securities depository which uses a book-entry system, the standing
of the beneficial owner to enforce any of the covenants herein may be established through the
books and records of such securities depository or a participant therein.
(c) Bonds Lost, Destroyed, etc. If any Bond, whether in temporary or definitive form, is
lost (whether by reason of theft or otherwise), destroyed (whether by mutilation, damage, in
whole or in part, or otherwise) or improperly cancelled, the applicable Bond Registrar may
authentic:ate a new Bond of like series, date, maturity date, interest rate (or, in the case of
Capital Appreciation Bonds, yield to maturity, and in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of
interest rale determination), denomination and original principal amount (in the case of Capital
Appreciation Bonds) or principal amount (in the case of other Bonds) and bearing a number not
contemporaneously ciutstanding; provided that (i) in the case of any mutilated Bond, such
mutilated Bond shall first be surrendered to the applicable Bond Registrar, and (ii) in the case of
any lost Bond or Bond destroyed in whole, there shall be first furnished to the applicable Bond
Registrar evidence of such loss or destruction, together with indemnification of the City and
such Bond Registrar, satisfactory to such Bond Registrar. If any lost, destroyed or improperly
cancelled Bond shall have matured or is about to mature, or has been called for redemption,
instead of issuing a duplicate Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar shall pay the same vwlhout
surrender thereof if there shall be first furnished to such Bond Registrar evidence of such loss,
destruction or cancellation, together with indemnity, satisfactory to it. Upon the issuance of any
substitute: Bond, the applicable Bond Registrar may require the payment of a sum sufficient to
cover any tax or other governmental charge that may be imposed in relation thereto.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-10-

 (d) Redemption and Repurchase, t h e Bonds may be made subject to redemption
prior to maturity at the option of the City, in whole or in part on any date, at such times and at
such redemption prices (to be expressed as a percentage of the principal amount of Current
Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds being redeemed or as a formula as described below and
expressed as a percentage of the Compound Accreted Value of Capital Appreciation Bonds to
be redeemed or as a formula'as described bielow) not to exceed 105 percent, plus, in the case
of Current Interest Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, accrued interest to the date of redemption,
as determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale thereof.
Nohvithstanding the foregoing, such 105 percent limitation on the redemption price of
Bonds shall not apply where the redemption price is based upon a formula designed to
compensate the owner of the Bonds to be redeemed based upon prevailing market- conditions
on the date fixed for redemption, commonly known as a "make-whole" redemption price (the
"Make-Whole Redemption Price"). Al the time of sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer shall
determine the provisions of the formula to be used to establish any Make-Whole Redemption
Price, which may vary depending on whether the Bonds are issued on a taxable or tax-exempt
basts. An Authorized Officer shall confirm and transmit the applicable Make-Whole Redemption
Price on such dates and to such parties as shall be necesisary to effectuate such redemption.
If fewer than all ofthe outstanding Bonds of a series are to be optionally redeemed, the
Bonds to be called shall be called from such maturities and interest rates of such series as may
be determined by an Authorized Officer.
Certain of the Bonds of a series may be made subject to mandatory redemption, at par
and accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption, as determined by an Authorized Officer at
the time of the sale thereof.
An Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell (at a price determined by such
Authorized Officer to be in the best interests of the City) or waive any right the City may have to
call any of the Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness for optional redemption, in whole or in part,
and is hereby further authorized to expend the proceeds of any such sales for any purpose for
which the proceeds of the Bonds are authorized to be expended and for the payment or
prepayment of any City debt obligations whether issued before or after the date of adoption of
this Ordinance, all as determined by an Authorized Officer; provided however, to the extent that
interest on such Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness is excluded from gross income for federal
income tax purposes, such experiditures shall not adversely affect such exclusion. If
determined to be necessary or appropriate, an Authorized Officer is authorized to solicit the
consent of holders of outstanding Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness to any such sale or
waiver.
Retail Bonds may be made subject to repurchase by the City upon the dernand of
certain holders thereof at a price of not to exceed 105 percent of par. as more fully described in
Section 12 hereof.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-11-

 At the time of sale of Bonds of a series, an Authorized Officer is authorized to determine
the manner of redeeming such Bonds, either by lot in the manner hereinafter provided or
pro-rata in the manner determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale, in the event less
than ail of the Bonds of the same series, maturity and interest rate are to be redeemed.
The Current Interest Bonds shall be redeemed only in amounts equal to the respective
minimum authorized denominations and integral multiples thereof and the Capital Appreciation
Bonds shall be redeemed cihly in amourits representing the respective minimum authorized
Maturity Amounts and integral multiples thereof. In the event of the redemption of fewer than all
the Bonds of the same series, maturity and interest rate by lot. the aggregate principal amount
or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) thereof to, be redeemed shall be the minimum authorized
denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for such series or an integral multiple thereof,
and the applicable Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of such series, maturity and
interest rate; a distinctive nunlber for each minimum authorized denomination or Maturity
Amount (as appropriate) of such Bond, and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as
many numbers as, at such minimum authorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as
appriDpriate) for each number, shall equal the principal amount or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of such Bonds to be redeemed. In such case, the Bonds to be redeemed shall be
those to which were assigned numbers so selected; provided that only so much of the principal
amount or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall equal
such minimum authorized denomination or Maturity Amount (as appropriate) for each number
assigned to it and so selected. In the event of the redemption of fewer than all Bonds of the
same series, maturity and interest rate on a pro-rata basis, if the Bonds are held in book-entry
form at the time of redemption, at the time of sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is
authorized lo direct the Bond Registrar to instruct the book-entry depository to select the
specific Bonds within such maturity and interest rate for redemption pro-rata among such
Bonds. The City shall have no resppnsibility or obligation to. ensure that the book-entry
depository properly selects such Bonds for redemption.
The City shall, at least 45 days prior to any optional redemption date (unless a shorter
time period shall be satisfactory to the applicable Bond Registrar), notify the applicable Bond
Registrar of such redemption date and of the principal amount or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) of Bonds of such series to be redeemed.
In connection with any mandatory redemption of Bonds of a series as authorized above,
the principal amounts of Bonds (or the Compound Accreted Value of the Capital Appreciation
Bonds) of such series to be mandatorily redeemed in each year may be reduced through the
earlier optional redemption thereof, with any partiaj optional redemptions of such Bonds of such
series credited against future mandatory redemption requirements in such order of the
mandatory redemption dates as an Aulhorized Officer may determine. In addition, on or prior to
the 60th day preceding any mandatory redempfion date of Bonds of a series, the applicable
Bond Registrar may, and if directed by an Authorized Officer shall, purchase Bonds of such
series required lo be retired on such mandatory redemption dale al such prices as an
Authorized Officer shall detenmine. Any such Bonds so purchased shall be cancelled and the
principal amount (or Compound Accreted Value, as appropriate) thereof shall be credited

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-12-

 against the payment required on such next mandatory redemption dale with respect to such
series of Bonds.
The applicable Bond Registrar shall promptly notify the City in writing of the Bonds, or
portions thereof, selected for redemption and, in the case of any Bond selected for partial
redemption, the principal amount. Compound Accreted Value or Maturity Amount (as
appropriate) thereof, and the interest rate thereof to be redeemed.
Subject lo the limitation on redemption price set forth above, in the case of redemption of
any Variable Rate Bonds, the terms of such redemption shall be delermined by an Authorized
Officer at the time of sale of such Variable Rale Bonds and may be set forth in the trust
indenture securing such Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof.
Section 4. Except as may otherwise be determined as provided below for Variable
Rale Bonds, unless waived by any owner of Bonds to be redeemed, notice of the call for any
such redemption shall be given by the applicable Bond Registrar on behalf of the City by mailing
the redemption notice by first class mail at least 30 days and not more than 60 days prior to the
dale fixed for redemption to the registered owner of the Bond or Bonds to be redeemed at the
address shown on the applicable Bond Register or at such other address as is furnished in
writing by such registered owner to such Bond Registi^ar, but the failure to mail any such notice
or any defect therein as to any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the
redemption of any other Bond. Any notice of redemption mailed as provided in this Section
shall be. conclusively presumed to have been given whether or not actually received by the
addressee. In the case of redemption of any Variable Rate Bonds of a series, the time and
manner of giving such notice shall be determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of sale of
such Variable Rate Bonds and may be set forth in the trtjst indenture securing such Variable
Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof
All notices of redemption shall state:
(1)

the series designation of the Bonds to tie redeemed,

(2)

the redemption date,

(3)
the redemption price, or in the case of a redemption of Bonds at a
Make-Whole Redemption Price, a description of the formula by which the redemption
price shall be determined,
(4)
if less than all outstanding Bonds of a series are to be redeemed, the
identification (and, in the case of partial redemption, the respective principal amounts
and interest rates, Compound Accreted Values or Maturity Amounts) of the Bonds to be
redeemed.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-13-

 (5)
that on the redemption date the redemption price will become due and
payable upon each such Bond or portion thereof called for redemption, and that interest
thereon shall cease to accrue or compound from and after said date,
(6)
the place where such Bonds are to be surrendered for payment of the
redemption price, which place of payment shall be the designated corporate trust office
of the applicable Bond Registrar, and
(7)
such other information as shall be deemed necessary by the applicable
Bopd Registrar at the tirne such notice is given to comply with law, regulation or industry,
standard.
With respect to an optional redemption of any series of Bonds, such notice may state
that said redemption is conditioned upon the receipt by the applicable Bond Registrar on or prior
to the date fixed for redemption of moneys sufficient to pay the redemption price of the Bonds of
such series. If such moneys are not so received, such redemption notice shall be of no force
arid effect, Ihe City shall not redeem such Bonds and the applicable Bond Registrar shall ghre
notice, in the same manner in which the notice of redemption vyas given, that such moneys were
not so received and that such Bonds will not be redeemed. Unless the notice of redemption
shall be made conditional as provided above, on or prior to any redemption date for a series of
Bonds, the City shall deposit with the applicable Bond Registrar an amount of money sufficient
to pay the redemption price of all the Bonds or portions thereof of such series which are to be
redeemed on that date.
Notice of redemption having been given as aforesaid, the Bonds, or portions thereof, so
to be redeemed shall, on the redemption date, become due and payable at the redemption price
therein specified, and from and after such date (unless the City shall default in the payment of
the. redemption price or unless, in the event of a conditional notice as described above, the
necessary moneys were not deposited) such Bonds, or portions thereof, shall cease to bear,
accrue or compound interest. Upon surrender of such Bonds for redemption in accordance with
said notice, such Bonds shall be paid by the applicable Bond Registrar at the redemption price.
Installments of ihterest due on or prior to the redemption date shall be payable as herein
provided for payment of interesl. Upon surrender for any partial redemption (i) of any Current
Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond, there shall be prepared for the registered owner a new
Bond or Bonds of the same series, type (Current Interest Bonds or Variable Rate Bonds),
interest rate or. in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, method of interest rate detennination. and
maturity in the amount of the unpaid principal or (ii) of any Capital Appreciation Bond, there shall
be prepared for the registered owner a new Capital Appreciation Bond or Bonds of the same
series. Yield to Maturity and maturity date in the amount of the unpaid Maturity AmounL
If any Current Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond, or portion thereof, called for
redemption shall not be so paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the principal shall, until
paid, bear interest from the redemption date at the rate borne by such Bond, or portion thereof,
so called for redemption. If any Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof, called for
redemption shall not be so paid upon surrender thereof for redemption, the Compound Accreted

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-14-

 Value at such redemption date shall continue to accrue interest from such redemption date at
the Yield to Maturity borne by such Capital Appreciation Bond, or portion thereof, so called for
redemption. All Bonds which have been redeemed shall be cancelled and destroyed by the
applicable Bond Registrar and shall not be reissued.
If any Bond is not presented for payment when the principal amount. Compound
Accreted Value or Maturity Amount thereof becomes due, either at maturity or at a date fixed for
redemption thereof or otherwise, and if moneys sufficient to pay such Bond are held by the
applicable Bond Registrar for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond, such Bond
Registrar shall hold such moneys for the benefit of the registered owner of such Bond without
liability to the registered owner for interest. The registered owner of such Bond thereafter shall
be restricted exclusively to such funds for satisfaction of any claims relating to such Bond.
Section 5. The Capital Appreciation Bonds and the Current Inlerest Bonds of each
series shall be prepared in substantially the following forms with such insertions and revisions
as shall be necessary to reflect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Bonds of such series
pursuant to Section 12 hereof; provided that if the text of any Bond is to be printed in its entirety
on the front side of such Bond, then the text shown or appearing on the reverse side of such
Bond shall replace paragraph [2] and the legend, "See Reverse Side for Additional Provisions,"
shall be omitted. The Convertible Bonds shall be prepared incorporating the provisions of the
forms of Capital Appreciation Bonds and Current Interesl Bonds set forth below as necessary to
reflect the terms and provisions of the sale of the Convertible Bonds pursuant to Section 12
hereof The Variable Rate Bonds shall be prepared, in substantialiy the form of the Current
Interest Bonds set forth belovy. or as provided in the applicable trust indenture securing such
Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in Section 2 hereof, with such insertions and revisions as
shall be necessary to reflect the. terms and provisions of the sale of the Variable Rate Bonds
pursuant to Section 12 hereof.
All Bonds may be prepared with such insertions and revisions as shall be necessary in
connection with the issuance of such Bonds as Retail Bonds or Direct Purchase Bonds.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-15-

 [Form of Capital Appreciation Bond — Front Side]

REGISTERED

No.

$
Compound Accreted
Value at Maturity
("Maturity Amounf)
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF ILLINOIS

CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND
SERIES

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
ORIGINAL
PRINCIPAL
AMOUNT PER

$
MATURITY

20_

000

YIELD TO

MATURITY

DATED

MATURITY

AMOUNT:

DATE

$

CUSIP
20

Registered Owner:
The City of Chicago (the 'City') hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for value
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date identified above, the Maturity Amount identified
above. The amount of interest payable on this Bond on the Maturily Date hereof is the artiount
of interest accrued from the Dated Date hereof al a semiannual compounding rate necessary to
produce the Yield to Maturity set forth above, compounded semiannually on each January 1 and
July 1, commencing
1, 20 . The Maturity Amount of this Bond is payable
in lawful money of the United States of America upon presentation and surrender of this Bond at
the designated corporate trust office of
. Chicago, Illinois, or its
successor, as bond registrar and paying agent (the "Bond Registrar"). The Compound Accreted
Value of this Bond per $
,000 Maturity Amount on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
commencing
1, 20 , determined by the semiannual compounding described in
this paragraph shall be as set forth in the Table of Compound Accreted Value Per $
,000
of Compound Accreted Value at Maturity contained herein.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-16-

 Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth at
this place.
It is hereby certified and recited that all conditions, acts and things requilred by law to
exist or to be done precedent tp and in the issuance of this Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and due form and time as required by law; that the
indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Bonds of which Ihis is one. does not exceed any
nmitation, imposed by layy; and that provision has been made for the collection of a direct annual
tax sufficient to pay the Maturily Amount hereof al maturity.
This Bond shall not be valid or become obligatory for any purpose until the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Bond Registrar.
IN WITNESS WHEREioF; the City of Chicago by the City Council has caused its corporate
seal to be imprinted by fac;simile hereon and this Bond to be signed by the duly authorized
facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Clerk, all as
of the Dated Date identified above:

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicago
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature)
City Clerk
City of Chicago
[SEAL]

Date of Authentication:
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Bond is one of the Bonds described in the withiri-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of the General Obligation Bonds. Series
. of the City of Chicago.

(Manual Signature)
Authorized Officer

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-17-

 [Form of Capital Appreciation Bond — Reverse Side]
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND
SERIES

For the prompt payment of the Maturity Amount of this Bond as the same t>ecomes due,
and for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full faith, credit and resources of the City
are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the original principal amount of
$
issued pursuant to the constitutional home rule powers of the City for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Puiposes described in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described in the Bond Ordinance, and
(iii). paying expenses incidental to the issuance of the Bonds, and was authorized by an
Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the Cily on
, 20
(the "Borid
Ordinance').
The Borids maturing on or after January 1,
, are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the City, in whole or in part on any date on or after
1,
, and if
less than all of the outstanding Bonds are to be redeemed, the Bonds to be called shall be
called from such maturities as shall be determined by the City, and if less than all of the Bonds
of the sahie maturity and yield to maturity are to be redeemed, then [by lot] [pro-rata] for the
Bonds ofthe same maturity and yield to maturity iri the manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds
to be redeemed at the redemption prices (being expressed as a percentage of the Compound
Accreted Value of the Bonds to be redeemed) set forth below:
DATES OF REDEMPTION

REDEMPTION PRICE

[Redemption by lot] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and yield lo niaturity, the aggregate Maturity Amount thereof to be redeemed shall be
$
.000 or an integral multiple thereof, and the Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of
such maturity and yield to maturity a distinctive number for each $
,000 Maturity Amount of
such Bond arid shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as, at
$
.000 for each number, shall equal the Maturity Amount of such Bonds to be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so selected;
provided that only so much of the Maturity Amount of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall
equal $
.000 for each number assigned to it and so selected.
[Redemption pro-rata] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and yield to maturity, the Bonds to be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
determined pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

I

-18-

 Notice of any such redemption shall be sent by first class mail not fewer than 30 days
nor more than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption to the Registered Owner of each
Bond to be redeemed at the address shown on the registration books of the City maintained by
the Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner
to the Bond Registrar; provided that the failure to mail any such notice or any defect therein as
to any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Bond.
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease lo accrue interesl on the specified
redemption date; provided that funds for redemption are on deposit at the place of payment at
that time, and shall not be deemed to be outstanding.
This Bond is trarisferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly authorized in writing at the designated corporate tmst office of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago. Illinois, but only in the manner, subject lo the limitations and upon payment of the
charges provided in the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon such transfer a new Bond or Bonds of authorized denominations, of the same maturity
and yield to maturity and for the same aggregate Original Principal Amount will be issued to the
transferee in exchange therefor. The Bond' Registrar shall not be required to transfer or
•exchange this Bond (A) after notice calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.
The Bonds are issued in fully registered form in Original Principal Amounts representing
$
,000 Maturity Amount or any integral multiple thereof This Bond may be exchanged at
the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate Original Principal
Amount of Bonds of the same series and maturity, upon the temns set forth in the Bond
Ordinance.
The City and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment of or on account of the Maturity
Amount hereof and redemption premium, if any. hereon and for all other purposes and neither
the City nor the Bond- Registrar shall be affected by any notice to the contrary.

TABLE OF COMPOUND ACCRETED VALUE
PER $

.000 OF COMPOUND ACCRETED VALUE A T MATURITY

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)
-19-

 (ASSIGNMENT)
FOR VALUE RECEIVED,

the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and. Address of Assignee)

the wilhin Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Bond on the books kept for registration thereof with full power" of
substitution in the premises.

Dated:
Signature guaranteed:
NOTICE:

The signature to this assignment must correspond with the name of the Registered
Owner as it appears upon the face of the within Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-20-

 [Fomi of Current interest Bond — Front Side]
REGISTERED

No.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF ILLINOIS
CITY OF CHICAGO
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND
SERIES

See Reverse Side for
Additional Provisions
Interest
Rate:

Maturity Date:
%

Dated Date;.

January 1 . 2 0 _

^. 2 0 _

CUSIP:

Registered Qyvner:
Priricipal Amounl:
The City of Chicago (the ' C i t / ) hereby acknowledges itself to owe and for value
received promises to pay to the Registered Owner identified above, or registered assigns as
hereinafter provided, on the Maturity Date identified above, the Principal Amount identified
above and to pay interest (computed on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months)
on such Principal Amount from the later of the date of this Bond or the most recent interest
payment date to which interest has been paid at the Iriterest Rate per annum set forth above on
January 1 and July 1 of each year commencing
1, 20 . unlil said Principal
Amount is paid. Principal of this Bond and redemption premium, if any. shall be payable in
lawful money of the United States of America upon presentation and surrender at the
designated corporate trust office of
, Chicago. Illinois, as bond
registrar and paying agent (the "Bond Registrar"). Payment of the installments of interest shall
be made to the Registered Owner hereof as shown on the registration books of the City
maintained by the Bond Registrar at the close of business on the 15th day of the month next
preceding each interest payment date and shall be paid by check or draft of the Bond Registrar
mailed to the address of such Registered Owner as it appears on such registration books or at
such other address furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to the Bond Registrar or. at
the option of any Registered Owner of $1,000,000 or more in aggregate principal amount of the
Bonds, by wire transfer of immediately available funds to such bank in the continental United
States of America as the Registered Owner hereof shall request in writing to the Bond Registrar.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-21-

 Reference is hereby made to the further provisions of this Bond set forth on the reverse
hereof and such further provisions shall for all purposes have the same effect as if set forth at
this place.
It is hereby certified and recited that all conditions, acts and things required by law to
exist, or to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this Bond did exist, have happened,
been done and performed in regular and due form and time as required by law; that the
indebtedness of the City, including the issue of Bonds of which this is one, does not exceed any
limitation imposed by law; and that provision has been made for the collection of a direct annual
tax sufficient to pay the interest hereon as il falls due and also to pay and discharge the
principal hereof at malurity.
This Bond shall not be valid or become obligatory for any purpose until the certificate of
authentication hereon shall have been signed by the Bond Registrar,
the Cily of Chicago by the City Council has caused ils corporate
seal to be imprinted by facsimile hereon and this Bond to be signed by the duly authorized
facsimile signature of the Mayor and attested by the facsimile signature of the City Clerk, all as
of the Dated Date identified above.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF,

(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
City of Chicagci
Attest:

(Facsimile Signature).
City Clerk
City of Chicago
[SEAL]
Date of Authentication:
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION

This Bond is one of the Bonds described in the within-mentioned Bond Ordinance and is
one of the General Obligation Bonds, Series
, of the City of Chicago.

By:

(Manual Signature)

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-22-

  

 

Authorized Of?cer

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (?nal)
-2 3-

[Form of Current Inlerest Bond — Reverse Side]
C I T Y OF C H I C A G O
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND
SERIES

For the prompt payment of this Bond, both principal and interest, as aforesaid, as the
same become dtje, arid for the levy of taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full faith, credit and
resources o f t h e City are hereby irrevocably pledged.
Tbis Bond is one of a series of Bonds aggregating the principal amount of
$
issued pursuant to the constitutional home rule powers of the City for the
purposes of (i) paying costs of the Refunding Purposes described in the hereinafter-defined
Bond Ordinance, (ii) paying costs of the Project described in the Borid Ordinance, and
(iii) paying expenses incidental to the issuance of the Bonds, and was authorized by an
Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on
, 20
(the "Bond
Ordinance').
The Bonds maturing on or after January 1,
, are redeemable prior to maturity at the
option of the City, in whole, or in part on any date on or after
1.
, and if less
than all of the outstanding Bonds are to be redeemed, the Bonds to be called shall be called
from such maturities and interest rates as shall be determined by the City and if less than all of
the Bonds of a single malurity and the same interest rate are to be redeemed then [by lol]
[pro-rata] within such maturity and interest rate in the manner hereinafter provided, the Bonds to
be redeemed at the redemption prices (being expressed as a percentage of- the principal
amount) set forth below, plus accrued interest to the date of redemption:
DATES OF REDEMPTION

REDEMPTION PRICE

The Bonds maturing on January 1,
, are subjed to mandatory redemption prior to
maturity on January 1 of the years
to
, inclusive, and the Bonds maturing on
January 1,
, are subject to mandatory redemption prior to maturity on January 1 of the
years
. to
, incilusiye, in each case at par and accrued interest to the date fixed for
redemption.
[Redemption by lot] In the event of the redemption of less than all the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the aggregate principal amount thereof to be redeemed shall be
$
,000 or an integral multiple thereof, and the Bond Registrar shall assign to each Bond of
such maturity and interest rate a distinctive number for each $
,000 principal amount of
such Bond and shall select by lot from the numbers so assigned as many numbers as, at
$
,000 for each number, shall equal the principal amount of such Bonds to be redeemed.
The Bonds to be redeemed shall be the Bonds to which were assigned numbers so selected;

General Obligalion Bonds ordinDncc (final)
-24-

 provided that only so much of the principal amount of each Bond shall be redeemed as shall
equal $
,000 for each number assigned to it and so selected.
[Redemption pro-rata] In the event of the redemption of less than all of the Bonds of like
maturity and interest rate, the Bonds to be redeemed will be selected pro-rata in the manner
determined pursuant to the Bond Ordinance.
Notice of any such redennption shall be sent by first class mail riot less than 30 days nor
more than 60 days prior to the date fixed for redemption to the Registered Owner of each Bond
to be redeemed at the address shown on the registration books of the City maintained by the
Bond Registrar or at such other address as is furnished in writing by such Registered Owner to
the Bond Registrar; proyided that ,the failure to mail any such notice or any defect therein as to.
any Bond shall not affect the validity of the proceedings for the redemption of any other Bond.
When so called for redemption, this Bond shall cease to bear interest on the specified
redemption date, provided that funds for redemption are on deposit, at the place of payment at
that lime, and shall not be deemed to be outstanding.
This Bond is transferable by the Registered Owner hereof in person or by its attorney
duly authorized in writing at the designated corporate trust office of the Bond Registrar in
Chicago, Illinois, but only in the manner, subject to the limitations and upon payment of the
charges provided iri the Bond Ordinance, and upon surrender and cancellation of this Bond.
Upon .such transfer a new Bond or Bonds of authorized denominations, of the same inlerest
rate, series and maturity and for the same aggregate principal amount will be issued to the,
transferee in exchange therefor. The Bond Registrar shall not be required to transfer or
exchange this Bond (A) after notice calling this Bond for redemption has been mailed, or
(B) during a period of 15 days next preceding mailing of a notice of redemption of this Bond.
The Bonds are issued in fully registered form in the denomination of $
.000 each or
authorized integral multiples thereof This Bond may be exchanged at the designated corporate
trust office of the Bond Registrar for a like aggregate principal amount of Bonds of the same
interest rate, series and maturity of other authorized denominations, upon the terms set forth in
the Bond Ordinance.
The City and the Bond Registrar may deem and treat the Registered Owner hereof as
the absolute owner hereof for the purpose of receiving payment of or on account of principal
hereof and interest due hereon and redemption premium, if any, and for all other purposes and
neither the City nor the Bond Registrar shall be affected by any notice to the contrary.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-25-

 (ASSIGNMENT)

F O R V A L U E RECEIVED, the undersigned sells, assigns and transfers unto
(Name and Address of Assignee)
the within Bond and does hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Bohd on the books kept for registration thereof with full power of
substitution in the premises.
Dated:
Signature guaranteed:
NOTICE:

The signature to this assignment must correspond with the name of the Registered
Owner as it appears upon the face of the within Bond in every particular, without
alteration or enlargement or any change whatever.

Seciion 6.
Each Bond shall be a direct arid general obligation of the City for the
payment of which (as to Compound Accreted Value, principal, interest and redemption
premium, if any, as appropriate) the City pledges its full faith and credit. Each Bond shall be
payable (as to Compound Accreted Value, prindpal. interest and redemption premium, if any,
as appropriate) from any moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City legally
available for such purpose, including but not limited to the proceeds of the Pledged Taxes (as
defined in Section 7 hereof).
Section 7.
For the purpose of providing the funds required to pay as the same
become due (i)the principal of and interest and redemption premium, if any. on the Bonds
(including the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds), (ii) the purchase
price of Bonds that are subject to optional or mandatory tender for purchase by the owners
thereof, to the extent not otherwise provided for pursuant to the terms of a Credit Facility (as
defined in Section 12 hereof), (iii) such amounts as may be payable under Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements (as defined in Section 14(a) hereof) from the direct annual tax described
below, (iv) amounts (other than periodic fees and expenses) payable to providers of Credit
Facilities as described, in Section 12 hereof, (v) any Line of Credii Indebtedness, (vi) the
principal of and interest on General Obligation Commercial Paper Notes and (vii) to the extent
determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary or desirable, periodic fees and expenses
payable to parties involved in the provision of ongoing services relating to the Bonds, the
Outstanding Indebtedness, the Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements or Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements, including any QIR and parties such as those identified by an Authorized
Officer in a notification of sale as described in Section 12 hereof and parties providing similar
ongoing services, such as rating agencies and entities providing financial market information to
be used in connection wilh the structuring and sale of the Bonds (the "Ongoing Financing

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-26-

 Services'), there is hereby levied and there shall be collected a direct annual tax upon all
taxable property in the City for the years and in the amounts as follovirs:
YEAR

AMOUNT

YEAR

AMOUNT

2013
2014
2015
2016,
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033

$150;000,000
150;000,000
150,000,000
150,000.000
150.000,000
150.00G;000
150.000.000
150,000,000
150,000.000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150,000,000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150.000.000

2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
2042
,2043
2044
2045
2046
2047
2048
2049
2050
2051
2052
2053
2054

$150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000.000
150.000,000
150.000,000
150.000,000
150.000.000
150.000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150,000,000
150.000.000
150,000.000
150,000.000
150,000,000
150.000,000
150,000,000
150,000,000
150.000,000

; provided that collections of such levy for any year in an amount in excess of that necessary to
make the payments described in clauses (i) through (vii), above (a) may be used for any lawful
public purpose designated by the City Council or (b) may be reduced and abated by an
Authorized Officer if such reduction is deemed desirable by an Authorized Officer in connection
with the sale or sales of the Bonds, in each case as determined from time to time by an
Authorized Officer as provided in Section 12 hereof
The tax levy made in this Seciion is not subject to the 'Aggregate Levy" limitation
contained in the Chicago Property Tax Limitation Ordinance contained in Chapter 3-92 of the
Municipal Code of Chicago (the "Municipal Code'), and Section 3-92-020 of the Municipal Code
is hereby superseded to exclude the tax levy herein from the definition of "Aggregate Levy"
contained therein.
The term "Pledged Taxes' means (i) the taxes hereinabove levied for collection for the
purpose of providing the funds necessary to make the payments described in clauses (i)
through (vii) of the first paragraph of this Section 7, and (ii) subject lo the provisions of
Section 15 hereof, the proceeds of taxes levied for the years from and after 2012 in connection
with the issuance of the Outstanding Indebtedness to the extent such tax collections are not

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-27-

 necessary for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein or pursuant to any other authorization, and the term "Pledged Taxes" shall
also include any amounts deposited into the hereinafter-defined Bond Fund or deposited with
the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent (as hereinafter defined) by an Authorized Officer for the
purpose of paying principal of arid interest on the Bonds and any accrued iriterest received and
deposited in the Bond Fund or the Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Account, if established pursuant to
Section 9 hereof
As provided in Section 12 or otherwise, the City reserves the right to abate all or a
portion of the Pledged Taxes required lo be levied in any year if and to 1he extent on or before
March 3.1 of the next succeeding calendar year (or such eariier dale as may be required by law),
the City has on hand amounts dedicated to the payments described in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of the first paragraph of this Section 7 due during the one-year period commencing on
January 2 of such succeeding cialeridar year, t h e City may, but shall not be required to, cause,
the extension and collection of the Pledged Taxes for the payment when due of any Line of
Credit Indebtedness or the principal of and interest on General Obligation Commercial Paper
Notes or cause the levy or extension in any year of taxes for the payment of the costs of
Ongoing Financing Services.
Section 8. The City shall appropriate or otherwise provide amounts sufficient to pay
(i) priricipal of and interest on the Bonds (including the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital
Appreciation Bonds), (ii) amounts (other than periodic fees and expenses) payable to providers
of Credii Facilities as described iri Section 12 hereof to the payment of which the City has
pledged its full faith and credit and (iii) Interest Rate Exchange Agreements to the payment of
which the City has pledged its full faith and credit for the years ;Such amounts are due, and the
City hereby covenants to take timely action as required by law to carry out the provisions of this
Section, but, if for any such year it fails to do so, this Ordinance shall constitute a continuing
appropriation ordinance of such amounts without any further actipn on the part of the City
Council.
Section 9.
Each Authorized Officer is authorized to establish one or more special
accounts, if determined to be necessary in connection with the sale of any of the Bonds,
separate and segregated from all other funds and accounts of the City, which shall either be"
(i) held by an Authorized Officer (each a "Bond Fund") or (ii) maintained with a bank or trust
company to be designated by an Authorized Officer (each an 'Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Account") pursuant to an escrow agreement (each an "Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreement"),
between the City and the applicable Escrow Agent named therein (each an 'Ad Valorem Tax
Escrow Agent'), and one or more of the Mayor or an Authorized Officer are hereby authorized to
execute and deliver one or more Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreements in connection wilh the
sale of the Bonds in such form as the officers so executing such agreement may deem
appropriate in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
In lieu of the proceeds of such taxes being deposited with the City Treasurer, any such
Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agreement may authorize the County Collectors of Cook and DuPage

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-28-

 Counties, Illinois to deposit the proceeds of such taxes directly into the applicable Ad Valorem
Tax Escrow Account, if such Account has been created.
Section 10. If the Pledged Taxes to be applied to the payment of the Bonds are not
available in time to make any payments of principal of or interest on the Bonds when due, then
the appropriate fiscal officers of the City are hereby directed to make such payments from any
other moneys, revenues, receipts, income, assets or funds of the City that are legally available
for that purpose in advancement of the collection of such Pledged Taxes, and when the
proceeds thereof are received, such other funds shall be replenished, all to the end that the
credii of the City may be preserved by the prompt payment of the principal of arid inlerest on the
Bonds as the same become due.
Section 11. A copy of this Ordinance, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed in
the respective offices of the County Clerks of Cook and DuPage Counties, Illinois (the "County
Clerks"), and such filing shall constitute the authority for and it shall be the duty of said County
Clerks, in each year beginning in 2014, to and including 2055, to extend the taxes levied
pursuant lo Section 7 hereof for collection in such year, such taxes to be in addition to and in
excess of all other taxes heretofore or hereafter authorized to be levied by the City on its behalf
A copy .of this Ordinance, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall also be filed with each
applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, if ariy, each applicable Bond Registrar, and if the
County Collectors of Cook and DuPage Counties are authorized to deposit the proceeds of the
taxes levied pursuant to Section 7 hereof directly with an Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent
pursuant to Section 9 hereof, with such County Collectors.
Section 1.2: Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized tp sell all or any portion of the
Bonds, other than the Retail Bonds and the Direct Purchase Bonds which shall be sold as
provided in the following two paragraphs, from time to time to or at the direction of an
underwriter or group of underwriters to be selected by such Authorized Offlcer (the
"Underwriters'), with the concurrence of the Chaimnan of the Committee on Finance of the City
Council (the 'Chairman"), on such terms as such Authorized Officer may deem to be in the best
interests of the City within the limitations set forth in this Ordinance.
Each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to sell Retail Bonds from time to time on
such terms as such Authorized Officer may deem to be in the best interests of the City within
the limitations contained in this Ordinance and, in connection therewith, to appoint an agent or
group of agents lo be selected by such Authorized Ofticer (the 'Selling Agents'), with the
concurrence of the Chairman, for the purpose of soliciting purchases of the Retail Bonds by
individual investors, each sale of Retail Bonds solicited by the Selling Agents to be made with
the concurrence of the Chairman.
The Bonds may be sold as Direct Purchase Bonds in a manner and containing such
terms authorized by an Aulhorized Officer, including pursuant to a placement agent
arrangement, to a purchaser or purchasers other than the Underwriters (the "Direct
Purchasers'), such Direct Purchasers to be selected by an Authorized Officer and such sale

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-29-

 being pemhiUed at a price of not less than 97 percent of the principal amount of the Direct
Purchase Bonds being sold. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to do all
such things and to execute and deliver such additional documents, agreements and certificates
as shall be necessary in connection with the sale of Direct Purchase Bonds.
The principal amount of and the interest on the Bonds (including the Compound
Accreted Value of any Capital Appreciation Bonds and based on reasonable estimates of the
interest to be paid on Variable Rate Bonds) sold of each series and maturily in the aggregate
(after taking into account mandatory redemptions) shall not exceed the amount levied therefor
as specified in Section 7 hereof The Bonds may be sold from time to time as an Aulhorized
Officer shall determine that the proceeds of such sales are needed.
Either Authorized Officer is hereby authorized and directed to cause all necessary
notices of redemption of the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding as provided
above to be given in accordance with the terms of the respedive ordinances or indentures, as
applicable, authorizing the Outstanding Indebtedness.
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver a
contrad of purchase with respect to each sale of the Bonds (i) to. or at the direction of, the
Underwriters or (ii) lo the Direct Purchasers, in substantially the form previously used for similar
general, obligation bonds of the City (the "Contract of Purchase"), with appropriate revisions to
reflect the terms and provisions of the Bonds and such other revisions in text as the Mayor or an
Authorized Officer shall determine are necessary or desirable in connection with the sale of the
Bonds, The compensation paid to the Underwriters in connection with any sale of Bonds shall
not exceed three percent of the principal, amount of the Bonds being sold. Nothing contained in
this Ordinance, shall limit the sale of the Bonds or any maturity or maturities thereof at a price or
prices in excess of the principal amount thereof
The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver a
contract with Selling Agents pursuant to which the Selling Agents shall solicit purchases of the
Retail Bonds by individual investors (a "Selling Agent Agreemenf) substantially in the form of
the selling agent agreement previously entered into by the" City in connection with the sale of
Retail Bonds, but with such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer executing the
same shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or such
Authorized Officer to evidence the City Council's approval of all such revisions. The aggregate
coriripensation paid to the Selling Agents pursuant to any Sielling Agent Agreement shall not
exceed three percent of the principal amount of the Retail Bonds sold pursuant to such Selling
Agent Agreement. The terms of any Selling Agent Agreement may provide for the delegation by
an Authorized Officer to one or more Deputy Comptrollers of authority to approve the final lerms
of sale of any Retail Bonds pursuant to such Selling Agent Agreement within parameters
established by an Authorized Officer consistent with the terms and limitations of this Ordinance.
Any Selling Agent Agreement may also contain provisions pursuant to which a person receiving
an ownership interest in any Retail Bonds through the death of a Bondholder shall have the right
to sell such Retail Bonds back to the City at a price of not to exceed 105 percent of par and
setting forth the terms and conditions of the exercise of such right. The Mayor or an Authorized

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-30-

 Officer (or delegate as authorized above) is hereby authorized to do all such things and to
execute and deliver such additional dcicumerits, agreements and certificates as shall be
necessary in connection with the sale of Retail Bonds from time to time pursuant to a Selling
Agent Agreement, including any such document, agreement or certificate necessary to describe
the terms of Retail Bonds then being sold.
In connecfion with any sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to
obtain one or more poficies of bond insurance from recognized bond insurers selected by an
Authorized Oflicer, if such Authorized Officer determines such bond insurance to be desirable in
connection with such sale of the Bonds. Either Authorized Officer may, on behalf of the City,
make covenants with such bond insurer that are not inconsistent wilh the provisions of this
Ordinance and are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance.
In connection with any sale of the Bonds, the Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby
authorized to obtain one or more letters of credit, lines of credit, standby bond purchase
agreements, or similar credit or liquidity facilities (a "Credit Facility') with one or more financial
institutions. The Mayor or an Authorized Offlcer is hereby authorized to enter into a
reimbursement agreement and/or standby bond purchase agreement and to execute and issue
a promissory note in connection with the provisions of each Credit Facility. Any Credit Facility,
reimbursement agreement or standby bond purchase agreement shall be in substantially the
form of the credit facilities, reimbursement agreements and standby bond purchase agreements
previously entered into by the City in connection with the sale of general obligation bonds or
notes, but with such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized-Officer executing the same
shall determine are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or an Authorized
Officer to evidence the City Council's approval of all such revisions. The annual fee paid to any
financial institution that provides a Credit Facility with respect to all or a portion of a series of the
Bonds shall not exceed three percent of the average principal amount of such Bonds
outstanding during such annual period. The final fomn of any reimbursement agreement and/or
standby bond purchase agreement entered into by the City with respect' to the Bonds shall be
attached to the notification of sale filed in the office of the City Clerk pursuant to this section.
Each such promissory note shall be a general obligation of the City for the payment of which,
both principal and interest, the City pledges its full faithj credit and resources. Each promissory
note, and any Bond owned or held as collateral by any such financial institution in its capacity as
a provider of a Credit Facility shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding 15 percent per annum
and shall mature not later than the final maturity date of the related Bonds secured by such
reimbursement agreement or standby bond purchase agreement. The Mayor or an Authorized
Officer is hereby authorized to execute and deliver any such reimbursement agreement or
standby bond purchase agreement, and any amendment thereto or replacement thereof, under
the seal of the City affixed and attested by the City Clerk.
In the event that Bonds are sold so as lo require the levy of taxes for any year specified
in Section 7 hereof for the purpose of making the payments described in clauses (i). (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of the first paragraph of Seciion 7 hereof in an amount less than the amount specified for
such year in the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, then an Authorized Officer shall, on or prior
lo March 31 (or such earlier date as may be required by law) of the calendar year next

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-31-

 succeeding such year, notify the City Council of the determination made pursuant to clauses (a)
and (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof regarding the application of any resulting
excess levy collections, and. in addition, in connection with a determination made pursuant to
clause (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, an Authorized Officer shall file in the
respective offices of the County Clerks certificates of tax abatement for such year. In the event
that upon the final sale of the Bonds of all series, such Bonds have been sold so as to require
the levy of taxes in any year specified in Section 7 hereof for the purpose of making the
payments described in clauses (i), (ii). (iii) and (iv) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof iri
an amount less than the amount specified for such year in Section 7 hereof, then there shall be
included, in the final nolificatiori of sale to the City Council described below in this Section 12.
the detemination made pursuant to clauses (a) and (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7
hereof regarding the application of any resulting excess levy collections for such year and any
succeeding year and, in addition, in connection with a detennination made pursuant to
clause (b) of the first paragraph of Section 7 hereof, an .Authorized Officer shall file in the
respective offices of the County Clerks certificates of tax abatement for such year or years. If
any of the Bonds are not to be sold and issued as provided herein and no levy collections are to
be applied for the purposes of paying the costs of Ongoing Financing Services as determined
by an Authorized Offlcer, the corresponding taxes herein levied to pay debt service thereon
shall be abated in full. Any certificate of abatement, delivered pursuant to this paragraph shall
refer to the amount of taxes levied pursuant to Section 7 hereof shall indicate the arinount of
reduction in the amount of taxes levied by the City resulting from the sale or sales of the Bonds
or the non-issuance thereof, which reduced amount is to be abated from such taxes, and, shall
further indicate the remainder of such taxes which is to be extended for collection by said
County Clerks.
The preparation, use and distribution of a preliminary official statement, an official
statement or any other disclosure document relating to each sale and issuance of Ihe Bonds are
hereby ratified and approved. The Mayor and each Authorized Officer are each hereby
authorized lo execute and deliver an official statement or other disclosure document relating to
each sale and issuance of the Bonds on behalf pf the City. The preliminary official statement,
official statement and other disclosure documents herein aulhorized shall be substantially
similar to those previously used for general obligation bonds of the City, and shall contain the
terms and provisions of the Bonds, the manner in which the Bonds shall be sojd. the use of
proceeds of the Bonds, financial inforrnation for the City, and such other information as the
Mayor or any Authorized Officer determines to be advisable under the circumstances.
Subsequent to the sale of any series of Bonds or, in the case of the Retail Bonds,
subsequent to the sale of all Bonds that are the subject of a Selling Agent Agreement, an
Authorized Officer shall file in the office of the City Clerk a notification of sale directed to the City
Council setting forth (i) the series designation, the aggregate principal amounl and authorized
denominations of, maturity schedule and redemption provisions for the Bonds sold, (ii) the
principal amounts of the Bonds sold as Current Interest Bonds, Capital Appreciation Bonds,
Convertible Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respectively, and whether any of the Bonds are
sold as Retail Bonds, (iii) in the case of the sale of the Retail Bonds or Direct Purchase Bonds,
the principal amounts of such Bonds sold as Current Interest Bonds, Capitalized Appreciation

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-32-

 Bonds, Convertible Bonds and Variable Rate Bonds, respectively, (iv) in the case of Bonds sold
as Capital Appreciation Bonds, (A) the Original Principal Amounts of and Yields to Maturity on
the Capital-Appreciation Bonds being sold and (B) a table of Compound Accreted Values per
minimum authorized Compound Accreted Value at maturity for any Capital Appreciation Bonds
being sold, setting forth the Compound Accreted Value of each such Capital Appreciation Bond
on each serniannual compounding date, (v) the inlerest rates on the Current Inlerest Bonds sold
or, in the case of Variable Rate Bonds, a description of the method of determining the interest
rate applicable to such Variable Rate Bonds from time to time, (vi) the specific maturities, series
and amounts of the Outstanding Indebtedness to be refunded with proceeds of the Bonds,
(vii) a description of any Existing Interesl Rate Exchange Agreements to be terminated,
amended or otherwise modified in connedion with the refunding of such Outstanding
Indebtedness and identifying any settlement, breakage or termination amburit to be paid in
conriection with each such termination, amendment or modification, (viii) the date on and price
at which the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding shall be redeemed (if such
redemption shall occur prior to stated maturity or pursuant to mandatory sinking fund
redemption), (ix) the disposition of the taxes levied for the years from and after 2012 for the
payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness or any Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreements
as authorized by Section 15 hereof, (x) the identity of the insurer or insurers issuing the
insurance policy or policies, if any. referred to below, and the identity oif the provider or providers
of one or more Credit Facilities, if any, for such Bonds, (xi) Uie identity ofthe Underwriters (or. in
the case of Retail Bonds, the Selling Agents and in the case of Direct Purchase Bonds, the
Direct Purchasers) selected for such Bonds, (xii) the identity of the applicable Bond Registrar
and any trustee or trustees selected by an Authorized Officer for such Bonds, (xiii) the identity of
any remarketing agent retained in: connection with the issuance of Variable Rate Bonds, if any.
(xiv) the compensation paid to the Underwriters (or, in the case of Retail Bonds, the Selling
Agents) in connection with such sale, (xv) the identity of any Refunding Escrow Agent (as
defined in Section 13(b) hereof) appointed by an Authorized Offlcer in conriection with the
refunding of Outstanding Indebtedness, and (xvi) any other matter authorized by this Ordinance
to be determined by an Authorized Officer at the time of the sale of the Bonds of each series.
In connection with any sale of the Bonds, an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to
execute and deliver one or more Continuing Disclosure Undertakings (each a 'Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking') evidencing the City's agreement to- comply with- the requirements of
Section (b)(5) of Rule 15c2-12. adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the
'SEC') under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, in a form approved by the Corporation
Counsel. Upon its execution and delivery on behalf of the City as herein provided, each
Continuing Disclosure Undertaking will be binding on the City, and the officers, employees and
agents of the City are hereby authorized to do all such acts and things and to execute all such
documents as may be necessary to carry out and comply wilh the provisions of each Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking as executed. Either Autiiorized Officer is hereby further aulhorized to
amend each Continuing Disclosure Undertaking in accordance with its respective lerms from
time to time following its execution and delivery as said officer shall deem necessary. In
addition, an Aulhorized Officer is authorized to make all future filings with the Electronic
Municipal Market Access system operated by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board or
such other municipal securities information repository as shall be designated by the SEC, all in

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-33-

 accordance with the provisions of Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 15c2-12(b)(5)
promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this Ordinance, the sole remedies for any failure by the City to comply with any Continuing
Disclosure Undertaking shall be the ability of the beneficial owner of any applicable Bond to
seek mandamus or specific performance by court order to cause the City to comply with its
obligations under such Continuing Disclosure Undertaking.
The Bonds shall be duly prepared and executed in the form and manner provided herein
and delivered to the purchasers in accordance with the applicable terms of sale.
The Mayor, each Authorized Officer, the City Treasurer and the City Clerk are each
hereby authorized to execute and deliver such other documents and agreements (including
such contracts, such intergovemmental agreements or such grant agreements with not-for-profit
organizations, educational or cultural institutions or for-profit organizations or to assist the State
of Illinois, the United States of America, or other municipal corporations, units pf local
government or school districts in the State of Illinois, receiving proceeds of the Bonds as an
Authorized Offlcer shall deem necessary and appropriate) and perform such other acts prior to
or following the issuance of the Bonds as may be necessary or desirable in coririection with the
issuance of the Bonds and any transactions contemplated herein related to the application of
the proceeds of the Bonds or collections or application of taxes levied for the payment of the
Bonds or the Outstariding Indebtedness or other purposes hereunder, but subject to any
limilations on or restrictions of such power or authority as herein set forth, and any such actions
heretofore taken by the Mayor, an Authorized Officer, the City Treasurer or the City Clerk in
accordance with the provisions hereof are hereby ratified and approved. With respect to each
grant of Bond proceeds, each Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to designate in writing,
with Ihe written concurrence of the Budget Diredor of the City (the 'Budget Director), (i) one or
more City departments or agencies to adrninister such grant, and (ii) the head of the City
department or agency who shall be authorized to execute a grant agreemerit and such other
documents, agreements or instruments as shall be deemed necessary or desirable by such City
department or agency head. Upon any such written designation by an Authorized Officer with
respect to a grant of Bond proceeds, such City department or agency shall be aulhorized to
administer such grant and the head of such City department or agency shall be authorized to
execute a grant agreement and such other documents, agreements or instruments as such
official shall deem necessary or desirable.
Section 13.
follows:

The proceeds from the sale of any series of the Bonds shall be used as

(a)
The sum representing the accrued interest received, if any. shall be used
to pay the first interest becoming due on the Bonds sold, and to that end. shall be
deposited in the applicable Bond Fund or the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Account, if established.
(b)
From the sale proceeds derived from any such sale of a series of the
Bonds, (i) such sum as may be determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary to

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-34-

 pay not more than three years of interest on the Bonds issued to pay costs of the Project
may be used lo pay such interest, and to that end. may be deposited in the applicable
Bond Fund or the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Account, if established; (ii) the
•sum determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary to pay the costs of the Project
shall be set aside, held and invested at the direction pf an Aulhorized Officer, as
separate funds of the City pending such payment, provided that proceeds of the Bonds
issued to finance the Pension Contributions shall be paid into the Pension Funds as and
when required by law; (iii) the sum determined by an. Authorized Officer to capitalize, or
fund interest on Outstanding Indebtedness shall be deposited into the respective debt
service funds established for the Outstanding Indebtedness; (iv) the sum determined by
an Authorized Officer to be sufficient to pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being
refunded at or prior to their respective maturities, at a price of par, the applicable
redempliori premium and accrued inlerest thereon up to and including said redemption
or maturily dates shall be deposited into the respective debt service funds established
for the Outstanding Indebtedness or into one or more "Refunded Bonds Escrow
Accounts* to be held by one or more banks or trust companies to be designated by an
Authorized Officer (each a "Refunding Escrow Agent'), each pursuant to the lerms of an
escrow agreement (each a "Refunding Escrow Agreement'), and the Mayor, an
Authorized Officer and the City Clerk, or any of them, are hereby authorized to execute
and deliver each Refunding Escrow Agreement, and any amendment thereto, in such
form as the officer so executing shall deem appropriate to effect the refunding or
refundings described in this paragraph and (v) the sum, determined by ari Authorized
Officer to be sufficient to provide for the payment of any settlemenL breakage or
termination amount payable in connection with the termination, amendment or
modification of an Existing Interest Rate Exchange Agreement shall be paid to the City's
counterparty or counterparties thereunder.
Notwithstanding any provision of the
Municipal Code, investments acquired with proceeds of the Bonds or investment income
thereon may mature beyond ten years from the date of acquisition, and may include but
are not limited to agreements entered into between the City arid providers of securities
under which agreements such providers agree to purchase from or sell to the City
specified securities on specific dates at predetermined prices, all as established al the
time of execution of any such agreement and as set forth in such agreement, and
guaranteed investment contracts, forward purchase agreements and other similar
investment vehicles.
Such guaranteed investment contracts, fonward purchase
agreements and other similar investment vehicles may, to the extent permitted by
operative authorizing documents and by applicable law. be assigned or transferred from
one bond transaction to another or apply to the proceeds of more than one bond
transaction on a commingled or non-commingled basis, as determined by an Aulhorized
Offlcer. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to enter into any
amendments to or restatements of existing documents or lo execute new documents, to
consent to actions being taken by others or to obtain the consent of other parties, as
may be necessary or desirable in this respect. Investment income derived from Bond
proceeds may be (w) expended for the same purposes for which Bond proceeds may be
expended, (x) used for the payment or prepayment of City debt obligations, (y) deposited
in the Corporate Fund of the Cily or (z) rebated to the United States of America as

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-35-

 provided in Section 16 hereof, all as determined by an Authorized Officer or the Budget
Director. Any commingled investment income from guaranteed investment contracts,
forward purchase agreements and other similar investment vehicles shall be apportioned
among bond transactions as determined by an Authorized Officer or as otherwise
required by operative authorizing documents and applicable law.
(c)
From the sale proceeds of a series of the Bonds not applied as provided
in paragraphs (a) and (b), above, the amount deemed necessary by an Authorized.
Officer shall be applied to the payment of the costs of issuance of such Bonds, including
the. premium or fee for bond Insurance or other credit or liquidity enhancement, if any,
and any unexpended portion of the sale proceeds shall be paid to the City.
The costs of the Project may be paid directly by the City or may be financed by the
making of grants for the implementation of the Project to (i) not-for-profit organizations,
educational or cultural institutions or for-profit organizations, (ii) the United States of America,
(iii) the State of Illinois or (iv) other units of local government, political subdivisions, municipal
corporations or school districts in the State of Illinois, including any operating division thereof, all
as determined by an Authorized Officer.
An Authorized Officer shall report to the City Council with respect to the expenditure of
the proceeds of each series of the Bonds issued hereunder to pay the costs of the Project.
Such reports shall be made no laterthan August 1 of each year, commencing August 1, 2014,
with respect to expenditures made during the preceding calendar year. No report shall be
required hereunder following any calendar year in which no proceeds of any series of the Bonds
are expended to pay costs of the Project.
Section 14. (a) The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby authorized to execute and
deliver, with respect lo all or any portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness, the Bonds, and any
General Obligation Indebtedness (as defined below) that may be issued in the future
(collectively, "City Indebtedness"), from time to time one or more agreements, or options to
enter into such agreements, with counterparties selected by an Authorized Offlcer, the purpose
of which is to provide to the City (i) an interest rate basis, cash flow basis, or other basis
different fronri that provided in the related City Indebtedness for the payment of interest or
(ii) with respect to a future delivery of general obligation bonds, notes or commercial paper
(collectively. "General Obligalion Indebtedness"), one or more of a guaranteed interest rate,
interest rate basis, cash flow basis, or purchase price (such agreements or options to enter into
such agreements being collectively referred to as 'Interest Rate Exchange Agreements').
Interest Rate Exchange Agreements include without limitation agreements or contracts
commonly known as interest rate exchange, swaps, including forward starting swaps, collar,
caps, or derivative agreements, forward payment conversion agreements, interest rate locks,
forward bond purchase agreements, bond warrant agreements, or bond purchase option
agreements and also include agreements granting to the City or a counterparty an option to
enter into any of the foregoing and agreements or contracts providing for payments based on
levels of or changes in interest rates, including a change in an interest rate index, to exchange
cash flows or a series of payments, or to hedge payment, rate spread, or similar exposure. The

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-36-

 stated aggregate notional amount (net of offsetting transactions) under all Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements related to certain City Indebtedness shall not exceed the principal
amounl of such City Indebtedness to which such Interest Rate Exchange Agreiements relate.
For purposes of the immediately preceding sentence, "offsetting transactions" shall include any
transaction which is intended to hedge, modify or otherwise affed another outstanding
transaction or ils ecpriomic results. The offsetting transaction need not be based on the same
index or rate option as the related City Indebtedness or the transaction being offset and need
not be vvith the same counterparty as the transaction being offset. Examples of offsetting
transactions include, vyithout limitation, a floating-to-flxed rate interest rate swap being offset by
a fixed-to-floating rate interesl rate swap, and a fixed-lo-flpaling rate interest rate syvap being
offset by a floating-to-fixed rate interest rate swap or an interest rate cap or floor or a
floating-to-floating interest rate swap.
Any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement to the extent practicable shall t>e in substantially
the fbrriri of eithei- the 2002 ISDA Master Agreement or the Local Cunrency — Single Jurisdiction
version or the Multicurrency— Cross Border version of the 1992 ISDA Master Agreement
(including a Schedule and/or,a Credit Support Annex to such Schedule, if applicable) published
by ISDA or any successor form to either published by ISDA, and in the appropriate
confirmations of transactions governed by the applicable agreemeni, with such insertions,
completions and modifications thereof as shall be approved by the officer of the City executing
the same, his or her execution to constitute conclusive evidence of the City Council's approval
of such insertions, completions and modiflc:ations thereof Should any ISDA form not be the
appropriate form to accomplish the objectives of the City under this Sectiori 14, then such other
agreement as may be appropriate is hereby approved, the execution by the Mayor or an
Authorized Offlcer being conclusive evidence of the City Council's approval of such insertions,
completions and mod'ific:ations thereof Amounts payable by the City under any Interest Rate
Exchang'e Agreemerit shall (i) constitute a general obligation of the City for w/hich is pledged its
full faith and credit, (ii) be payable from a tax unlimited as to rate or amounl that may have
heretofore or shall be hereafter levied by the City Council (including, with respect only to an
Interest Rate Exchange Agreement relating to the Bonds, the lax levy described in Section 7
hereof), (iii) constitiife operating expenses of the City payable from any monies^ i^evenues,
income, assets or funds of the City available for such purpose, or (iv) constitute any combination
of (i). (ii), and (iii), all as shall be determined by an Authorized Officer. Nothing contained in this
Section 14 shall limit or restrict the authority of the Mayor or an Authorized Officer to enter into
similar agreements pursuant to prior or subsequent authorization of the City Council.
The Mayor and an Authorized Officer are hereby aulhorized to take all actions necessary
to assign, terminate, amend or modify all or a portion of any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement
upon a determination that such assignment, termination, amendment or modification is in the
best financial interest of the City. Any settlement, breakage or termination amount payable as a
result of such assignment, termination, amendment or modification may be paid from proceeds
of sale of the Bonds or General Obligation Indebtedness or from any lawfully available funds of
the City.

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)

-37-

 Any amounts received by the City pursuant to any Interest Rate Exchange Agreement
(other than regularly scheduled payment amounts) are hereby authorized to be expended for
any purpose for which the proceeds of the related City Indebtedness are authorized jo be
expended and for the payment or prepayment of any City Indebtedness, all as determined by an
Authorized Offlcer.
In addition to the foregoing, the Mayor and an Authorized Officer are heretiy authorized
to take all actions necessary to assign, terminate, amend or modify all or a portion of any
agreement of the type described herein as an Interest Rate Exchange Agreement with respect
lo any Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness upon a deterrnination that such assignment,
termination, amendment or modification is in the best financial inlerest of the City. Any
settlement, breakage or termination amount payable as a result of such assignment,
termination, amendment or modification may be paid from the sources provided for the payment
of such agreements in the proceedings authorizing the Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness to
which such agreements relate or from any other lawfully available funds of the City.
(b)
It is necessary and in the best iritei'ests of the City to avail itself of the services of
Swap Providers under the statutory and regulatory regime contained in the Dodd-Frank Act and
the CfTC Regulations and in connection therewith, in addition to the amendments to the
Municipal Code contained in Section 26 hereof, the Mayor and each Authorized Offlcer are each
hereby authorized to execute-and deliver (i) the ISDA Protocol Documentation in the form at: the
time prescribed by ISDA. which may include, among other documentation, the ISDA DF
Protocol Agreement, the ISDA DF Supplement, the ISDA DF Protocol Questionnaire and related
Addenda and (ii) one or more bilateral agreements with one or more providers of Interest Rate
Exchange Agreements (each, a 'Bilateral Agreement"), which Bilateral Agreements shall be
responsive lo the applicable provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act and the CFTC Regulati.ons and
contain provisions similar to those in the ISDA Protocol Documentation. The ISDA Protocol
Documentation and the Bilateral Agreements shall be executed in the forms as described
above, in each case with such revisions, insertions, completions and modiflcations therein as
shall be approved by the Mayor or Authorized Officer executing the same that are not
inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this Ordinance, such execution to constitute
conclusive evidence of the approval of the Mayor or Authorized Officer executing the same and
this City Council of such revisions, insertions, completions and rtiodiflcafions thereof
Section 15. The taxes levied for the years from and after 2012 for the payment of the
Outstanding Indebtedness or amounts due under any Existing Interest Rate Exchange
Agreement, to the extent the collection of such taxes is not necessary for the payment of all or a
portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof or for the payment of
amounts due under an Existing Interesl Rate Exchange Agreemeni due to the termination of
such Existing Inlerest Rate Exchange Agreement as authorized hereiri or pursuant to any other
authorization, may, at the direction of an Authorized Offlcer, be applied (A) as set forth in the
next paragraph or (B) to any other lawful public purpose of the City designated by the City
Council including (i) the purposes set forth in clauses (i), (ii). (iii). (iv), (v) and (vi) of the first
paragraph of Section 7 of this Ordinance, (ii) the payment of the costs of any capital projects for
which funds have been lawrfully appropriated or (iii) the abatement of such taxes. There shall be

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)
-38-

 prepared by an Authorized Offlcer and filed with the County Clerks a certificate of reduction of
taxes heretofore levied for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness selected for refunding
by an Authorized Offlcer as provided in Sections 12 and 13 hereof and directing the abatement
of the taxes heretofore levied to pay the Outstanding Indebtedness being refunded, including
the taxes levied for the years from and after 2012, if so detemnined by an Authorized Officer as
provided in the preceding sentence. In addition, any proce.eds of the Outstanding Indebtedness
being held for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness, to the extent such proceeds are
not necessary for the payment of the Outstanding Indebtedness due to the refunding thereof as
authorized herein or pursuant to any other authorization, may, at the direction of an Authorized
Offlcer, be applied to any lawful public purpose of the City designated by the City Council,
including the payment of the Bonds (but in the case of Bonds Ihe interest on which is excluded
from gross income for federal income tax purposes, only upon receipt by the City of an opinion
of Bond Counsel to the effed that such will not adversely affect the tax-exempt status of the
Bonds).
Furthermore, notwithstanding any other provision hereof, taxes levied for the years 2012
to 2014, inclusive, for the payment of Outstanding Indebtedness, to the extent the collection of
such taxes is not necessary for the payment of all or .a portion of the Outstanding Indebtedness
due to the refunding thereof with the proceeds of the Bonds may. in addition to the other
purposes set forth above, be applied to the payment of the principal of and interest due on
General Obligation Commercial Paper Notes due on or before January 31, 26^7, at the direction
of an Authorized Offlcer. Any diredions or determinations by an Authorized Officer pursuant to
this paragraph shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than the date »levy is applied to the
payment of commercial paper as provided herein.
Section 16. The City covenants that it will take no action in the investment of the
proceeds of the Bonds (other than Bonds issued as bonds the interesl on which is not
excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes) which
would result in making the interest payable on any of such Bonds subject to federal income
taxes by reason of such Bonds being classified as "arbitrage bonds" within the meaning of
Section 148 ofthe Code.
The City further covenants that it will act with respect to the proceeds of Bonds (other
than Bonds issued as bonds the interesl on which is not excludable from the gross income of
the owner thereof for federal income tax purposes), the earnings on the proceeds of such Bonds
and ariy other moneys on deposit in any fund or account maintained in respect of such Bonds,
including, if necessary, a rebate of such earnings to the United States of America, in a manner
which would cause the interest on such Bonds to continue to be exempt from federal income
taxation under Section 103(a) of the Code.
Each Authorized Offlcer is hereby authorized to execute such certifications, tax returns,
covenants and agreements as shall be necessary, in the opinion of nationally recognized bond
counsel, or in the best interest of the City, as determined by an Authorized Offlcer. to evidence
the City's compliance with the covenanis contained in this section. Each Authorized Officer is

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-39-

 hereby authorized to execute one or more declarations of intent to reimburse costs of the
Project in accordance with the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder.
Section 17. This Ordinance is prepared in accordance with the powers of the City as a
home rule unit under Article Vll of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. The appropriate officers of the
City are hereby authorized to take such actions and do such things as shall be necessary to
perform, carry ouL give effect to and consummate the transactions contemplated by this
Ordinance and the Bonds, including, but not limited to. the exercise following the delivery date
of any pf the Bonds of any power or authority delegated to such official of the City under this
Ordinance with respect to the Bonds upon the initial issuance thereof, but subject lo any
limitations on or restrictions of such power or authorily as herein set forth, and any actions
heretofore taken by such officers of the City in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby ratified and approved.
Section 18. The Mayor and each Authorized Officer may each designate another to act
as their respective proxy and, as applicable, to affix their respective signatures to the Bonds
whether in temporary or definitive form, and any other instrument, certificate or document
required to be signed by the Mayor or an Authorized Officer pursuant to this Ordinance and any
instrument, certificate or document required thereby. In such case, each shall send to the City
Council written notice of the person so designated by each, such notice slating the name of the
person so selected and identifying the instruments, certificates and documents which such
person shall be authorized to sign as proxy for the Mayor and each Authorized Officer,
respectively. A written signature of the Mayor or of an Authorized Officer; respectively,
executed by the person so designated underneath, shall be attached to each notice. Each
notice, with the signatures attached, shall be recorded in the Journal of Proceedings of the City
Council for such date and filed in the offlce of the City Clerk. When the signature of the Mayor
is placed on an instrument, certiflcate or document at the direction of the Mayor in the specifled
nnanner. the same, in all respects, shall be as binding on the City as if signed by the Mayor in
person. When the signature of an Authorized Officer is so affixed to an instrumenL certiflcate or
document at the direction of such Authorized Officer, the same, in all respects, shall be as
binding on the City as if signed by such Authorized Officer in person.
Section 19. If requested by the Bond Registrar, the Mayor, each Authorized Officer and
the City Clerk are each authorized to execute the standard form of agreement between the City
and the Bond Registrar with respect to the obligations and duties thereof
Section 20. If payment or provision for payment is made, to or for the registered
owners of all or a portion of the Bonds, of the Compound Accreted Value of any Capital
Appreciation Bond and the principal of and interest due and to become due on any Current
Interest Bond or Variable Rate Bond at the times and in the manner stipulated therein, and there
is paid or caused to be paid to the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax
Escrow Agent as provided in Section 9 hereof or such bank or trust company as shall be
designated by an Authorized Officer (such bank or trust company hereinafter referred to as a
"Defeasance Escrow Agent'), all sums of money due and to become due according to the
provisions hereof, then these presents and the estate and rights hereby granted shall cease,

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-40-

 terminate and be void as to those Bonds or portions thereof except for purposes of registration,
transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations. Any
Bond shall be deemed to be paid within the meaning of this section when payment of the
Compound Accreted Value of any such Capital Appreciation Bond or the principal of any such
Current Interest Bond, plus interest thereori to the due date thereof (whether such due date be
by reason of maturity or upon redemption as provided in this Ordinance or otherwise), either
(a) shall have been made or caused to have been made in accordance with the terms thereof,
or (b) shall haye been provided for by irrevocably depositing with the applicable Bond Registrar,
the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent as provided in Section 9 hereof or a Defeasance
Escrow Agent, in trust and exclusively for such payment, (1) moneys sufficient to make such
payment or (2)(A) direct obligations of the United States of America; (B) obligations of agencies
of the United States of America, the timely payment of principal of and interest on which are
guaranteed by the United States of America; (C) obligations of the following agencies: Federal
Home Loan Mortgage Corp. (FHLMC) debt obligations. Farm Credit System (formeriy: Federal
Land Banks, Federal Intermediate Credit Banks, and Banks for Cooperatives) debt obligations.
Federal Home Loan Banks (FHL Banks) debt obligations, Fannie Mae debt obligations.
Financing Corp. (FICO) debt obligations, Resolution Funding Corp. (REFCORP) debt
obligations, and U.S. Agency for International Development (U.S. A.I.D.) Guaranteed notes;
(D) pre-refunded municipal obligations deflned.as follows: any bonds or olher obligations: of any
state of the United States of America or of any agency", instrumentality or local govemmental
unit of any such state which are not callable at the option of the obligor prior to maturity or as to
which irrevocable instructions have been given by the obligor to call on the date specified in the
notice; or (E) instruments evidencing an ownership interest in obligations described in the
preceding clauses (A), (B) and (C). or (3) a combination of the investments described in
clauses (1.) and (2) above, such amounts so deposited being available or maturing as to
principal and interest in such amounts and at such times, without consideration of any
reinvestment thereof, as, will insure the availability of sufficient moneys to make such payment
(all as confirmed by a nationally recognized Arm of independent public accountants). At such
times as a Bond shall be deemed to be paid hereunder, as aforesaid, it shall no longer be
secured by or entitled to the benefits of this Ordinance, except for the purposes of registration,
transfer and exchange of Bonds and any such payment from such moneys or obligations.
No such deposit under this section shall be made or accepted hereunder and no use
made, of any such deposit unless, in the case of Bonds (other than Bonds issued as bonds the
interest on which is not excludable from the gross income of the owner thereof for federal
income tax purposes), the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow
Agent or the applicable Defeasance Escrow Agent, as the case may be, shall have received an
opinion of nationally recognized municipal bond counsel to. the effect that such deposit and use
would not cause any of such Bonds to be treated as "arbitrage bonds" within the meaning of
Section 148 of the Code or any successor provision thereto.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit a defeasance deposit of escrow securities as
provided in this section or a defeasance deposit with respect lo the Outstanding Indebtedness
pursuant to any Refunding Escrow Agreemeni authorized by Section 13(b) hereof, from being
subject to a subsequent sale of such escrow securities and reinvestment of all or a portion of

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-41-

 the proceeds of that sale in escrow securities which, together with money to remain so held in
trust, shall be sufficient to provide for payment of principal, redemption premium, if any, and
interest on any of the defeased Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness, as appropriate. Amounts
held by the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, any
Defeasance Escrow Agent or any Refunding Escrow Agent in excess of the amounts needed so
to provide for payment of the. defeased Bonds or Outstanding Indebtedness, as appropriate,
may be subject to withdrawal by the City. The Mayor or an Authorized Officer is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver from time to tihne one or more agreements (and amendments
thereto) wilh counterparties selected by an Authorized Offlcer. with respect to the investment
and use of such excess amounts held by the applicable Bond Registrar, the applicable Ad
Valorem Tax Escrow Agent, a Defeasance Escrow Agent or a Refunding Escrow Agent.
Section 21.
Notwithslanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, the terms and
provisions of the tmst indenture securing a series of Variable Rate Bonds as authorized in
Section 2 hereof with respect to (a) the authentication, registration, fi-ansfer and destrudion or
loss of such Variable Rate Bonds, (b) subject to the limitation on redemption price set forth in
Section 3(d) hereof, the redemjjtion of such Variable Rate Bonds, or (c), the method of payment
or defeasance of such Variable Rate Bonds, shall apply to such Variable Rate Bonds issued
pursuant to this Ordinance. Wilh respect to the Direct Purchase Bonds, an Authorized Offlcer is
authorized to negotiate the lerms and provisions of such Direct Purchase Bonds in addition lo or
as an alternative to the terms .and provisions ofthe trust indenture securing a series, of Variable
Rate Bonds.
Section 22. Any series of the Bonds, the Outstanding Indebtedness or the Outstanding
Revenue Indebtedness may be restructured in a manner authorized by the Mayor or an
Authorized Offlcer, including but not limiied to (a) terminating credit enhancement or liquidity
facilities for a series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness, (b) replacing credit enhancement or liquidity facilities for a series of Bonds,
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness with similar credit
enharicement or liquidity from a different provider, (c) replacing credit enhancement or liquidity
facilities for a series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness with different forms of credit enhancement or liquidity frpm the same or a different
provider, (d) adding additional credit enhancement or liquidity supplemental to that securing a
series of Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness,
(e) removing or amending provisions for a series of Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness, or in flnaricing documents related thereto, to or for the
benefit of credit enhancers or liquidity providers or adding provisions for the benefit of new or
replacement credit enhancers or liquidity providers, (0 replacing an existing remarketing agent
or remariceting agents for Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue
Indebtedness with a remarketing agenl or remarketing agents selected by an Authorized Officer
or assigning an existing remarketing agreement to a remarketing agent or remarketing agents
selected by an Authorized Offlcer. (g) converting to or adding a different interest rale mode or
modes under the documents pursuant to which such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness were issued, (h) adding a floating rate note (FRN) mode to
any document pursuant to which such Bonds. Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-42-

 Revenue Indebtedness were issued or refunding such Bonds, Outstanding Indebtedness or
Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness using an FRN structure, or (i) selling or remarketing
Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness pursuant to a direct purchase
arrangement to one or more purchasers selected by an Authorized Offlcer either at par or with a
discount or premium, subject to any limitations or restrictions with respect to such actions being
taken contained in this Ordinance with respect to the Bonds or an ordinance pursuant to which
such Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued, but
provided, that if determined by an Authorized Officer to be necessary to achieve the financial
interests of the City, such limitations or restrictions contained in an ordinance pursuant to which
such Outstanding Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness was issued may be
exceeded, but not in excess of the comparable limitations set forth in this Ordinance. The
Mayor or an Authorized Offlcer is; hereby authorized to enter into any amendments to or
restatements of existing documents or to execute new documents, to consent lo actions being
taken by others or to obtain the consent of other parties, and to cause to be prepared such
remarketing documents, including disdosure documents, as may be necessary or desirable to
effect any such debt restructuring and facilitate the remarketing of the Bonds, Outstanding
Indebtedness or Outstanding Revenue Indebtedness, and to pay the fees, costs and expenses
relating thereto, as the Mayor or an Authorized Offlcer executing the same determines is
necessary and desirable, the execution thereof by the Mayor or an Authorized Officer to
evidence the City Council's, approval of all such amendments.
Sedion 23. Any funds heretofore or hereafter received by the City, pursuant to any
Interest Rate Exchange Agreement and in connection with .Outstanding Indebtedness, are
hereby authorized to be expended for the payment or prepayment of any City Indebtedness;
provided however, notwithstanding the foregoing, such authorization shall not apply to any
funds the expenditure of which shall have been heretofore authorized by other applicable law.
Section 24. To provide increased flnancial flexibility and protedion to the City in
connection with Finaricing Transactions, the Mayor and each Authorized Offlcer are each
hereby authorized lo obtain one or more letters of credit, lines of credit, loan payment
undertaking agreements or other forms of flnancial security or credit enhancement to secure
payment of amounts due from the Cily in connection with each such Financing Transaction,
including payment of any purchase option price (each such document, instrument or form of
flnancial security or credit enhancement being hereinafter referred to as a "Financing Credit
Facility") with one or more flnancial institutions. The Mayor and each Authorized Officer are
each hereby authorized to enter into one or more reimbursement agreements (each, a
"Financing Reimbursement Agreement") and to execute and issue orie or more promissory
notes (each a "Financing Note") in connection with such Financing Credit Facilities. Any
Financing Credit Facility, Financing Reimbursement Agreement or Financing Note shall be in
substantially the form of the credit facilities, reirnbursement agreements and promissory notes,
respectively, previously entered into by the City in connection with existing Financing
Transactions, existing lines of credit secured by the City or the sale of general obligation bonds
or notes by the City, but with such revisions in text as the Mayor or an Authorized Officer
executing the same shall defermirie are necessary or desirable, the execution thereof by the
Mayor or an Authorized Offlcer to evidence the City Council's approval of all such revisions.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-43-

 The annual fee paid to any flnancial institution that provides a Financing Credit Facility shall not
exceed three percent of the principal amount of the Financing Credit Facility outistanding during
such annual period. The final fonm of any Financing Credit Facility, Financing Reimbursement
Agreement or Financing Note entered into by the City pursuant to this paragraph shall be tiled in
the offliie of the City Clerk. The payment obligation of the City (each, a "Financing Payment
Obligation") in connection with any Financing Credit Facility, Financing Reimbursement
Agreement or Financing Note shall be a general obligation of the City for the payment of which,
both principal and interest, the City pledges its full faith, credit and resources: Eac:h such
Financing Payment Obligation shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding 18 percent per annum
and shall mature not later than the fortieth anniversary of the final date of payment by the City
under the related Financing Transaction (including the payment of any purchase option price).
The Mayor and each Authorized Offlcer are each hereby authorized to execute and deliver any
such Financing Credit Facility. Financing Reimbursemenl Agreement or Financing Note, and
any amendment thereto or replacement thereof, under the seal of the City affixed and attested
by the City Clerk. In connection with any Financing Transaction, the Mayor and each
Authorized Officer are each hereby authorized to retain one or more financial institutions to act
as paying agent on behalf of the City. The City shall appropriate or otherwise provide amounts
sufficient to pay when due all Financing Payment Obligations, and the City hereby covenanis to
take timely adion as required by law to carry out the provisions of this paragraph, but, if for any
such year il fails to do so, this Ordinance shall constitute a continuing appropriation ordinance of
such amounts without any further action on the part of the City Council.
Section 25.
as follows:

Section 3 of the 2002 Ordinance is hereby .amended in its entirety to read

Seciion 3. Maximum Amount and Term. Without further authorization of this City
Council, the maximum aggregate principal amount of all Authorized Debt outstanding
under this ordinance at any time shall not exceed One Billion Dollars ($1,000,000,000)
(exclusive of unpaid interest and fees). All Authorized Debt shall mature on or prior to
January 1. 2032.
Section 26. Section 2-32-031 of the Municipal Code is hereby amended by deleting the
language stricken through and by inserting the language underscored, as follows:
2-32-031 Debt Management Policies; retention of rebate calculation agents,
financial advisors anri-flualified independent representatives.
{a) The chief flnancial officer and the comptroller shall each have
authority to retain, in connection with debt obligations issued by the City, such
rebate calculation agents as either such offlcer may deem necessary or desirable
in order for such debt obligations lo comply with applicable requirements of the
Internal Revenue Code. As-usod in this sedion, the torm-^chief-financial-offioef^
steH-moan the chiof financial offlcer of the City ap)pointed-by4t^

General Obligalion Bonds ordinance (final)
-44-

 Lb) The chief f\nancia\ officer shall have authority_.t.o_.f^Mn.Jn connectioil
with flnancial products and_debt obligations purchased, entered into and/oi
js_sued by the City, such advisors to provide structuring, timing and related advice
for such financial products and debt obligations, as deemed necessary, in
compliance with the applicable requirements of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act Public Law 111-203. and the regulations
in connection therewith.
j(c) The chief financial officer shall have aulhority to retain^irLCjinnecttoD
with debt obligaliP-DS issued bv the Citv, such qualified independent
cepLesentatives for selecting, retaining and moriitorinq the performance of the
City's interest rate exchange agreements, as deemed necessary or desirable in
order for such interest rate exchange agreements to comply with applicable
requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act and the regulations in connedion therewith.
As used in this section, "interest rate exchange_a^[e^m6rits'' shall mean those
certain interest rate exchange aoreements entered into pursuant to an ordinance
oLthe citVLCOjincil authorizing the issuance of a_sen.es of borids^
(d) The chief financial officer shall have authority to adopt written policies
which shall address the managemej3.t_gf_the city's bond, nole and_QtbejLdebt
issuances, including the entering into of interest rate exchange aqreemenLs_and
hiring of advisors in connedion therewith. The chief financial officer may amend
such written policies from time to time. Copies of each such written policy and
any amendments thereLo shall be kept on file with the comptroller.
Section 27. To the extent that any ordinance, resolution, rule, order or provision of the
Municipal Code, or part thereof, is in conflict vyith the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions
of this Ordinance shall be controlling. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision
shall not aft'ect any of the other provisions of this Ordinance. No provision of the Municipal
Code or violation of any provision of the Municipal Code shall be deemed to render voidable at
the option of the City any document, instrument or agreement authorized hereunder or to impair
the validity of this Ordinance or the insti"uments authorized by this Ordinance or to impair the
rights of the owners of the Bonds to receive payment of the priricipal'of or interest on the Bonds
or to impair the security for the Bonds; provided further that the foregoing shall not be deemed
to affect the availability of any olher remedy or penalty for any violation of any provision of the
Municipal Code.
Seciion 28. This Ordinance shall be published by the City Clerk, by causing to be
printed in special pamphlet form at least five copies hereof, which copies are to be made
available in her office for public inspection and distribution to members of the public who may
wish to avail themsetves of a copy of this Ordinance.
Seciion 29. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption,
approval by the Mayor and publication as provided herein.

General Obligation Bonds ordinance (final)

-45-

  .arrwuaw?o

 
 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT 

REVOLVING LINE OF CREDIT AGREEMENT

Execution Copy

REVOLVING LINE OF CREDIT AGREEMENT

between

CITY OF CHICAGO

and

JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, as Bank
dated as of April 25, 2014

 TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE I DEFINITIONS
Section
Section
Section
Section

1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04

Definitions
Interpretation
Accounting Matters
Classification of Loans

1
10
11
11

ARTICLE II THE FACILITY
Section 2.01
Section 2.02
Section 2.03
Section 2.04
Section 2.05
Section 2.06
Section 2.07
Section 2.08
Section 2.09
Section 2.10
Section 2.11
Section 2.12
Section 2.13
Section 2.14
Section 2.15
Section 2.16
Section 2.17
Section 2.18
Section 2.19
Section 2.20

Commitment
Loans
Requests for Borrowings
Funding of Loans
Interest Elections
Termination and Reduction of Commitment
Repayment of Loans; Evidence of Debt
Prepayment of Loans
Fees
Interest
Alternate Rate of Interest
Net of Taxes, Etc
Increased Costs
Break Funding Payments
Maximum Rate
Tax Event
Source of Payments
Electronic Transmissions
Term Out
Extension of Commitment Maturity Date

;

11
11
12
13
13
13
13
14
14
15
15
16
17
18
19
19
20
20
20
20

ARTICLE III REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE CITY
Section 3.01

Representations of the City

21

ARTICLE IV COVENANTS OF THE CITY
Section 4.01

Covenants ofthe City

24

ARTICLE V CONDITIONS PRECEDENT
Section 5.01
Section 5.02
Section 5.03
Section 5.04

Conditions to Effective Date
Conditions Precedent to Each Loan
Conditions Precedent to Term Loan
Condition Precedent to Tax-Exempt Loan

27
28
28
28

ARTICLE VI EVENTS OF DEFAULT; REMEDIES
Section 6.01

Events of Default

29

(i)

 Section 6.02

Remedies

30

ARTICLE VII MISCELLANEOUS
Section 7.01
Section 7.02
Section 7.03
Section 7.04
Section 7.05
Section 7.06
Section 7.07
Section 7.08
Section 7.09
Section 7.10
Section 7.11
Section 7,12
Section 7.13
Section 7.14

Changes to Agreement
Successors and Assigns
Goveming Law; Waiver of Jury Trial
Notice
Obligations Absolute
Holidays
Survival
Liability of the Bank
Certain Costs; Indemnification
Counterparts
Severability
Headings
Dissemination of Information
USA PATRIOT Act

LIST OF EXHIBITS:
Exhibit A - Form of Loan Note
Exhibit B - Form of Borrowing Request
Exhibit C- Form of Reallocation of Commitment Notice

(ii)

31
31
32
32
33
33
33
33
34
35
35
35
35
35

 REVOLVING LINE OF CREDIT AGREEMENT
THIS REVOLVING LINE OF CREDIT AGREEMENT dated as of April 25, 2014 (this
"Agreement"), is between the CITY OF CHICAGO, a municipal corporation and home rule unit
of local govemment organized and existing under the Constitution and laws of the State of
Illinois (the "City"), and JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, a
national banking association organized and existing under the laws of the United States of
America (the "Bank").
In consideration of the premises and of the mutual covenants herein contained, and
intending to be legally bound hereby, the parties hereto hereby covenant and agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS
Section 1.01 Definitions. The following capitalized terms have the meanings indicated
below unless the context shall clearly indicate otherwise.
"ABR". when used in reference to any Loan, shall refer to whether such Loan is bearing
interest at a rate determined by reference to the Alternate Base Rate.
"Adjusted LIBO Rate" means, with respect to any Eurodollar Loan for an Interest Period,
an interest rate per annum (rounded upwards, if necessary, to the next 1/16 of 1%) equal to (a)
the LIBO Rate for such Interest Period multiplied by (b) the Statutory Reserve Rate.
"Affiliate" means, with respect to any Person, any Person that directly or indirectly
through one or more intermediaries, controls, or is controlled by, or is under common control
with, such first Person. A Person shall be deemed to control another Person for the purposes of
this definition if such first Person possesses, directly or indirectly, the power to direct, or cause
the direction of, the management and policies of the second Person, whether through the
ownership of voting securities, common directors, trustees or officers, by contract or otherwise.
"Agreement" means this Revolving Line of Credit Agreement, as amended, modified or
supplemented from time to time.
"Ahemate Base Rate" means, for any day, the highest of (a) the Prime Rate plus one-half
of one percent (0.5%), or (b) the Federal Funds Rate plus one percent (1.0%). Each change in
the Alternate Base Rate shall take effect at the fime of such change in the Prime Rate or the
Federal Funds Rate, as the case may be. Each determinafion of the Altemate Base Rate by the
Bank will be conclusive and binding on the City, absent manifest error.
"Amortization Commencement Date" means, with respect to the Term Loan, the first
Business Day of the January or July immediately following the date that is one hundred and
twenty (120) days from the Term Loan Conversion Date; provided, however, that an
Amortization Commencement Date shall occur only i f the conditions precedent set forth in
Section 5.03 of this Agreement are satisfied on the Term Loan Conversion Date.

 "Amortization End Date" means, with respect to the Term Loan, the earliest to occur of
(a) the third (3'^'') anniversary of the Term Loan Conversion Date, or (b) the date on which a
Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing or that the representations and
warranties ofthe City contained in Article IV hereof are no longer true and correct in all material
respects.
"Amortization Payment Date" means, with respect to the Term Loan, (a) the
Amortization Commencement Date and each first Business Day of each sixth month thereafter
occurring prior to the Amortization End Date, and (b) the Amortization End Date.
"Anti-Corruption Laws" means all laws, rules, and regulations of any jurisdiction
applicable to the City from time to time conceming or relating to bribery or corrupfion relating to
the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting of any item of value for the purpose of influencing
the action of an official or director in the discharge of his or her public or legal duties.
"Applicable Rate" means, for any day, with respect to any Tax-Exempt Loan or Taxable
Loan, as the case may be, or with respect to the Commitment Fee payable under this Agreement,
the applicable rate per aimum set forth below under the caption "Applicable Margin for TaxExempt Loans," "Applicable Margin for Taxable Loans", or "Commitment Fee Rate", as the
case may be, based upon the Ratings applicable on such date to the Parity Debt:

Level

Moody's

Standard
& Poor's

I
II

Baal or
above
Baa2

BBB-t- or
above
BBB

Fitch
BBB+
or
above
BBB

Applicable
Margin for
TaxExempt
Loans

Applicable
Margin for
Taxable
Commitment Fee
Loans
Rate

Any change in the Commitment Fee Rate, the Applicable Margin for Tax-Exempt Loans
or the Applicable Margin for Taxable Loans resulting fi"om a change in a Rating shall be and
become effective as of and on the date of the announcement of the change in such Rating.
References to Ratings above are references to rating categories as presently determined by the
Rating Agencies and, in the event of adoption of any new or changed rating system by any such
Rating Agency, each of the Ratings from the Rating Agency in question referred to above shall
be deemed to refer to the rating category under the new rating system which most closely
approximates the applicable rating category as currently in effect. In the event of a split Rating
(i.e., one or more ofthe foregoing Ratings are at different levels than the Rating(s) ofthe other
Rating Agency(ies)), the lowest Rating shall govem for purposes of determining the applicable

' In the event that the Margin Rate Factor shall be changed, the Applicable Margin for Tax-Exempt Loans shall be
adjusted on the effective date of such change without notice to the City, which notice is hereby waived.

 Commitment Fee Rate, the Applicable Margin for Tax-Exempt Loans or the Applicable Margin
for Taxable Loans.
"Availability Period" means the period from and including the Effective Date to but
excluding the earlier of the Commitment Maturity Date and the date of termination of the
Commitment.
"Authorized Officer" means the Chief Financial Officer or the City Comptroller.
"Bank" has the meaning given that term in the preamble to this Agreement and shall
include all successors and assigns.
"Beneficial Owner" has the meanings set forth in Section 2.16(a).
"Board" means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System of the United
States of America.
"Borrowing Request" has the meanings set forth in Section 2.03.
"Business Day" means any day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or other day on which
commercial banks in New York City arc authorized or required by law to remain closed;
provided that, when used in connection with a Eurodollar Loan, the term "Business Day" shall
also exclude any day on which banks are not open for dealings in dollar deposits in the London
interbank market.
"Change of Law" means the occurrence, after the date of this Agreement, of (a) the
adoption or taking effect of any law, rule, regulation or treaty, (b) any change in any law, rule,
regulation or treaty or in the administration, interpretation or application thereof by any
Govemmental Authority or (c) compliance by the Bank (or by any lending office of the Bank or
by such Bank's holding company, if any) with any request, guideline or directive (whether or not
having the force of law) of any Govemmental Authority made or issued after the date of this
Agreement; provided that, notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, (x) the Dodd-Frank
Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and all requests, rules, guidelines,
requirements and directives thereunder or issued in coimection therewith and (y) all requests,
rules, guidelines or directives promulgated by the Bank for International Settlements, the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (or any successor or similar authority) or the United States
or foreign regulatory authorities, in each case pursuant to Basel III, shall be deemed to be a
"Change of Law", regardless of the date enacted, adopted, issued or implemented.
"City" has the meaning given that term in the preamble to this Agreement.
"City Council" means the City Council of the City, or any succeeding goveming or
legislative body of the City.
"Code" means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time,

 "Commitment" means, with respect to the Bank, the commitment of the Bank lo make
Loans hereunder, as such commitment may be reduced from time to time pursuant to the terms
of this Agreement. The initial amount of the Bank's Commitment is $200,000,000.
"Commitment Fee" has the meaning given that term in Section 2.09(a).
"Commitment Maturity Date" means April 25, 2016.
"Default" means any condition or event which with the giving of notice or lapse of time
or both would, unless cured or waived, become an Event of Default.
"Default Rate" means (a) with respect to any Eurodollar Loan, (i) through the last day of
the then applicable Interest Period, the applicable Adjusted LIBO Rate plus the Applicable
Margin for Tax-Exempt Loans (if the respective Loan is a Tax-Exempt Loan) or the Applicable
Margin for Taxable Loans (if the respective Loan is a Taxable Loan) plus three percent (3%) and
(ii) thereafter, the Default Rate applicable to an ABR Loan; provided, however, that the Default
Rate shall never exceed the Maximum Rate; and (b) with respect to any ABR Loan, a fluctuating
interest rate per annum equal to the greater of (i) the sum of the Altemate Base Rate from time to
time in effect plus the Applicable Margin for Tax-Exempt Loans (if the respective Loan is a TaxExempt Loan) or the Applicable Margin for Taxable Loans (if the respective Loan is a Taxable
Loan) plus three percent (3%), or (ii) 10.5%; provided, however, that the Default Rate shall
never exceed the Maximum Rate.
"Dollars" and

means the lawful currency of the United States of America.

"Effective Date" means the date on which the conditions specified in Section 5.01 are
safisfied (or waived in accordance with Section 7.01).
"Environmental Laws" means any and all federal, state, local and foreign statutes, laws,
regulations, ordinances, rules, judgments, orders, decrees, permits, concessions, grants,
franchises, licenses, agreements or other govemmental restrictions relating to the environment or
to emissions, discharges or releases of pollutants, contaminants, petroleum or petroleum
products, chemicals or industrial, toxic or hazardous substances or wastes into the environment
including, without limitation, ambient air, surface water, ground water, or land, or otherwise
relating to the manufacture, processing, distribufion, use, treatment, storage, disposal, transport
or handling of pollutants, contaminants, petroleum or petroleum products, chemicals or
industrial, toxic or hazardous substances or wastes or the clean up or other remediation thereof
"Eurodollar", when used in reference to any Loan, refers to whether such Loan is bearing
interest at a rate determined by reference to the Adjusted LIBO Rate.
"Event of Default" has the meaning given that term in Section 6.01.
"Event of Taxability" means a change in law or fact or the interpretation thereof, or a
final, non-appealable determination by the Internal Revenue Service or the Department of the
Treasury or the occurrence of any acuon or inaction by the City which has the effect of causing
interest paid or payable on any Tax-Exempt Loan to become includable, in whole or in part, in

 the gross income ofthe recipients thereof or any former recipient thereof for federal income tax
purposes.
"Excess Interest" has the meaning given that term in Section 2.15.
"Federal Funds Rate" means for any day the rate of interest per aimum as determined by
the Bank at which overnight Federal Funds are offered to the Bank for such day by major banks
in the interbank market, with any change in such rate to become effective as to the City on the
date of any change in such rate. Each determination of the Federal Funds Rate by the Bank shall
be deemed conclusive and binding on the City absent manifest error.
"Fitch" means Fitch Rafings, its successors and assigns.
"GAAP" means generally accepted accounting principles in the United States as in effect
from time to time, applied by the City on a basis consistent with the City's most recent financial
statements furnished to the Bank pursuant to Section 4.01(b) hereof
"Govemmental Authority" means any national, stale or local govemment (whether
domestic or foreign), any political subdivision thereof or any other govemmental, quasigovernmental, judicial, public or statutory instrumentality, authority, body, tribunal, agency,
bureau, court or entity (including the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Federal
Reserve Board, any central bank or any comparable authority), or any arbitrator with authority to
bind any of the parties to this Agreement at law.
"Interest Payment Date" means (a) with respect to any ABR Loan, the last day of each
calendar month, and (b) with respect to any Eurodollar Loan, the last day of the Interest Period
applicable to such Loan; provided, however, that, in addifion to the foregoing, the Commitment
Maturity Date and each date on which the City shall pay all or any portion of such Loan shall be
deemed to be an "Interest Payment Date" with respect to any interest which is then accrued
hereunder for such Loan (or such portion paid by the City).
"Interest Period" means with respect to any Eurodollar Loan, the period commencing on
the date of such Loan and ending on the numerically corresponding day in the calendar month
that is one month thereafter; provided, that (i) i f any Interest Period would end on a day other
than a Business Day, such Interest Period shall be extended to the next succeeding Business Day
unless, in the case of a Eiarodollar Loan only, such next succeeding Business Day would fall in
the next calendar month, in which case such Inlerest Period shall end on the next preceding
Business Day and (ii) any Interest Period pertaining to a Eurodollar Loan that commences on the
last Business Day of a calendar month (or on a day for which there is no numerically
corresponding day in the last calendar month of such Interest Period) shall end on the last
Business Day ofthe last calendar month of such Interest Period. For purposes hereof, the date of
a Loan initially shall be the date on which such Loan is made and thereafter shall be the effective
date of the most recent continuation of such Loan.
"Law" means any law (including common law), constitution, statute, treaty, convention,
regulation, rule, ordinance, order, injunction, writ, decree or award of any Govemmental
Authority or court with applicable jurisdiction.

 "Letter Aereement" means the Letter Agreement dated April 25, 2014, between the City
and the Bank, as amended or supplemented from time to fime in accordance with the terms
hereof and thereof
"LIBO Rate" means, with respect to any Eurodollar Loan for an Interest Period of one
month, the London interbank offered rate as administered by the Ice Benchmark Administration
(or any other Person that takes over the administration of such rate for Dollars for a period equal
in length to such Interest Period as displayed on pages LIBOROl or LIBOR02 of the Reuters
screen that displays such rate (or, in the event such rate does not appear on a Reuters page or
screen, on any successor or substitute page on such screen that displays such rate, or on the
appropriate page of such other infonnation service that publishes such rate from fime to time as
selected by the Bank in its reasonable discretion) at approximately 11:00 a.m., London time, two
Business Days prior to the commencement ofsuch Interest Period, as the rate for dollar deposits
in the London interbank market with a maturity comparable to such Interesl Period. In the evenl
that such rate does not appear on such page (or on any such successor or subsfitute page), the
LIBO Rate shall be determined by reference to such other publicly available service for
displaying interest rates for dollar deposits in the London interbank market as may be selected by
the Bank in its reasonable discretion or, in the absence of such availability, by reference to the
rate at which dollar deposits of $5,000,000 and for a maturity comparable to such Interest Period
are offered by the principal London office of the Bank in immediately available funds in the
London interbank market at approximately 11:00 a.m., London time, two Business Days prior to
the commencement ofsuch Interest Period.
"Loan" means any loan by the Bank to the City pursuant to Article 11 hereof "Loans"
means all such Loans collectively.
"Loan Documents" means this Agreement, the Letter Agreement and, after the execution
and delivery thereof pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, the promissory note of the City
delivered to the Bank in connecfion with this Agreement, each amendment or waiver hereof or
hereunder and each other document or agreement executed and delivered from time to time by
the City in connecfion with or pursuant to the terms of this Agreement or any other Loan
Document.
"Margin Rate Factor" means the greater of (i) 1.0 and (ii) the product of (a) one minus
the Maximum Federal Corporate Tax Rate multiplied by (b) y^SJifiy. The effective date of any
change in the Margin Rate Factor shall be the effective date of the decrease or increase (as
applicable) in the Maximum Federal Corporate Tax Rate.
"Material Adverse Change" means any event, circumstance, change or effect that,
individually or in the aggregate, is materially adverse to (a) the ability of the City to perform any
of its obligations (including, without limitation, payment obligations) under this Agreement or
any other Loan Document or with respect to any Parity Debt, or (b) the validity or enforceability
of this Agreement or any of the other Loan Documents or the rights of or benefits available to the
Bank under this Agreement or any other Loan Document.

 "Maximum Federal Corporate Tax Rate" means the marginal federal corporate income
tax rate on the highest income bracket of corporations as in effect in the United States from time
to time. As of the Effective Date, the Maximum Federal Corporate Tax Rate is 35%.
"Maximum Rate" means the lesser of (a) eighteen percent (18%), and (b) the maximum
non-usurious lavkful rate of interest permitted by applicable law.
"Moody's" means Moody's Investors Service, Inc., its successors and assigns.
"Obligations" means all indebtedness, obligations and liabilities of the City to the Bank
from time to time arising under or in connection with or evidenced or secured by this Agreement
or any other Loan Document to which the City is a party, and all extensions, renewals or
refinancings thereof, whether such indebtedness, obligations or liabilities are direct or indirect,
otherwise secured or unsecured, joint or several, absolute or contingent, due or to become due,
whether for payment or performance, now existing or hereafter arising. Without limitafion of the
foregoing, such indebtedness, obligations and liabilities include the principal amount of Loans,
interest, fees, indemnities or expenses under or in connection with this Agreement or any other
Loan Document to which the City is a party, and all extensions, renewals and refinancings
thereof, whether or not such Loans were made in compliance with the terms and conditions of
this Agreement or in excess of the obligation of the Bank to lend.
"Ordinance" means, that certain ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on
May 1, 2002 and published in the Journal of Council Proceedings for such date at pages 83072
through 83374, inclusive; as amended by (i) that certain ordinance adopted by the City Council
ofthe City on March 14, 2012 and published in the Joxarnal of Council Proceedings for such date
at pages 21706 through 21748, inclusive; and (ii) that certain ordinance adopted by the City
Council ofthe City on February 5, 2014 and published in the Journal of Council Proceedings for
such date at pages 73627 through 73670, inclusive.
"Other Taxes" has the meaning given that term in Section 2.12(a).
"Parity Debt" means at any date, without duplication, (a) all general obligations of the
City for borrowed money, and (b) all general obligations of the City evidenced by bonds,
debentures, notes or other similar instruments.
"Participants" has the meaning given that term in Secfion 7.02(a).
"Payment Office" means the payment instmctions provided by the Bank to the City, or
such other office as the Bank may designate fi-om time to time.
"Person" means an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an association, a limited
liability company, a trust or any other enfity or organization, including a govemment or political
subdivision or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
"Prime Rate" means the rate of interest per annum publicly announced from time to time
by the Bank as its prime rale; each change in the Prime Rate shall be effective from and
including the date such change is publicly announced as being effective. The Prime Rate may be
greater or less dian the interest rates charged by the Bank to other borrowers and is not solely

 based or dependent upon the interest rate which the Bank may charge any particular borrower or
class of borrowers. Each determination of the Prime Rate by the Bank shall be deemed
conclusive and binding on the City absent manifest en-or.
"Rating" means the long term unenhanced debt ratings assigned by any of Fitch, S&P
and Moody's to Parity Debt of the City.
"Rating Agencies" means Fitch, Moody's and S&P.
"Reallocation of Commitment Notice" has the meanings set forth in Secfion 2.01(b).
"S&P" means Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, a division of The McGrav/-Hill
Companies, Inc., its successors and assigns.
"Sanctions" means economic or fmancial sanctions or trade embargoes imposed,
administered or enforced from time to time by the U.S. govemment, including those
administered by the Office of Foreign Assets Conlrol of the U.S. Department of the Treasury or
the U.S. Department of State.
"State" means the State of Illinois.
"Statutory Reserve Rale" means a fraction (expressed as a decimal), the numerator of
which is the number one and the denominator of which is the number one minus the aggregate of
the maximum reserve percentage (including any marginal, special, emergency or supplemental
reserves) expressed as a decimal established by the Board to which the Bank is subject with
respect to the Adjusted LIBO Rate, for Eurodollar funding (currendy referred to as "Eurodollar
Liabilities" in Regulation D of the Board). Such reserve percentage shall include those imposed
pursuant to such Regulation D. Eurodollar Loans shall be deemed to constitute Eurodollar
funding and to be subject to such reserve requirements without benefit of or credit for proration,
exemptions or offsets that may be available from time to time to the Bank under such Regulation
D or any comparable regulation. The Statutory Reserve Rale shall be adjusted automatically on
and as of the effective date of any change in any reserve percentage.
"Taxable Date" means the date as of which interest on any Tax-Exempt Loan is first
includible in gross income of the Bank (or any successor, assignee or participant thereof) as a
result of an Event of Taxability as such a date is established pursuant to a Tax Event.
"Taxable Period" has the meaning set forth in Section 2.16(a) hereof
"Taxable Rate" means, with respect to a Taxable Period, the product of (i) the average
interest rate on the Tax-Exempt Loan during such period and (ii) KEDACT
"Taxable Commitment" means the commitment of the Bank to make Taxable Loans to
the City from time to time in accordance with the terms of this Agreement. As of the Effective
Date, the Taxable Commitment shall be equal to $200,000,000.

 "Taxable Loan" means a Loan designated by the City in the Borro'wing Request
applicable to such Loan as bearing interest which is not excludable from gross income of the
Bank for federal and state income tax purposes.
"Taxes" has the meaning given that term in Section 2.12(a).
"Tax-Exempt Commitment" means tlie commitment of the Bank to make Tax-Exempt
Loans to the City from time to time in accordance with the terms of this Agreement. As of the
Effective Date, the Tax-Exempt Commitment shall be equal to $0.
"Tax-Exempt Loan" means a Loan designated by the City in the Borrowing Request
applicable to such Loan as bearing interest which is excludable from gross income of the Bank
for federal and state income tax purposes.
"Tax Event." with respect lo any Tax-Exempt Loan, shall be deemed to have occurred on
the first to occur of the following; (a) the date of entry of any decree or judgment by a court of
competent jurisdiction (whether or not such decree or judgment is appealable or deemed to be
final under applicable procedural law, or by operation of law) that interest on any of the TaxExempt Loans is includable in the gross income of the Bank for federal income tax purposes, or
(b) the date of the issuance by the Internal Revenue Service of a Letter 4413 Notice of Proposed
Adverse Determination to the effect that all or any portion of the interest on any Tax-Exempt
Loan is not excluded from gross income for federal income tax purposes, or (c) delivery to the
City and the Bank of a written legal opinion (which opinion shall not be a reasoned opinion and
shall be subject to only customary assumptions and exclusions) of nationally recognized bond
counsel reasonably acceptable lo the City and the Bank to the effect that an Event of Taxability
has occurred, or (d) on that date when the City shall receive notice from the Bank (or any
successor, assignee or participant thereof) that the Intemal Revenue Service (or any other
govemment official or agency exercising the same or a substantially similar function from time
to time) has assessed as includable in the gross income of such Person the interest on any TaxExempt Loan due to the occurrence of an Event of Taxability, or (e) on that date when the City
files any statement, supplemental statement or other tax schedule, return or document which
discloses that an Event of Taxability shall have in fact occurred, or (f) on the date when the City
shall be advised in writing by the Commissioner or any District Director of the Intemal Revenue
Service (or any other govemment official or agent exercising die same or a substantially similar
function from time to time) that, based upon filings of the City, or upon any review or audit of
the City or upon any other ground whatsoever, an Event of Taxability shall have occurred;
provided, however, no Tax Event shall occur under subparagraph (d) or (f) hereunder unless the
City has been afforded the opportunity, at its expense, to contest any such assessment, and,
further, no Tax Event shall occur until such contest, i f made, has been finally determined;
provided further, however, that upon demand from the Bank (or any successor, assignee or
participant thereof), the City shall promptly reimburse, but solely from payments made by the
City, die Bank (or any successor, assignee or participant thereof) for any payments, including
any taxes, interest, penalties or other charges, the Bank (or any successor, assignee or participant
thereof) shall be obligated to make as a result of the Tax Event.
"Term Loan" has the meaning set forth in Section 2.19.

 "Term Loan Bank Rate" means the rate of interest per annum with respect to a Term
Loan (a) for any day commencing on the Term Loan Conversion Date up to (but not including)
the one hundred eightieth (180th) day next succeeding the Term Loan Conversion Date, equal to
the Term Loan Rate from time to time in effect; (b) for any day commencing on (and including)
the one hundred eightieth (180th) day next succeeding the Term Loan Conversion Date up to
(but not including) the one year anniversary of the Term Loan Conversion Date, equal to the sum
ofthe Term Lo£in Rate from time to time in effect plus one percent (1.00%); £uid (c) for any day
commencing on (and including) the one year anniversary of the Term Loan Conversion Date and
thereafter through the Amortization End Date, equal to the sum of the Term Loan Rate from time
to time in effect plus two percent (2.00%); provided, however, that immediately and
automatically upon the occurrence of an Event of Default (and without any notice given with
respect thereto, which notice is hereby waived by the City) and during the continuance of such
Event of Default, "Term Loan Bank Rate" shall mean the Default Rate, and provided, further,
however, that the Term Loan Bank Rate shall never exceed the Maximum Rate.
"Term Loan Conversion Date" has the meaning set forth in Section 2.19.
"Term Loan Rate" means, for any day, the highest of (i) the Prime Rate plus one and onehalf percent (1.5%), (ii) the Federal Funds Rate plus two percent (2.0%), or (iii) seven and onehalf percent (7.5%). Each change in the Term Loan Rate shall take effect at the time of such
change in the Prime Rate or the Federal Funds Rate, as the case may be. Each determination of
the Term Loan Rate by the Bank will be conclusive and binding on the City, absent manifest
error.
"Type", when used in reference to any Loan, shall refer to whether the rate of interest on
such Loan is detennined by reference to the Adjusted LIBO Rate or the Altemate Base Rate.
"Written" or "in writing" means any form of written communication or a communication
by means of telecopier device.
Section 1.02 Interpretation. The definitions of terms herein shall apply equally to the
singular and plural forms of the terms defined. Whenever the context may require, any pronoun
shall include the corresponding masculine, feminine and neuter forms. The words "include",
"includes" and "including" shall be deemed to be followed by the phrase "without limitation".
The word "will" shall be construed to have the same meaning and effect as the word "shall". The
word "law" shall be construed as referring to all statutes, rules, regulations, codes and other laws
(including official rulings and interpretations thereunder having the force of law or with which
affected Persons customarily comply), and all judgments, orders and decrees, of all
Govemmental Authorifies. Unless the context requires otherwise (a) any definition of or
reference to any agreement, instrument or other document herein shall be construed as referring
to such agreement, instrument or other document as from time to fime amended, restated,
supplemented or otherwise modified (subject to any restrictions on such amendments,
restatements, supplements or modifications set forth herein), (b) any definition of or reference to
any statute, rule or regulation shall be constmed as referring thereto as from time to time
amended, supplemented or otherwise modified (including by succession of comparable successor
laws), (c) any reference herein to any Person shall be construed to include such Person's
succes.sors and assigns (subject to any restrictions on assignment set forth herein) and, in the case

10

 of any Govemmental Authority, any olher Govemmental Authority that shall have succeeded to
any or all functions thereof, (d) the words "herein", "hereof and "hereunder", and words of
similar import, shall be construed to refer to this Agreement in its entirety and not to any
particular provision hereof, (e) all references herein to Articles, Sections, Exhibhs and Schedules
shall be construed to refer to Articles and Sections of, and Exhibits and Schedules to, this
Agreement and (f) the words "asset" and "property" shall be construed to have the same meaning
and effect and to refer to any and all tangible and intangible assets and properties, including cash,
securities, accounts and contract rights.
Section 1.03 Accounting Matters. All accounting terms used herein without definition
shall be interpreted in accordance with GAAP, and except as otherwise expressly provided
herein all accounting determinations required to be made pursuant to this Agreement shall be
made in accordance with GAAP.
Section 1.04 Classification of Loans. For purposes of this Agreement, Loans may be
classified and referred to by Type (e.g., a "Eurodollar Loan").
ARTICLE II
THE FACILITY
Section 2.01 Commitment, (a) Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, the
Bank agrees to make Loans to the City from time to time during the Availability Period in an
aggregate principal amount that will not result in (a) the sum of the total Loans outstanding
exceeding the Commitment, (b) the sum of the total Tax-Exempt Loans outstanding exceeding
the Tax-Exempt Commitment, and (c) the sum of the total Taxable Loans outstanding exceeding
the Taxable Commitment. Within the foregoing limit and subject to the terms and conditions set
forth herein, the City may borrow, prepay and reborrow Loans.
(b)
Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, from fime to time during the
Availability Period, but in no event more frequendy than once per calendar quarter or otherwise
more frequendy as requested by the City and as agreed to by the Bank in writing, the City may
notify the Bank in writing, substantially in the form attached to this Agreement as Exhibit C (the
"Reallocation of Commitment Notice"), of its determination to reallocate the Commitment
between the Taxable Commitment and the Tax-Exempt Commitment; provided that following
such reallocafion by the City, (a) the sum ofthe total Tax-Exempt Loans outstanding shall not
exceed the Tax-Exempt Commitment, (b) the sum of the total Taxable Loans outstanding shall
not exceed the Taxable Commitment, and (c) the sum of the total Loans outstanding shall not
exceed the Commitment. A Reallocation of Commitment Notice executed by the City shall be
provided to the Bank, not later than 11:00 a.m., New York City time, five (5) Business Days
before the date ofthe proposed reallocation, and shall be irrevocable.
Secfion 2.02 Loans, (a) Subject to Section 2.11 and Section 2.02(b), each Loan made
hereunder lo the City shall be made by the Bank as a Eurodollar Loan. The Bank at its option
may make any Etirodollar Loan by causing any domestic or foreign branch or Affiliate of the
Bank to make such Loan; provided that any exercise of such option shall not affect the obligation
of the City to repay such Loan in accordance with the terms of this Agreement.

n

 (b)
At the commencement of each Interest Period for any Eurodollar Loan, such Loan
shall be in an amount that is not less than $500,000 and integral multiples of $1,000 in excess
thereof At the fime that any ABR Loan is made as a result of the terms of Section 2.11 or
pursuant to this subsection (b), such Loan shall be an amount that is not less than $500,000 and
integral muhiples of $1,000 in excess thereof; provided that, in the event that the unused balance
of the Commitment at any time is otherwise less than the minimum Loan amount otherwise
required in this subsection (b), an ABR Loan may be funded by the Bank in an aggregate amount
that is equal to such unused balance. Loans of more than one Type may be outstanding at the
same time; provided that there shall not at any fime be more than a total of ten (10) Eurodollar
Loans outstanding.
(c)
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, the City shall not be
entitled to request, or to elect to convert or continue, any Loan if the Interest Period requested
with respect thereto would end after the Commitment Maturity Date.
Section 2.03 Requests for Borrowings. To request a Loan, the City shall notify the
Bank of such request by telephone (a) in the case of a Eurodollar Loan, not later than 11:00 a.m..
New York City time, three Business Days before the date of the proposed Loan or (b) in the case
of an ABR Loan, not later than 11:00 a.m., New York City time, one Business Day before the
date of the proposed Loan. Each such telephonic Borrowing Request shall be irrevocable and
shall be confirmed promptly by hand delivery, telecopy or electronic mail to the Bank of a
written Borrowing Request substantially in the form attached to this Agreement as Exhibit B (the
"Borrowing Requesf'). Each such telephonic and written Borrowing Request shall specify the
following information in compliance with Section 2.02:
(i)

the aggregate amount of the requested Loan;

(ii)

the date ofsuch Loan, which shall be a Business Day;

(iii)
whether such Loan is to be an ABR Loan or a Eurodollar Loan (provided
that the City shall designate each such Loan as a Eurodollar Loan unless the provisions of
Section 2.11 or Section 2.02(b) apply);
(iv)
whether such Loan is to be a Tax-Exempt Loan or a Taxable Loan (and i f
such Loan is to be a Tax-Exempt Loan, the City shall further have complied with the
condition precedent set forth in Section 5.04 on the request date for such Loan); and
(v)
the location and number of the City's account to which funds are to be
disbursed, which shall comply whh the requirements of Section 2.04.
Subject to Section 2.11 and Section 2.02(b), each Loan requested by the City hereunder
shall be made by the Bank as a Eurodollar Loan. In the event that the City shall have provided
a Borrowing Request with respect to a Tax-Exempt Loan and the City shall otherwise fail to
comply with the condition precedent set forth in Section 5.04 with respect to such Loan, the
Bank shall have the option, at its discretion, to fiind such requested Loan as a Taxable Loan to
the City, so long as the funding of such Loan shall not cause the outstanding Taxable Loans to
exceed the Taxable Loan Commitment.

12

 Section 2.04 Funding of Loans, (a) The Bank shall make each Loan to be made by it
hereunder on the proposed date thereof by wire transfer of immediately available funds by 2:30
p.m.. New York City time, by promptly crediting the proceeds of such Loan to an account of the
City designated by the City in the applicable Borrowing Request.
(b)
As to any Eurodollar Loan, the Bank may fulfill, if it so elects, its commitment by
causing a foreign branch or affiliate to make or continue such Loan, provided that in such event
that the Bank's Loan shall, for the purposes of this Agreement, be considered to have been made
by the Bank and the obligation ofthe City to repay such Loan shall nevertheless be to the Bank
and shall be deemed held by the Bank for the account of such branch or affiliate.
Section 2.05 Interest Elections. Each Loan initially shall be funded by the Bank as a
Eurodollar Loan with an Inlerest Period. Thereafter, each such Loan shall continue as a
Eurodollar Loan with an Interest Period, subject to the terms of Section 2.11 and Secfion 2.02(b).
Section 2.06 Termination and Reduction of Commitment
(a) Unless previously
terminated, the Commitment shall terminate on the Commitment Maturity Date.
(b)
Subject to the terms of the Letter Agreement, the City may at any time terminate,
or from fime to time reduce, the Commitment; provided that (i) each reduction of the
Commitments shall be in an amount that is not less than $500,000 and integral multiples of
$1,000 in excess thereof and (ii) the City shall not terminate or reduce the Commitments if, after
giving effect lo any concurrent prepayment of the Loans in accordance with Section 2.08, the
sum of the Loans outstanding would exceed the total Commitment.
(c)
The City shall notify the Bank of any election to terminate or reduce the
Commitment under paragraph (b) of this Section at least three Business Days prior to the
effective date of such termination or reduction, specifying such election, specifying the specific
Dollar amount ofthe Tax-Exempt Commitment and/or the Taxable Commitment which shall be
so terminated or reduced, and the effective date thereof Each notice delivered by the City
pursuant to this Secfion shall be irrevocable; provided that a notice of termination of the
Commitment delivered by the City may state that such notice is conditioned upon the
effectiveness of other credii facilities, in which case such notice may be revoked by the City (by
notice to the Bank on or prior to the specified effective date) i f such condition is not satisfied.
Any termination or reduction ofthe Commitment shall be permanent.
Section 2.07 Repayment of Loans: Evidence of Debt, (a) Subject to Section 2.19, the
City hereby unconditionally promises to pay to the Bank the then unpaid principal amount of
each Loan on the Commitment Maturity Date.
(b)
If at any time the sum of the aggregate principal amount of all outstanding Loans
exceeds the Commitment, the City shall immediately repay Loans in an aggregate principal
amount sufficient to cause the remaining outstanding Loans not to exceed the Commitment.
(c)
The Bank shall maintain in accordance wilh its usual practice an account or
accounts evidencing the indebtedness of the City to the Bank resulting from each Loan made by
the Bank, including the amounts of principal and interest payable and paid to the Bank from time
to time hereunder.

13

 (d)
The Bank shall maintain accounts in which it shall record (i) the amount of each
Loan made hereunder, the Type thereof and the Interest Period applicable thereto, (ii) the amount
of any principal or interest due and payable or to become due and payable from the City to the
Bank hereunder and (iii) the amount of any sum received by the Bank hereunder for the account
of the Bank.
(e)
The entries made in the accounts maintained pursuant to paragraph (c) or (d) of
this Section shall be prima facie evidence of the existence and amo
(f)
unts of the obligafions recorded therein; provided thai the failure of the Bank to
maintain such accounts or any error therein shall not in any manner affect the obligafion of the
City to repay the Loans in accordance with the lerms of this Agreement.
Section 2.08 Prepayment of Loans, (a) The City shall have the right at any time and
from time to time lo prepay any Loan in whole or in part, subject to prior notice in accordance
with paragraph (b) of this Section.
(b)
The City shall notify the Bank by telephone (confirmed by telecopy or electronic
mail) of any prepayment hereunder (i) in the case of prepayment of a Eurodollar Loan, not later
than 11:00 a.m.. New York City time, three Business Days before the date of prepayment, or (ii)
in the case of prepayment of an ABR Loan, not later than 11:00 a.m.. New York City time, one
Business Day before the date of prepayment. Each such notice shall be irrevocable and shall
specify the prepayment date and the principal amounl of each Loan or portion thereof to be
prepaid; provided that, if a notice of prepayment is given in connection with a conditional notice
of termination of the Commitment as contemplated by Secfion 2.06(c), then such notice of
prepayment may be revoked if such notice of termination is revoked in accordance with Section
2.06(c). Each partial prepayment of any Loan shall be in an amount that would be pennitted in
the case of an advance of a Loan ofthe same Type as provided in Section 2.02. Prepayments
shall be accompanied by accrued interest to the extent required by Section 2.10.
Section 2.09 Fees, (a) The City agrees lo pay to the Bank a commitment fee (the
"Commitment Fee"), which shall accrue at the Applicable Rate on the daily amount of the
difference between the Commitment of the Bank under this Agreement and the Loans
outstanding during the period, which Commitment Fee shall be payable from and including the
Effective Date to but excluding the date on which such Commitment terminates. Accrued
Commitment Fees shall be payable in arrears on the last day of March, June, September and
December of each year and on the date on which the Commitment terminates, commencing on
the first such date lo occur after the date hereof All Commitment Fees shall be computed on the
basis of a year of 365-days or 366-days, as applicable, and shall be payable for the actual number
of days elapsed (including die first day but excluding the last day).
(b)
The City agrees to pay to the Bank fees in the amounts and al the times as set
forth in the Letter Agreement.
(c)
All fees payable hereunder shall be paid on the dates due, in immediately
available funds, to the Bank. Fees paid shall not be refundable under any circumstances.

14

 Section 2.10 Interesl. (a) Each Eurodollar Loan which is a Tax-Exempt Loan shall
bear interest at a rate per annum equal to ^ % of the Adjusted LIBO Rate plus the Applicable
Rale.
(b)
Each Eurodollar Loan which is a Taxable Loan shall bear interest at a rate per
annum equal to the Adjusted LIBO Rate plus the Applicable Rate.
(c)

Each ABR Loan shall bear interest at the Altemate Base Rate plus the Applicable

Rate.
(d)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if any principal of or interesl on any Loan or any
fee or other amount payable by the City hereunder is not paid when due, whether al stated
maturity, upon acceleration or otherwise, such overdue amount shall bear interest, after as well
as before judgment, at a rate per annum equal to (i) in the case of overdue principal of any Loan,
the Default Rate or (ii) in the case of any olher amount, die Default Rate applicable to ABR
Loans.
(e)
Accrued interest on each Loan shall be payable in arrears on each Interest
Payment Date for such Loan, upon the final maturity thereof and upon terminafion of the
Commitment; provided that (i) interesl accrued pursuant to paragraph (d) of this Section shall be
payable on demand, (ii) in the event of any repayment or prepayment of any Loan, accrued
interest on the principal amount repaid or prepaid shall be payable on the date of such repayment
or prepayment and (iii) in the evenl of any conversion of any Eurodollar Loan prior to the end of
the current Interesl Period therefor, accrued inlerest on such Loan shall be payable on the
effective date of such conversion.
(f)
All interest hereunder shall be computed on the basis of a year of 360 days, except
that inlerest computed by reference to the Altemate Base Rate shall be computed on the basis of
a year of 365 days (or 366 days in a leap year), and in each case shall be payable for the actual
number of days elapsed (including the first day but excluding the last day). The applicable
Alternate Base Rate, Adjusted LIBO Rate or LIBO Rate shall be determined by the Bank, and
such detennination shall be conclusive absent manifest error.
Section 2.11 Altemate Rate of Interest,
Interest Period for a Eurodollar Loan:

(a) If prior to the commencement of any

(i)
the Bank determines (which determination shall be conclusive absent
manifest error) that adequate and reasonable means do not exist for ascertaining the
Adjusted LIBO Rate or the LIBO Rate, as applicable, for such hiteresi Period; or
(ii)
the Adjusted LIBO Rate or the LIBO Rate, as applicable, for such Interest
Period will not adequately and fairly reflect the cost to the Bank of making or
maintaining the Loan for such Interest Period;
then the Bank shall give notice thereof to the City by telephone or electronic mail as promptly as
practicable thereafter and, unlil the Bank notifies the City that the circumstances giving rise to
such notice no longer exist, (i) the continuation of any Loan as a Eurodollar Loan shall be

15

 ineffective and such Loan shall be continued as an ABR Loan and (ii) if any Borrowing Request
calls for a Eurodollar Loan, such Loan shall be made as an ABR Loan.
(b)
If, after the dale hereof, any Change of Law shall make it unlawfiil or impossible
for the Bank (or its lending offices) to honor its obligations hereunder to make or maintain any
Eurodollar Loan, the Bank shall promptly give notice thereof to the Cily. Thereafter, until die
Bank notifies the City that such circumstances no longer exist, (i) the obligations of the Bank to
make Eurodollar Loans, and the right of ihe City to continue any Loan as a Eurodollar Loan shall
be suspended and thereafter the City may select only ABR Loans, and (ii) if the Bank may not
lawfully continue to maintain a Eurodollar Loan to the end of the then current Interest Period
applicable thereto, the applicable Loan shall immediately be converted to an ABR Loan for the
remainder ofsuch Interesl Period.
(c)
I f at any time the circumstances described in (a) and (b) above are no longer
applicable, the Bank shall promptiy give notice thereof lo the City, and the ABR Loans then
outstanding, if any, shall be converted lo Eurodollar Loans in a manner and timeframe
reasonably determined by the Bank witii notice to the City.
Section 2.12

Net of Taxes. Etc.

(a)
Taxes. Any and all payments to the Bank by the Cily hereunder shall be made
free and clear of and without deduction for any and all taxes, levies, imposts, deductions,
charges, withholdings or liabilities imposed as a result of a Change of Law, excluding, however,
taxes imposed on or measured by the net income or capital ofthe Bank by any jurisdiction or any
political subdivision or taxing authority thereof or therein solely as a result of a connection
between the Bank and such jurisdiction or political subdivision (all such non-excluded taxes,
levies, imposts, deductions, charges, withholdings and liabilities being hereinafter referred to as
"Taxes"). If as a result of a Change of Law, the Cily shall be required by law to withhold or
deduct any Taxes imposed by the United Slates or any political subdivision thereof or any other
taxing authority from or in respect of any sum payable hereunder to the Bank, (i) the sum
payable shall be increased as may be necessary so that after making all required deductions
(including deductions applicable to additional sums payable under this Section 2.12), the Bank
receives an amount equal to the sum it would have received had no such deductions been made,
(ii) the City shall make such deductions and (iii) the City shall pay the full amount deducted to
the relevant taxation authority or other authority in accordance with applicable law. If the City
shall make any payment under this Section 2.12 to or for the benefit of the Bank wilh respect lo
Taxes and the Bank (in its discretion as to the extent, order and means in which it does so) shall
claim (and receive and retain) any credit or deduction for such Taxes against any other taxes
payable by the Bank to any taxing jurisdiction in die United Stales then die Bank shall pay to tiie
City an amounl equal lo the amount by which such other taxes are actually reduced; provided
that the aggregate amounl payable by the Bank pursuant lo this sentence shall not exceed the
aggregate amount previously paid by the City with respect to such Taxes. In addition, the City
agrees to pay any present or future stamp, recording or documentary taxes and, if as a result of a
Change of Law, any other excise or property taxes, charges or similar levies that arise under the
laws ofthe United States of America or the Stale of Illinois or any other political subdivision or
taxing authority from any payment made hereunder or from the execution or delivery or
otherwise with respect to this Agreement, excluding, however, taxes imposed on or measured by

16

 the net income or capital of the Bank by any jurisdiction or any political subdivision or taxing
authority thereof or therein solely as a result of a connection between the Bank and such
jurisdiction or political subdivision (hereinafter refened to as "Olher Taxes"). The Bank shall
provide lo the City within a reasonable time a copy of any written notificafion it receives with
respect to Other Taxes owing by the City to the Bank hereunder provided that the Bank's failure
to send such notice shall not relieve the Chy of ils obligalion to pay such amounts hereunder.
(b)
Payment of Taxes. The City shall, lo the fullest extent permitted by law, pay the
Bank for the fiill amounl of Taxes and Other Taxes including any Taxes or Other Taxes imposed
by any jurisdiction on amounts payable under this Seciion 2.12 paid by the Bank or any liability
(including penalties, interest and expenses) arising therefrom or with respect thereto, whether or
not such Taxes or Olher Taxes were correctly or legally asserted; provided that the City shall not
be obligated lo pay the Bank for any penalties, interest or expenses relating lo Taxes or Olher
Taxes arising from the Bank's gross negligence or willful misconduct. The Bank agrees to give
notice to the City of the assertion of any claim against the Bank relating to such Taxes or Other
Taxes as promptly as is practicable after being notified of such assertion; provided that the
Bank's failure to notify the Cily promptly of such assertion shall not relieve the City of its
obligalion under this Secfion 2.12. Payments by the City pursuant to this Section shall be made
within thirty (30) days from the date the Bank makes written demand therefor, which demand
shall be accompanied by a certificate describing in reasonable detail the basis thereof The Bank
agrees to repay to the City any refund (including that portion of any interest that was included as
part of such refund) with respect to Taxes or Other Taxes paid by the City pursuant lo tiiis
Section 2.12 received by the Bank for Taxes or Other Taxes that were paid by the City pursuant
to this Section 2.12 and to contest, with the cooperation and at the expense ofthe City, any such
Taxes or Other Taxes which the Bank or the City reasonably believes not to have been properly
assessed.
(c)
Notice. Within thirty (30) days after the dale of any payment of Taxes by the
Cily, the City shall furnish to the Bank, the original or a certified copy of a receipt evidencing
payment thereof
(d)
Survival of Obligations. The obligations ofthe City under this Section 2.12 shall
survive the termination of this Agreemeni.
Section 2.13 Increased Costs, (a) If the Bank shall have determined that any Change
of Law shall (A) change the basis of taxation of payments to the Bank of any amounts payable
hereunder (except for taxes on the overall net income of the Bank), (B) impose, modify or deem
applicable any reserve, special deposit, liquidity or similar requirement (including any
compulsory loan requirement, insurance charge or other assessment) against making or
maintaining its obligations under this Agreemeni or assets held by, or deposits wilh or for the
account of or credit extended by, the Bank (except any reserve requirement reflected in the
Adjusted LIBO Rate) or (C) impose on the Bank or on the London interbank market any other
condition regarding this Agreement or Eurodollar Loans made by the Bank, and the result of any
event refened to in clause (A), (B) or (C) above shall be lo increase the cost lo the Bank of
making or maintaining ils obligations hereunder, or to reduce the amoimt of any sum received or
receivable by the Bank hereunder, then, the City shall pay to the Bank at such time and in such

17

 amount as is set forth in paragraph (c) of this Seciion, such additional amounl or amounts as will
compensate the Bank for such increased costs or reductions in amount.
(b)
If the Bank shall have detennined that any Change of Law shall impose, modify
or deem applicable any capital, liquidity or similar requirement (including, without limitation, a
request or requirement that affects the manner in which the Bank or the Bank's holding company
allocates capital resources lo ils commitments, including its obligations under lines of credit) that
either (A) affects or would affect ihe amounl of capital lo be maintained by the Bank or the
Bank's holding company or (B) reduces or would reduce the rate of return on the Bank's or the
Bank's holding company's capital to a level below that which the Bank or the Bank's holding
company could have achieved but for such circumstances (taking into consideration the Bank's
or the Bank's holding company policies with respect to capital adequacy and liquidity) then, the
Cily shall pay to the Bank at such time and in such amount as is set forth in paragraph (c) of this
Section, such addifional amount or amounts as will compensate the Bank or the Bank's holding
company for such cost of maintaining such increased capital or liquidity or such reduction
suffered.
(c)
All payments of amounts refened to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Section shall
be due 30 days following the City's receipt of notice thereof and shall be payable, in full, on the
next succeeding quarterly payment date that the fee described in Section 2.09(a) is due and
payable. Interest on the sums due as described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Seciion, and in
the preceding sentence, shall begin to accrue from the date when the payments were first due and
shall otherwise be payable in accordance witii this Section; provided, that from and after the
required date of payment, interest shall begin to accrue on such obligations at a rate per annum
equal to the Default Rate until such delinquent payments have been paid in full. A certificate as
lo such increased cost, increased capital or reduction in return incuned by the Bank as a result of
any event mentioned in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this Seciion setting forth, in reasonable detail, the
basis for calculation and the amount of such calculation shall be submitted by the Bank" lo die
Cily and shall be conclusive (absent manifest error) as to the amount thereof In making the
determinations contemplated by the above referenced certificate, the Bank may make such
reasonable estimates, assumptions, allocations and the like that the Bank in good faith
determines to be appropriate.
Section 2.14 Break Funding Payments. In the event of (a) the payment of any principal
of any Eurodollar Loan other than on the last day of an Interest Period applicable thereto
(including as a result ofan Event of Default or as a result of any prepayment pursuant to Section
2.11), (b) the conversion of any Eurodollar Loan oUier than on the last day of tiie Interest Period
applicable thereto, (c) the failure lo borrow, continue or prepay any Eurodollar Loan on the date
specified in any notice delivered pursuant hereto (regardless of whether such notice may be
revoked under Seciion 2.11(b) and is revoked in accordance therewith), then, in any such evenl,
the City shall compensate the Bank for the loss, cost and expense attributable to such event. In
the case of a Eurodollar Loan, such loss, cost or expense to tiie Bank shall be deemed lo include
an amount delermined by the Bank to be the excess, if any, of (i) the amounl of interest which
would have accrued on the principal amount of such Loan had such event not occuned, at the
Adjusted LIBO Rate that would have been applicable to such Loan, for the period from the date
of such event to the last day of the then current Interesl Period therefor (or, in the case of a
failure lo bonow, convert or continue, for the period thai would have been ihe Inlerest Period for

18

 such Loan), over (ii) the amount of interesl which would accrue on such principal amount for
such period at the interest rate which the Bank would bid were it lo bid, at the commencement of
such period, for dollar deposits of a comparable amount and period from other banks in the
eurodollar market. A certificate of the Bank setting forth any amount or amounts that the Bank
is entitled to receive pursuant to this Section shall be delivered to the City and shall be
conclusive absent manifest enor. The City shall pay the Bank the amount shown as due on any
such certificate wilhin ten (10) days after receipt thereof
Seciion 2.15 Maximum Rate. If the rale of interest payable hereunder shall exceed the
Maximum Rate for any period for which interest is payable, then (a) interest al the Maximum
Rate shall be due and payable with respect to such interest period, and (b) interest at the rate
equal to the difference between (i) the rale of interest calculated in accordance witii the terms
hereof and (ii) the Maximum Rate (the "Excess Interesl"). shall be deferred until such date as the
rate of interest calculated in accordance with the terms hereof ceases to exceed the Maximum
Rate, at which time the City shall pay to the Bank, with respect to amounts then payable to the
Bank that are required to accrue interest hereunder, such portion of the defened Excess Interest
as will cause the rate of inlerest then paid to the Bank to equal the Maximum Rate, which
payments of defened Excess Interest shall continue to apply to such unpaid amounts hereunder
until the earlier of (i) the date of payment in full of all other amounts due hereunder by the City
lo the Bank (other than Excess Inlerest which has not been recaptured) and on which the
Commitment has been permanently terminated in fiill, the Loans have been repaid to the Bank in
full and this Agreement is no longer in effect, and (ii) the dale on which all deferred Excess
Interesl is fully paid lo the Bank.
Section 2.16 Tax Event.
(a) In the evenl a Tax Event occurs, in addition to the
amounts required to be paid with respect to each Tax-Exempt Loan by the City under this
Agreement, the City hereby agrees to pay to the Bank and each of its successors, assigns and
participants with respect to the Loans and the other Obligations of the City pursuant to this
Agreement and the other Loan Documents (each, a "Beneficial Owner"), on demand therefor
(A) an amount equal to tiie difference between (I) the amount of interesl that would have been
paid to such recipient with respect to such Tax-Exempt Loan during the period for which interest
on such Tax-Exempt Loan is includable in the gross income of such Beneficial Owner if such
Tax-Exempt Loan had bome interest at the Taxable Rate, beginning on the Taxable Date (the
"Taitable Period"), and (II) the amounl of interest actually paid to the Beneficial Owner during
the Taxable Period, and (B) an amounl equal to any interest, penalties or charges owed by such
Beneficial Owner as a result of interest on such Tax-Exempt Loan becoming includable in the
gross income ofsuch beneficial owner, together with any and all attorneys' fees, court costs, or
other out-of-pocket costs incuned by such Beneficial Owner in connection therewith.
(b)
Subject to the provisions of clauses (c) and (d) below, such Beneficial Owner
shall afford the Cily the opportunity, at the City's sole cost and expense, to contest (l)thc
validity of any amendment to the Code which causes the interesl on such Tax-Exempt Loan to be
includable in the gross income of such Beneficial Ovmer or (2) any challenge to the vaUdity of
the tax exemption with respect to the interest on such Tax-Exempt Loan, including the right to
direct the necessary litigation contesting such challenge (including administrative audit appeals).

19

 (c)
The following shall constitute conditions precedent to the exercise by the City of
its right to contest set forth in clause (ii) above, the City shall, on demand, immediately
reimburse such Beneficial Owner for any and all expenses (including attorneys' fees for services
that may be required or desirable, as determined by such Beneficial Owner in its sole discretion)
that may be incuned by such Beneficial Owner in cormection with any such contest, and shall,
on demand, immediately reimburse such Beneficial Owner for any and all penalties or other
charges payable by such beneficial owner for failure to include such interest in its gross income;
and
(d)
The obligations ofthe City under this Section 2.16 shall survive the termination of
this Agreement and the payment in full of the Loans.
Section 2.17 Source of Payments. The obligations of the City to pay the Loans and
Term Loan to the Bank and the other Obligations due and owing to the Bank under this
Agreement shall constitute general obligations of the Cily to which the City's full faith and credit
is pledged.
Section 2.18 Electronic Transmissions. The Bank is authorized to accept and process
any amendments, instructions, consents, waivers and all other documents which are sent to the
Bank by electronic transmission, including SWIFT, electronic mail, telecopy, courier, mail or
other computer generated telecommunications, and such electronic communication has the same
legal effect as if written and shall be binding upon and enforceable against the Cily. The Bank
may, but shall not be obligated to, require authentication of such electronic transmission or that
the Bank receives original documents prior to acting on such electronic transmission.
Section 2.19 Term Out. Subject to the conditions set forth in Section 5.03, the
aggregate principal amount of the Loans of the Bank outstanding on the Commitment Maturity
Date (the "Term Loan Conversion Date") shall convert to a term loan of the Bank in such
outstanding amount (the "Term Loan"). The Term Loan shall bear interest from and including
the Commitment Maturity Date until the payment thereof in full at the Term Loan Bank Rate and
shall otherwise constitute a Loan for all purposes of this Agreement. The Cily agrees to repay to
the Bank the unpaid principal amount of the Term Loan (together with interest accrued thereon)
in approximately equal semi-annual installments of principal, with the first such payment
commencing on the Amortization Commencement Dale, and on each Amortization Payment
Dale thereafter, with the last such payment equal to all remaining unpaid principal and occuning
on the Amortization End Date.
Section 2.20 Extension of Commitment Maturity Date. I f the City, on any date no
earlier than one hundred and twenty (120) days prior to the Commitment Maturity Date, submits
to the Bank a written request for an extension of the Commitment Maturity Date for a period
mutually agreeable to the Bank and the City, the Bank will make reasonable efforts to respond to
such request within thirty (30) days after receipt of all information necessary, in the Bank's
reasonable judgment, to permit the Bank to make an informed credii decision. In the event the
Bank fails lo definitively respond lo such request wilhin such period of time, the Bank shall be
deemed to have refused lo grant the extension requested. The Bank may, in its sole and absolute
discretion, decide to accept or reject any such proposed extension and no extension shall become
effective unless the Bank shall have consenied thereto in writing. The consent of the Bank, i f

20

 granted, shall be conditioned upon the preparation, execution and delivery of documentation in
form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Bank and consistent with this Agreement. If
such an extension request is accepted by the Bank in writing in its absolute discretion, the then
cunent Commitment Maturity Date shall be extended to the date agreed to by the City and the
Bank.
ARTICLE III
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE CITY
Section 3.01 Representations of the City. The City makes the following representations
and wananties to the Bank as of the Effective Date, on the date of funding of each Loan and as
of the effective date of any extension of the Commitment Maturily Date (which representations
and warranties shall survive the execution and delivery of this Agreement):
(a)
the City has full legal right, power and authority to adopt the Ordinance, to enter
into, execute and deliver this Agreement and the other Loan Documents to which the City is a
party and to pledge its full faith and credit to the payment of the Loans, the Term Loans and the
other Obligations due and owing to the Bank hereunder; and the City has duly authorized and
approved the execution and delivery of this Agreement and the olher Loan Documents to which
the City is a party and the performance by the City of its obligations under this Agreement and
the other Loan Documents to which the City is a party;
(b)
no further authorization or approval is required for the City's execution and
delivery of this Agreement and the Letter Agreemeni, and each of this Agreement and the Letter
Agreement constitutes the legal, vedid and binding obligation of the City, when duly executed
and delivered by the parties hereto, and is enforceable in accordance with its terms, except as
such enforcement may be limited by bankruptcy, reorganization, insolvency, moratorium or
olher laws relating to or affecting the enforcement of creditors' rights generally, by general
principles of equity and by principles of public or governmental policy limiting the
enforceability of indemnification provisions; and no further authorization or approval is required
for the performance by the City of its obligations under this Agreement or the Letter Agreement;
(c)
the City Council has duly adopted the Ordinance which is in full force and effect.
The Loan Documents to which the City is a party have been duly executed and delivered by
authorized officers of the City, and are in full force and effect and are legal, valid and binding
obligations of the City, enforceable in accordance with their terms except as such enforcement
may be limited by bankruptcy, reorganization, insolvency, moratorium or other laws relating to
or affecting the enforcement of creditors' rights generally, by general principles of equity and by
principles of public or govemmental policy limiting the enforceability of indemnification
provisions;
(d)
payment of the Loans, the Term Loans and the other Obligations ofthe City to the
Bank pursuant to this Agreement will constitute a general obligation ofthe City to which the full
faith and credit of the City is pledged;

21

 (e)
all approvals, consents and orders of, registration, declarations and filings (except,
if any, under applicable state blue sky or securities laws) with, a federal, Slate or other
govemmental commission, board, regulatory body or instrumentality, having jurisdiction which
would constitute a condition precedent lo the performance by the City of its obligations under
this Agreement and the other Loan Documents to which it is a party, have been obtained or
made;
(f)
all legislation necessary to fulfill the terms and conditions of, and to carry out the
transactions contemplated by, the Ordinance, this Agreement and the olher Loan Documents is in
full force and effect;
(g)
the adoption of the Ordinance and the performance and compliance with the
provisions thereof do not, and the execution, delivery and performance of, and the canying out
of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement and the other Loan Documents lo which the
Cily is a party, do not and will not violate any existing law or administrative regulation of the
State or of any department, division, agency or instrumentality thereof or ofthe United Slates, or
any court or administrative regulation, judgment, decree or order to which the City is subject, or
conflict wilh in a material manner or constitute on the part of the City a material breach of, or a
material default under, any material provision of any agreement, ordinance, resolution or other
instrument to which the City is a party or is otherwise subject;
(h)

[reserved];

(i)
except as disclosed prior to the execution of this Agreement in writing to the
Bank, no action, suit or proceeding, al law or in equity, or before any court, public board or body
is pending (or to the knowledge of the City, threatened) against the City or any officers of the
City in their respective capacities as such (i) to restrain or enjoin the execution and delivery by
the City of this Agreement or the other Loan Documents, or (ii) in any manner questioning the
authority of the Cily to execute, deliver and perform this Agreemeni or the other Loan
Documents, or (iii) questioning the validity or enforceability of the Ordinance, this Agreement or
the other Loan Documents to which the City is a party, or (iv) questioning in any manner the
City's pledge of its ftiU faith and credit to the repayment of the Loans or the Term Loan or the
City's obligations lo the Bank pursuant to Uiis Agreement or the otiier Loan Documents, or (v)
which could materially adversely affect the business, financial condition or results of operation
ofthe City;
0)
the representations and wananties of the City set forth in the Loan Documents to
which it is a party as of the dale thereof are true and conect in all material respects;
(k)
the Loans, the Term Loans and the other Obligations of the City under this
Agreement constitute direct and general obligations of the City for the payment of which the
City has pledged its full faith and credit;
(1)
Change;

subsequent to December 31, 2012, there has not been any Material Adverse

(m)
there is no amendment, or, to the best of the City's knowledge, proposed
amendment certified for placement on a statewide ballot, to the Constitution of the State or any
22

 published administrative interpretation ofthe Constitution ofthe Slate or any State law, or any
legislation which has passed either house of the State legislature, or any published judicial
decision interpreting any ofthe foregoing, the effect of which would materially adversely affect
the Loans, this Agreement or any holder or beneficiary thereof in its capacity as such;
(n)
the City is a municipal corporation and "home rule unit" as that term is defined in
Section 6 of Article VII of the 1970 Constitution ofthe State. Pursuant to the provisions of
Section 6(a) of Article VII and subject lo the limitations of that Article, the City may exercise
any power and perform anyftmctionpertaining to its govemment and affairs including, but not
limited to, the power to tax and to incur debt;
(o)
in connection wilh the execution and delivery of this Agreement and the other
Loan Documents, the City has complied in all material respects wilh the Ordinance and the
Constitution and laws of the State;
(p)
thefinancialstatements ofthe City made available to the Bank in accordance with
clause (i) of Section 4.01(b) fairly present tiie financial position and results of operation ofthe
City as of the date and for the period therein .set forth, and the financial statements have been
prepared in accordance with GAAP, except as otherwise noted in such financial statements. No
Material Adverse Change as shown on such financial statements has occuned since the date of
suchfinancialstatements;
(q)
except as disclosed prior lo the execution of this Agreement in writing to the
Bank, the City is not in default under any material provision of (i) the Ordinance or this
Agreemeni, or (ii) any other Loan Document to which i l is a party, or under any other material
agreements or instruments relating to the City (to the extent such default would have a material
adverse effect on the security for the Loans or the Term Loans or the City's ability lo pay when
due the obligations under this Agreement or the rights and remedies of the Bank);
(r)
except as disclosed by the City in writing to the Bank, the Cily has not received
notice lo the effect that the operations of the Cily are not in compliance with any of the
requirements of applicable Federal, health and safety statutes and regulations or Environmental
Laws, or are the subject of any governmental investigation evaluating whether any remedial
action is needed to respond to a release of any toxic or hazardous waste or substance into the
environment, which non-compliance or remedial action would have a material adverse effect on
the security for the Loans or the City's ability lo pay the obligations under this Agreemeni;
(s)
the City will apply the proceeds of the Loans in accordance wiih the terms and
provisions of the Ordinance and this Agreement;
(t)
Ihe City is subject to suit with respect to its obligations under this Agreement and
no sovereign immunity exists under Illinois law as of the date that this Agreement is executed
and delivered by the City, with respect lo the City's contractual obligations under this
Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing or any olher provision of this Agreement, notiiing in
this Agreement shall be deemed to create any rights of action for persons or entities not a pai1y to
this Agreement or to circumvent any of the immunities conlained in the Local Govemment and
Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, 745 ILCS 10/1-101 el seq., as amended;

23

 (u)
the Cily has not taken any action or omitted to take any action, and knows of no
action taken by any Govemmental Authority, which action, if taken or omitted, would adversely
affect the exclusion of interest on the Tax-Exempt Loans from gross income for purposes of
federal or State income taxation; and
(v)
to its knowledge, the City, its officers and elected officials are in compliance with
Anti-Corruption Laws and applicable Sanctions in all material respects except as disclosed to the
Bank by the City in writing. No Loan or Term Loan, use of proceeds or other transaction
contemplated by this Agreemeni will violate Anti-Corraplion Laws or applicable Sanctions.
ARTICLE IV
COVENANTS OF THE CITY
Section 4.01 Covenants of the City. Until the Commitment has expired or been
terminated and the principal of and interest on each Loan (including, without limitation, the
Term Loan) and all fees and other Obligations payable under this Agreement and the Letter
Agreemeni shall have been paid in ftiU, unless the Bank shall otherwise consent in writing, the
City covenants and agrees as follows:
(a)
Notice of Default. Upon an Autiiorized Officer or the City's Corporation
Counsel's office becoming aware of the existence of any Default under Section 6.01(d), (h) or (j)
hereof or any Event of Default, tiie City will give prompt notice in wrifing to tiie Bank of the
occurrence of such evenl and of any other development, financial or otherwise, which could
reasonably be expected to materially adversely affect the City's operations, properties or affairs
or the ability ofthe City to perform its obligations under this Agreement, which notice shall state
what action the City proposes lo lake in regard lo such occunence.
(b)
Information. The Cily will deliver to the Bank, in as many copies as il reasonably
shall request, as soon as available, the following documents:
(i)
within 240 days after the close of each of its fiscal years, the financial
statements ofthe City certified by independent certified public accountants goveming the
operations of the City for such fiscal year and containing balance sheets, statements of
revenues, expenses and changes in retained earnings and statements of cash flows of the
City for such fiscal year, all prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles;
(ii)

the City's annual budget and the City's annual appropriation ordinance;

(iii)
upon the request of the Bank, any disclosure documents distributed in
connection wilh any public issue of the City secured by the general obligation of the City;
(iv)
simultaneously whh the delivery of the financial .statements described in
clause (i) above and upon the request of tiie Bank, a certificate of an Authorized Officer
ofthe City stating that the City has no knowledge of any Default under Section 6.01(d),

24

 (h) or (j) or any Event of Default under ihis Agreement, or if any such circumstance shall
exist, such certificate shall state the nature and status thereof; and
(v)
from time to lime such additional information regarding the financial
condition of the City as the Bank may reasonably request.
The City shall be deemed to have furnished the information specified in clauses (i) and
(ii) above on the date that such information is posted at the City's website on the Internet at
www.cilyofchicago.org or al such other website as notified to the Bank in writing.
(c)
Books and Records: Inspection of Records. The City shall keep adequate records
and books of account, in which complete entries will be made, reflecting all material financial
transactions of the City. Upon the reasonable request of the Bank and during normal business
hours, and following the occurrence of an Evenl of Default and the continuance thereof, at the
expense of the City, the City will give the Bank, or any attomey-in-facl or counsel therefor,
access to and permission lo examine, copy or make excerpts from, any and all books, records and
documents under conlrol of the City relating to the financial condition of the City.
(d)
Compliance with Law. The City will comply with and observe the obligations
and requirements set forth in the Ordinance, and in the Constitution of the State and in all
statutes and regulations binding upon it relating to this Agreement or the other Loan Documents
to which it is a party.
(e)
Notices. The City shall promptly furnish, or cause to be furnished, to the Bank (i)
each notice required to be given to the Bank pursuant to the Ordinance, (ii) notice of any change
in any long-term credit rating issued by any of S&P, Fitch or Moody's wilh respect to the Parity
Debt, and (iii) notice of any litigation or administrative proceeding which, i f adversely
determined, could reasonably be expected to materially adversely affect the security for the
Loans or the ability ofthe City lo pay its obligations to the Bank under this Agreement or to pay
its obligations under any of the Loan Documents to which it is a party.
(f)
Maintenance of Approvals: Filings. Etc. The City at all times shall maintain in
effect, renew and comply with all the lerms and conditions of all consents, licenses, approvals
and authorizations as may be necessary under any applicable law or regulation for its execution
and delivery of (i) this Agreement, and (ii) with respect to the other Loan Documents to which
the City is a party, to the extent that failure to do so would have a material adverse effect on the
security for the Loans or the City's ability to pay when due the obligations of the City under this
Agreement or the rights and remedies ofthe Bank.
(g)
Special Remedies. The City will extend to the Bank, by amendment of the terms
of this Agreemeni, any special acceleration remedies which the Cily may hereafter grant under
any Parity Debt hereafter issued by the City pursuant lo the Ordinance.
(h)
Amendments. The City shall not amend, or consent to the amendment of any
Loan Document which could have a material adverse effect on the City's ability lo pay its
obligations hereunder, without the prior written consent of the Bank, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld.

25

 (i)
Incorporation of Terms. So long as this Agreement is in effect, except to the
extent compliance in any case or cases is waived in writing by the Bank, the City agrees that lo
the extent that the City enters into any other revolving line of credit agreemeni which is secured
by the City's general obligation and which grants a creditor a more favorable amortization (i.e.
shorter tenor) of loans or other obligations than what is contained in this Agreement, or enters
into any olher revolving line of credit agreement which is secured by the City's general
obligation and which contains no term out of outstanding loans at the maturity of such facility
(i.e. the loans or other obligations payable by the Cily thereunder are due and payable at
maturity), such shorter amortization or bullet maturity term, together wilh the relaled definitions,
exhibits and ancillary provisions, shall be deemed incorporated into the terms hereof by
reference, mutatis mutandis, and made a part hereof to the same extent and with the same force
and effect as if the same had been herein set forth in their entirety. The Cily shall provide
written notice to the Bank of the existence of such terms, and at the request ofthe Bank, the City
further covenants to promptly execute and deliver at its expense an amendment to this
Agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank evidencing the amendment of this
Agreemeni to include such incorporated provisions, provided that the execution and delivery of
such amendment shall not be a precondition to the effectiveness of such incorporated terms as
provided for in this Section 4.0 l(i), but shall merely be for tiie convenience of the parties hereto.
It is understood by the parties hereto that, -with respect lo such provisions as incorporated into
this Agreement, no amendment or modification of the original credii agreement in which such
terms were originally provided or any waiver of compliance therewith, shall constitute an
amendment, modification or waiver of the provisions thereof as incorporated herein for the
benefit ofthe Bank unless consented to in writing by the Bank.
(j)
Credii Facilities. The City shall not enter into or otherwise consent lo any
amendment, supplement or other modification of any reimbursement agreement with a credii
provider in connection with Parity Debt which impairs the security provided to the Bank for
repayment of the obligations of the City hereunder, without the prior written consent of the
Bank.
(k)
Sovereign Immunity. To the extent permitted by law, in any action, suit,
litigation or proceeding, the City shall not claim sovereign immunity wilh respect to any
obligations of tiie City under this Agreement; provided that pursuant to any laws of the State of
Illinois, the City shall not waive any sovereign immunities from time lo time available under the
laws of said State as lo jurisdiction and procedures. Notwithstanding the foregoing or any olher
provision of this Agreement, nothing in tiiis Agreement shall be deemed lo create any rights of
action for persons or entities not a party lo tiiis Agreement or to circumvent any of the
immunities conlained in the Local Government and Govemmental Employees Tort Immunity
Act, 745 ILCS 10/1-101 et seq., as amended.
(1)
Maintenance of Tax-Exempt Status. The City shall not act in any other manner
which would adversely affect the exclusion of the interest on the Tax-Exempt Loans from tiie
gross income ofthe Beneficial Owners thereof for federal income or State income lax purposes.
(m)
Further Assurances. At any time and from time to time the City shall execute and
deliver such ftirther instruments and lake such fiirther action as may reasonably be requested by
the Bank to effect the purposes of this Agreement.

26

 (n)
Use of Proceeds. The City will not request any Loan, including, without
limitation, the Term Loan, and the City shall not use, and shall ensure that its officers, employees
and elected officials shall not use, the proceeds of any Loan (A) in violation of any AntiCorruption Laws, or (B) in any manner that would result in the violation of any Sanctions
applicable to any party hereto.
ARTICLE V
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT
Section 5.01 Conditions to Effective Dale. It shall be a condition precedent to the
obligation of the Bank to make Loans that all proceedings taken in connection with the
transactions contemplated hereby and all documents incident thereto including the Loan
Documents shall be in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank and that the conditions
enumerated in this Seciion 5.01 have been fulfilled to the satisfaction of the Bank and ils
counsel, Winston & Slrawn LLP. Delivery by the Bank of fully executed signature pages to this
Agreement shall constitute acknowledgment and acceptance by the Bank that all such conditions
have been met or waived.
(a)
Representations. The City shall represent, as of the Effective Date (and after
giving effect to the effectiveness hereot), and deliver a certificate as ofsuch date lo such effect,
that (i) there shall exist no Default or Event of Default hereunder, (ii) all representations and
wananties made by the City herein shall be true, conect and complete as of the Effective Date,
and (iii) to the best knowledge of the City, except as otherwise disclosed to the Bank in writing,
no Material Adverse Change shall have occurred since December 31, 2012, the date of tiie most
recent audited financial statements provided lo the Bank.
(b)
Supporting Documents. On or prior to the date of the execution and delivery of
tiiis Agreement, the Bank shall have received, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank, the
following:
(i)
Agreement;

true and complete executed originals of this Agreement and the Letter

(ii)
(i) above;

executed or certified copies of each other Loan Document not specified in

(iii)
(A) a certificate ofthe Cily in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank,
executed by the City Clerk, dated the Effective Date, to the effect that the Ordinance has
been adopted and approved by the City Council of the City (which ordinance shall be
attached to such certificate), and remains in full force and effect and (B) an incumbency
certificate with respect to the officers or agents of the Cily who are aulhorized to execute
any documents or instruments on behalf of the City under this Agreement and the other
Loan Documents to which the City is a party;
(iv)
an executed legal opinion, dated the dale of the execution and delivery of
this Agreement, addressed to the Bank and in fom and substance satisfactory to the

27

 Bank, of counsel to the City covering such matters as the Bank may reasonably request;
and
(v)
such other documents, instruments, approvals (and, i f requested by the
Bank, certified duplicates of executed copies thereof) or opinions as the Bank may
reasonably request.
(c)
Certain Payments. The Cily shall have paid the amounts specified to be paid on
the Effective Date pursuant to the Letter Agreement.
(d)
No Legal Limitations. No law, regulation, ruling or other action of the United
States or the State of Illinois or any political subdivision or authority therein or thereof shall be
in effect or shall have occurred, the effect of which would be to prevent the Bank from fulfilling
its obligations under this Agreement.
(e)
Satisfaction of Legal Requirements. All legal requirements provided herein
incident to the execution, dehvery and performance ofthe Loan Documents and the transacfions
contemplated thereby, shall be reasonably satisfactory to the Bank and Bank's counsel.
Section 5.02 Conditions Precedent to Each Loan. The obligation of the Bank to make
a Loan at any time is subject to the satisfaction of the following conditions on the date of funding
of such Loan: (a) the representations and wananties contained in Article IV of this Agreement
are true and correct in all material respects as of such date; and (b) no event has occuned and is
continuing, or would result from such payment, which constitutes a Default or Event of Default.
Unless the City shall have previously advised the Bank in writing that the above
statement is no longer true, the City shall be deemed to have represented and wananted on the
date of such Loan that the above statement is true and conect.
Section 5.03 Conditions Precedent to Term Loan. On the Commhment Maturity Dale,
a Term Loan shall be made available to the City only if on such dale (a) the representations and
wananties contained in Article IV of this Agreement are true and correct in all material respects
as of such date; and (b) no event has occurred and is continuing, or would result from such
payment, which constitutes a Default or Event of Default.
Unless the City shall have previously advised the Bank in writing that the above
statement is no longer true, the City shall be deemed to have represented and warranted on the
date of such payment that the above statement is true and conect.
Section 5.04 Condition Precedent to Tax-Exempt Loan.
Wilh respect to each
Bonowing Request pursuant lo which tiie City shall have requested that the Bank fimd a TaxExempt Loan on the date specified in such Bonowing Request, a Tax-Exempt Loan shall be
made available to the Cily only if on the date of delivery by the City of such Bonowing Request,
the Bank shall have received an executed legal opinion, dated the date of such Bonowing
Request with respect to such Tax-Exempt Loan, addressed to the Bank and in form and
substance satisfactory to the Bank, of Bond Counsel covering such matters as the Bank may
reasonably request with respect to such Tax-Exempt Loan, including, without limitation, an

28

 opinion which concludes that all interest receivable by the Bank in respect of such Tax-Exempt
Loan is excludable from gross income of the Bank for federal and state income tax purposes.
ARTICLE VI
EVENTS OF DEFAULT; REMEDIES
Seciion 6.01 Events of Default. The occunence and continuance of any one or more of
the following events shall be an event of default ("Event of Default"):
(a)
the City fails to pay, or cause to be paid, when due: (i) any principal of or interest
on any Loan, including, without limitation, the Term Loan, for any reason; or (ii) any olher
Obligation owing to the Bank hereunder or under the Letter Agreement and such failure
continues for fifteen (15) Business Days after the City shall have received written notice from
the Bank that the same was not paid when due;
(b)
any "event of default" shall have occurred under any of the Loan Documents (as
defined respectively therein);
(c)
any representation, wananty or statement made by or on behalf of the City herein
or in any Loan Document or in any certificate delivered pursuant hereto or thereto shall prove to
be untrue in any material respect on the date as of which made or deemed made; or the
documents, certificates or statements of the City (including unaudited financial reports, budgets,
projections and cash flows of the City) ftimished to the Bank by or on behalf of the City in
connection with the transactions contemplated hereby, when taken as a whole, are materially
inaccurate in light of the circumstances under which they were made and as of the date on which
they were made;
(d)
(i) the City fails to perform or observe any term, covenant or agreement conlained
in Section 4.01 (other than subsection (b) thereof); or (ii) the City fails to perform or observe any
other term, covenant or agreement contained in this Agreement (other than those referred to in
Sections 6.01(a) and (d)(i)) and any such failure cannot be cured or, if curable, remains uncured
after the earlier of (A) thirty (30) days after written notice thereof lo the City, or (B) knowledge
by responsible officers ofthe City ofthe occunence thereof;
(e)
this Agreement or any Loan Document or any material provision hereof or thereof
shall al any time for any reason cease to be valid and binding on the Cily or any other party
thereto or shall be declared lo be null and void, or the validity or enforceability thereof shall be
contested by an Authorized Officer of the Cily or such other party thereto or by any
Governmental Authority having jurisdiction, or the City or such other party shall deny that it has
any or further liability or obligation under any such document;
(f)
any provision of the Ordinance relating to the City's ability to pay the Obligations
or perform its obligafions hereunder or the rights and remedies of the Bank, or any Loan
Document or any material provision thereof shall cease to be in full force or effect, or any
Authorized Officer of the City shall deny or disaffirm the City's obligations under any Loan
Document;

29

 (g)
a debt moratorium, debt restructuring, debt adjustment or comparable restriction
is imposed on the repayment when due and payable of the principal of or interest on any debts of
the City;
(h)
(i) the City shall commence any case, proceeding or other action (A) under any
existing or future law of any jurisdiction, domestic or foreign, relating to bankruptcy, insolvency,
reorganization or relief of debtors, seeking to have an order for relief entered with respect to it,
or seeking to adjudicate it a bankrupt or insolvent, or seeking reorganization, anangement,
adjustment, winding-up, liquidation, dissolution, composition or other relief wilh respect to il or
its debts, or (B) seeking appointment of a receiver, trustee, custodian or olher similar official for
it or for all or any substantial part of the City or shall make a general assignment for the benefit
of its creditors; or (ii) there shall be commenced against the City any case, proceeding or other
action of a nature refened to in clause (i) above which (x) results in an order for such relief or in
the appointment of a receiver or similar official or (y) remains undismissed, undischarged or
unbonded for a period of sixty (60) days; or (iii) there shall be commenced against the Cily, any
case, proceeding or olher action seeking issuance of a wanant of attachment, execution, distraint
or similar process against all or any substantial part of the City, which results in the entry of an
order for any such relief which shall not have been vacated, discharged, or stayed or bonded
pending appeal wilhin sixty (60) days from the entry thereof; or (iv) the City shall take any
action in furtherance of, or indicating ils consent to, approval of, or acquiescence in, any of the
acts set forth in clause (i), (ii) or (iii) above; or (v) the City shall generally not, or shall be unable
to, or so admit in writing its inabihty to, pay hs debts as they become due;
(i)
the City shall (i) default in any payment of principal of, premium, i f any, or
interest on any Parity Debt; or (ii) default in the observance or performance of any other
agreement or condition relating to any Parity Debt, or contained in any instrument or agreement
evidencing, securing or relating thereto, or any other event shall occur or condhion exist, the
effect of which default or other event or condition is to cause, or to permit the holder or holders
of such Parity Debt (or a trustee or agent on behalf of such holder or holders or beneficiary or
beneficiaries), to cause, with the giving of notice if required, such bonds or obligations to
become due and payable;
(j)
any final, non-appealable judgment or judgments, writ or writs or wanant or
wanants of attachment, or any similar process or processes in an aggregate amount in excess of
$25,000,000 shall be rendered against the City or the property of the City and remain unpaid,
unvacated, unbonded, uninsured, or unstayed for a period of sixty (60) days; or
(k)
the long-term rating of Parity Debt is lowered below "BBB" (or its equivalent) by
S&P, "BBB" (or its equivalent) by Filch or "Baa2" (or its equivalent) by Moody's, or such longterm rafings are suspended, withdrawn or otherwise become unavailable by S&P, Fitch or
Moody's.
Section 6.02 Remedies. Upon the occunence of any Event of Default, the Bank may
exercise any one or more of the following rights and remedies in addition to any other remedies
herein or by law provided:

30

 (a)
terminate;

terminate the Commitment and thereupon the Commitment shall immediately

(b)
by written notice to the Cily, declare all Obligations to be, and such amounts shall
thereupon become, immediately due and payable without presentment, demand, protest or other
notice of any kind, all of which are hereby waived by the City; provided that upon the occunence
ofan Event of Default under Seciion 6.01(h) hereof such acceleration shall automatically occur
(unless such automatic acceleration is waived by the Bank in writing);
(c)

pursue any rights and remedies it may have under the Loan Documents; or

(d)

pursue any other action available at law or in equity.
ARTICLE VII
MISCELLANEOUS

Section 7.01 Changes to Agreemeni. No provision of this Agreement may be changed,
waived, discharged or terminated orally, but only by an instrument in writing signed by the
parties hereto. Any such waiver or consent shall be effective only in the specific instance and for
the specific purpose for which given. No delay or omission of the Bank lo exercise any right
under this Agreemeni or the Loan Documents shall impair such right or be construed to be a
waiver of any Default or Event of Default or an acquiescence therein, and any single or partial
exercise of any such right shall not preclude any other or further exercise thereof or the exercise
of any olher right.
Section 7.02 Successors and Assigns, (a) This Agreement shall be binding upon and
inure to the benefit of and be enforceable by the respective successors and assigns of the parties
hereto; provided, however, that (i) the City may not assign or transfer any of its rights or
obligations hereunder without the prior written consent ofthe Bank and any assignment without
such consent shall be void, and (ii) unless the intended assignee is an Affiliate of the Bank, the
Bank may not assign or transfer any of ils rights or obligations hereunder without the prior
written consent ofthe Cily and any assignment without such consent shall be void (provided that
no such consent ofthe City shall be required upon the occunence and during the continuance of
any Event of Default hereunder). The Bank shall have the right at any time lo grant
participations in all or part of its obligations hereunder and the obligations of the City hereunder
to any other institutional purchaser (the "Participants") without the consent of or notice to the
City or any other Person; provided, however, that any such participation shall not relieve the
Bank from any of ils obligations under this Agreement and the City shall deal exclusively with
the Bank for all purposes of this Agreement (including the making of all payments on Loans).
The Bank may disclose lo any Participant or prospective Participant any information or other
data or material in the Bank's possession relating to this Agreement, any Loan Document and the
City, without the consent of or notice to the City.
(b)
Notwithslanding the foregoing, the Bank may assign and pledge all or any portion
of the amounts owing to il with respect to the Loans hereunder lo any Federal Reserve Bank or
the United States Treasury as collateral security pursuant to Regulation A of the Board of

31

 Governors of the Federal Reserve System and any Operating Circular issued by such Federal
Reserve Bank. No such assignment shall release the Bank from its obligations under this
Agreement.
Section 7.03 Goveming Law; Waiver of Jury Trial, (a) This Agreement shall be
deemed to be a contract under, and for all purposes shall be govemed by, and construed and
interpreted in accordance wilh, the laws ofthe State.
(b)
The City and the Bank each hereby inevocably waives any and all right to trial by
jury in any legal proceeding arising out of or relating to this Agreement and any Loan Document
or the transactions contemplated hereby and thereby.
Section 7.04 Notice. Any notice, demand, direction, request or other instrument
authorized or required by this Agreemeni lo be given to or filed with the Bank or the City, shall
be deemed or have been sufficiendy given or filed for all purposes, if any, when delivered by
hand or when sent by registered mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, and if given by
telecopy shall be deemed given when transmitted (receipt confirmed):
If to the Bank, to:
JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association
KlIOACIliO

Witii a copy lo:
JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association
KUIJACTIII)

And, for compliance-related
items, with a copy lo:
KLDAirtU

If to the Cily:
City of Chicago
Office of the Comptroller

32

 RIIOACIIH)

Section 7.05 Obligations Absolute. The obligations of the City under this Agreement
shall be absolute, unconditional and inevocable, and shall be paid strictly in accordance with the
terms of this Agreement under all circumstances whatsoever, including, without limitation: (i)
any lack of validity, enforceability or legal effect of this Agreemeni or any Loan Document, or
any term or provision herein or therein; (ii) the existence of any claim, set-off, defense or other
right that the City or any other Person may have at any lime against the Bank or any other
Person; and (iii) any other event, circumstance or conduct whatsoever, whether or not similar to
any ofthe foregoing, that might, but for this paragraph, constitute a legal or equitable defense to
or discharge of, or provide a right of set-off against, the City's obligations hereunder (whether
against the Bank or any other Person); provided, however, that subject lo Section 7.08 hereof, the
foregoing shall not exculpate the Bank from such liability to the City as may, be finally,
judicially determined in an independent action or proceeding brought by the Cily against the
Bank following payment of the City's obligations under this Agreement.
Section 7.06 Holidays. Except as otherwise provided herein, whenever any payment or
action to be made or taken hereunder shall be staled lo be due on a day which is not a Business
Day, such payment or action shall be made or taken on the next following Business Day, and
such extension of lime shall be included in computing interesl or fees, if any, in connection with
such payment or action.
Section 7.07 Survival. All representations, wananties, covenanis and agreements of the
City contained in this Agreement as amended or supplemented from time to time or made in
writing in connection herewith shall survive the execution and delivery hereof and thefiindingof
the Loans by the Bank hereunder and shall continue in full force and effect until payment in full
of all Obligations of the City hereunder, it being understood that the agreements of the City
found in Article II and 7.09 shall survive the termination of this Agreement and payment in full'
ofsuch Obligations.
Section 7.08 Liability of the Bank, (a) Neither the Bank nor any of ils officers or
directors shall be liable or responsible for: (i) the use which may be made of the Loans or for
any acts or omissions of the Cily in connection therewith; (ii) the validity, sufficiency, accuracy
or genuineness of documents, or of any endorsement thereon, even if such documents should in
fact prove to be in any or all respects invalid, insufficient, fraudulent or forged; (iii) payment by
the Bank to the City against presentation of documents which do not comply with the lerms of
this Agreement, including failure of any documents to bear any reference or adequate reference
lo this Agreement; (iv) for enors, omissions, interruptions or delays in transmission or delivery
of any messages, by mail, cable, telegraph, telex, telecopier or otherwise; (v) for any loss or
delay in the transmission or otherwise of any document required in order to fund a Loan; or (vi)
any other circumstances whatsoever in funding a Loan; except only that the City shall have a
claim against the Bank, and the Bank shall be liable to the City, to the extent, but only to the
extent, of any direct, as opposed to consequential, damages suffered by the City which the Cily

33

 proves were caused by (x) the Bank's willftil misconduct or gross negligence in determining
whether documents presented under this Agreemeni comply with the terms thereof or (y) the
Bank's willfijl misconduct or gross negligence in failing to pay under this Agreemeni after the
presentation to il by the Cily of a certificate strictly complying with the terms and conditions of
this Agreement. In furtherance and not in limitation of the foregoing, the Bank may accept
documents that appear on their face lo be in order, without responsibility for further
investigation, regardless of any notice or information to the conirary.
(b)
The Cily assumes all risks associated with the acceptance by the Bank of
documents received by telecommunication, it being agreed that the use of telecommunication
devices is for the benefit of the City and tiiat the Bank assumes no liabilities or risks with respect
tiiereto.
Seciion 7.09 Certain Costs; Indemnification, (a) Pursuant to and subject to the terms
of the Letter Agreement, the City hereby agrees to pay on demand all reasonable costs and
expenses incuned by the Bank, in connection with the preparation, execution, delivery and
administration of this Agreement and any other documents that may be delivered in connection
herewith or therewith, including, without limitation, the reasonable fees and out of pocket
expenses of counsel for the Bank. The City hereby also agrees to pay on demand all reasonable
costs and expenses (including, without limitation, the reasonable fees and out of pocket expenses
of its legal counsel, including in house counsel for the Bank) incuned by the Bank with respect
to advising the Bank as to its rights and responsibilities under this Agreement and any Loan
Document or any waiver or amendment of, or the enforcement of, this Agreement, any Loan
Document and such other documents which may be delivered in connection with this Agreemeni.
In addition, the Cily shall pay any and all stamp and olher taxes and fees payable or determined
to be payable in connection with the execution, delivery, filing and recording of this Agreemeni
and the security contemplated by any Loan Document and agrees to hold the Bank harmless
from and against any and all liabilities with respect to or resulting from any delay in paying or
omission to pay such taxes and fees. In addition, the City agrees lo pay, after the occunence of
an Event of Default, all costs and expenses (including attomeys' fees and costs of settlement)
incuned by the Bank in enforcing any obligations or in collecting any paymenls due from the
Cily hereunder by reason of such Event of Default or in connection with any refinancing or
resti:ucturing of tiie credit anangements provided under this Agreement in the nature of a
"workout" or of any insolvency or bankruptcy proceedings.
(b)
To the extent permitted by law, the City agrees lo indemnify and hold harmless
the Bank, its officers, directors, employees and agents (each an "Indemnified Party") from and
against any and all claims, damages, losses, liabilities, reasonable costs or expenses whatsoever
which an Indemnified Party may incur (or which may be claimed against an Indemnified Party
by any Person) by reason of or in connection with the execution and delivery of and
consummation of the transactions contemplated under this Agreement and any Loan Document,
including, without limitation, the execution and delivery of, or payment or failure to pay by any
Person (other than the Bank, as and when required by the terms and provisions hereof) under this
Agreement; provided, however, that the City shall not be required to indemnify the Bank for any
claims, damages, losses, liabilities, costs or expenses to the extent, but only to the extent, caused
by (y) the willful misconduct or gross negligence of the Bank. Nothing in this Section 7.09 is

34

 intended to limit the obligations of the Cily lo pay its other obligations hereunder and under the
Loan Documents.
Section 7.10 Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in two or more
counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original but all of which, when taken together
shall constitute one and the same instrument.
Seciion 7.11 Severability. If any provision of this Agreement shall be held or deemed
to be or shall in fact be illegal, inoperative or unenforceable, the same shall not affect any other
provision or provisions herein conlained or render the same invalid, inoperative or unenforceable
to any extent whatsoever.
Section 7.12 Headings. Article and Section headings and the Table of Contents used
herein are for convenience of reference only, are not part of this Agreement and shall not affect
the construction of, or be taken into consideration in interpreting, this Agreement,
Section 7.13 Dissemination of Information. The Bank may disseminate information
relating to the City, this Agreement or any Loan (i) in connection with any assignment or
participation; (ii) upon the order of any court or otherwise to the extent required by statute, rule,
regulation or judicial process; (iii) lo bank examiners or upon the request or demand of any other
administrative, regulatory agency, or authority; or (iv) to any domestic or foreign branch,
subsidiary or affiliate, representative office or agent of the Bank and third parties selected by any
of the foregoing entities, wherever situated, for confidential use (including in connection with the
provision of any service and for data processing, statistical and risk analysis purposes), or in
connection with the Bank's performance, administration or enforcement of this Agreement.
Section 7.14 USA PATRIOT Act. The Bank, lo the extent that it is subject to the
requirements of the USA Patriot Act (Title III of Pub. L. 107-56 (signed into law October 26,
2001)) (the "Act"), hereby notifies the City that pursuant to the requirements of the Act, it is
required to obtain, verify and record information that identifies the City, which information
includes the name and address of the City and other information that will allow the Bank to
identify the City in accordance with the Act.

[signature page immediately follows]

35

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto, by their officerstiiereuntoduly authorized,
have executed and delivered this Agreement, effective as of the day and yearfirstabove written.
CITY OF CHICAGO

JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION
By:_
Title:

l<i;i)AtTCD

Signature page lo
Revolving Line ofCredit Agieemem

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF, tiie parties hereto, by their officers thereunto duly authorized,
have executed and delivered this Agreement, effective as of the day and year first above written.
CITY OF CHICAGO

By:_
Title: I

JPMORGAN CHASE BANK. NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION

By: .
Title:

Signature page to
Revolving Line of Credit Agreement

 EXHIBIT A

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
CITY OF CHICAGO

CITY OF CHICAGO
LOAN NOTE
$200,000,000

Chicago, Illinois
April 25,2014

THE CITY OF CHICAGO (the "City") hereby promises to pay to the order of
JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, a national banking association (the
"Bank") in the manner and on the dates provided in the hereinafter defined Agreement in lawful
money ofthe United Stales of America and in immediately available funds the aggregate amount
of all Obligations of the Cily owing to the Bank pursuant to the terms of the Agreement, plus
accrued interest thereon. Terms used herein and not otherwise defined herein shall have the
meanings assigned lo them in the Revolving Line of Credit Agreement dated as of April 25,
2014 (as it may be amended from time to time, the "Agreement"), by and between the City of
Chicago and the Bank.
This Loan Nole is the Loan Note referred lo in the Agreement. This Loan Note is issued
pursuant to and in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the Stale of Illinois, pursuant to
and in accordance wilh that certain ordinance adopted by the City Council of the Cily on May 1,
2002, as amended by (i) that certain ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on March
14, 2012, and (ii) that certain ordinance adopted by the City Council ofthe Cily on February 5,
2014 (collectively, the "Ordinance"), to evidence Obligations, if any, made for the purpose of
providing funds to the Cily.
This Loan Note constitutes a direct and general obligation of the City to which the fiill
faith, credii and resources of the Cily are pledged.
The City hereby authorizes the Bank lo make appropriate notations on Schedule 1
attached hereto of all Loans evidenced hereby and all principal payments and prepayments made
hereunder and of the date to which interest hereon has been paid; provided, however, that the
Bank's failure to make any such notation or any defecl therein shall not affect the obligations of
the City to pay the full amount ofthe principal of and inlerest on all Loans.
Reference is hereby made to the Ordinance and the Agreemeni for the provisions, among
other things, with respect to the nature and extent of the security for this Loan Note, the manner
and enforcement of such security, the custody and application of the proceeds of this Loan Note
and the rights, duties and obligations ofthe City and the Bank.
Il is hereby certified, recited and declared that all acts, conditions and things required to
exist, happen and to be performed, precedent to and in the issuance of this Loan Note, do exist,

A-l

 have happened and have been performed in due time, form and manner as required by the
Constitution and statutes of the State of Illinois, and that the total indebtedness of the City,
including indebtedness evidenced by this Loan Nole, does not exceed any Constitutional or
statutory limitation. This Loan Note shall be govemed by and construed in accordance with the
intemal laws ofthe State of Illinois.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City, by authority of its Cily Council, has caused this note
to be signed for and on its behalf and in its name by the Chief Financial Officer, and the official
seal of the City of Chicago to be affixed hereto, all as of the 25th day of April, 2014.
CITY OF CHICAGO

By:.
Name:

Titie: I

A-2

KlZllACrED
KIIDACTED

 LOAN NOTE
SCHEDULE 1

LOANS AND
REPAYMENTS OF LOANS
Date

Amounl of
Loan

Taxable or
Tax-Exempt
Loan

Eurodollar
Rale or ABR
Rale witii
Respect
Thereto

A-3

Amount of
Principal
Repaid

Unpaid
Principal
Balance of
Loans

Notation
Made Bv

 EXHIBIT B

BORIWWING REQUEST
,20
JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association
REDACIED

Whh a copy to:
JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association
REDACTED

Re:

Bonowing Request

This Bonowing Request is being delivered pursuant to Section 2.03 of the Revolving Line
of Credh Agreemeni, dated as of April 25, 2014 (the "Credit Agreement"), between the City of
Chicago (the "City'S and JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association (the "Bank"). All
capitalized terms used but not defined herein shall have the meaning specified for such terms in the
Credit Agreement.

B-1

 

 

Dated: 20_ CITY OF CHICAGO

By:
Name:
Title:

 

B-2

EXHIBIT C

REALLOCATION OF COMMITMENT NOTICE
,20
JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association
REDACTED

With a copy to:
JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association
REDACIED

Re:

Reallocation of Commitment Notice

This Reallocation of Commitment Notice is being delivered pursuant to, and in accordance
with. Section 2.01(b) of the Revolving Line of Credit Agreement, dated as of April 25, 2014 (the
"Credit Agreemeni"). between the Cily of Chicago (the "City") and JPMorgan Chase Bank,
National Association (the "Bank"). All capitalized terms used but not defined herein shall have
the meaning specified for such terms in the Credit Agreemeni.
The City hereby irrevocably notifies the Bank that the Commitment of the Bank shall be
allocated between the Tax-Exempt Commitment and the Taxable Commitment as follows:
1.

Prior to giving effect lo this Reallocation of Commitment Notice, the Tax-Exempt
Commitment of the Bank under the Credit Agreemeni is S
, and the
Taxable Commitment of the Bank under ihe Credit Agreemeni is
$

2.

.

Pursuant lo this Reallocation of Commitment Notice, the City hereby requests thai
the Tax-Exempt Commitment of the Bank under the Credit Agreement be changed
to $
, and the Taxable Commitment of the Bank under the Credii
Agreement be changed to $
.

C-I

 Follov/ing such reallocation, (a) the sum of the total Tax-Exempt Loans outstanding
shall not exceed the Tax-Exempt Commitment, (b) the sum of the total Taxable
Loans outstanding shall not exceed the Taxable Commitment, and (c) the sum of
the total Loans outstanding shall not exceed the Commitment.
The Business Day of the requested effective date of the reallocation is:
, 20 .
Dated:

, 20_

CITY OF CHICAGO

By:_
Name:
Titie:

C-2

 EXHIBIT 

THE NOTE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
CITY OF CHICAGO

CITY OF CHICAGO
LOAN NOTE
$200,000,000

Chicago, Illinois
April 25, 2014

THE CITY OF CHICAGO (the "City") hereby promises to pay to the order of
JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, a national banking association (the
"Bank") in the manner and on the dates provided in the hereinafter defined Agreement in lawful
money ofthe United States of America and in immediately available funds the aggregate amount
of al! Obligations of the City owing to the Bank pursuant to the terms of the Agreement, plus
accrued interest thereon. Terms used herein and not otherwise defined herein shall have the
meanings assigned to them in the Revolving Line of Credit Agreement dated as of April 25,
2014 (as it may be amended from time to time, the "Agreement"), by and between the City of
Chicago and the Bank.
This Loan Note is the Loan Note referred to in the Agreement. This Loan Note is issued
pursuant to and in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois, pursuant to
and in accordance with that certain ordinance adopted by the City Council ofthe City on May 1,
2002, as amended by (i) that certain ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on March
14, 2012, and (ii) that certain ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City on February 5,
2014 (collectively, the "Ordinance"), to evidence Obligations, i f any, made for the purpose of
providing funds to the City.
This Loan Note constitutes a direct and general obligation of the City to which the full
faith, credit and resources of the City are pledged.
The City hereby authorizes the Bank to make appropriate notations on Schedule 1
attached hereto of all Loans evidenced hereby and all principal payments and prepayments made
hereunder and of the date lo which interest hereon has been paid; provided, however, that the
Bank's failure lo make any such notation or any defect therein shall not affect the obligations of
the City to pay the full amount of the principal of and interest on all Loans.
Reference is hereby made to the Ordinance and the Agreement for the provisions, among
other things, with respect to the nature and extent ofthe security for this Loan Note, the manner
and enforcement ofsuch security, the custody and application of the proceeds of this Loan Note
and the rights, duties and obligations of the City and the Bank.
Il is hereby certified, recited and declared that all acts, conditions and things required to
exist, happen and to be performed, precedent to and in the issuance of this Loan Note, do exist,
have happened and have been performed in due time, form and manner as required by the
Constitution and statutes of the State of Illinois, and that the total indebtedness of the City,
including indebtedness evidenced by this Loan Note, does not exceed any Constitutional or

  

statutory liiiiiialion. This Loan Nole shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the
internal laws ofthe Stale of Illinois.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City, by authority of its City Council, has caused this note
to be signed for and on its behalf and in its name by the Chief Financial Officer, and the official
seal ofthe City of Chicago to be affixed hereto, all as ofthe 25th day of April, 2014.,

nancial Officer

 LOAN NOTE
SCHEDULE 1

LOANS AND
REPAYMENTS OF LOANS
Date

Amount of
Loan

Taxable or
Tax-Exempt
Loan

Eurodollar
Rate or ABR
Rate with
Respect
Thereto

Schedule

Amount of
Principal
Repaid

Unpaid
Principal
Balance of
Loans

Notation
Made By

 EXHIBIT 

RATING AGENCIES REPORTS

Fitch Ratings I Piess Release

Page 1 of 5

FitchRatings
Fitch Rates Chicago, IL's ULTGOs 'A-'; Outlook Negative Ratings Endorsement Policy
24 Feb 2014 4:27 PM (EST)
Fitch Ratings-New York-24 February 2014: Fitch Ratings has assigned an 'A-' raiing lo the following Chicago, IL bonds:
-$108.9 million general obligation bonds, project series 2014A;
-$108.2 million general obligation bonds, refunding series 2014B;
-$43.3 million general obligation bonds, taxable project series 2014C;
-$127.3 million general obligation bonds, taxable refunding series 2014D.
Proceeds will be used to relund various outstanding series for overall restructuring purposes, to fund various capital
improvements, and lo linance legal settlement payments. The bonds are expected to sell the week of March 3rd via
negotiation.
Fitch has also affirmed the following ratings:
- $ 8 billion unlimited tax general obligation (ULTGO) bonds al 'A-';
-$602 million sales tax bonds al 'A-';
-$200 million commercial paper notes, 2002 program series A (tax exempt) and B (taxable) bank bond raiing al 'BBBV.
The Rating Outlook is Negative.
SECURITY
The ULTGO bonds are secured by the city's full faith and credit and its ad valorem lax. without limitation as to rale or
amount.
The sales tax bonds are secured by a first lien on the city's 1.25% home rule sales and use tax and the city's local share ol
slate-distributed 6.25% sales and use tax. Additionally, there is a springing debl service reserve, lunded over a 12-month
period, that is triggered if coverage fails below 2.5x.
The bank bond raiing lor the commercial paper (CP) notes is based upon the city's general obligation pledge payable Irom
any legally available lunds without an ability or obligation to levy additional taxes. The CP notes are additionally secured by
a letter of credit.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
LACK OF PENSION SOLUTION; LIMITED OPTIONS: The 'A-' and Negative Outlook reflect the lack of meaningful
solutions to both the near- and long-term burdens associated with the city's underfunded pension plans. The cily has been
unsuccesslul thus far in ils attempts to negotiate a solution with labor unions and lobby the slate legislature, which
ultimately controls the benefit formula, although eflorts to lorge a solution persist
OTHER IMPROVEMENT EVIDENT; BUDGET STILL TIGHT: Pension concerns overshadow recent improvement in olher
aspects of the city's credit profile. Recent budgets have been narrowly balanced with lesser reliance upon one-lime items.
Maintenance ol signilicant long-term reserves is an important element ol financial llexibilily.
WEAK DEBT PROFILE & OVERLAPPING PENSION BURDEN EXACERBATES PRESSURE: Pension stress
exacerbates the already weak debt prolile, which leatures above-average debt burden and slov; payout Several
overlapping area governments also have underfunded pension systems, which will require some measure ol increased
funding, presenliiig a stacked burden on residents and taxpayers.

https://vvww.titchrating.s.coni/creclitdesk/pies.s_ieleabe.s/deinil.clin'.'prinl=l&pr_id=821512

2/24/2014

 Fitch Ratings I Press Release

Page 2 of 5

ECONOMIC HUB; SLUGGISH RECOVERY: Chicago sen/es as an economic hub lor the Midwest region and maintains
good prospects for long-term stability if not expansion. Growth in cyclical revenues rellects a measure ol economic
recovery; however, high unemployment persists and property tax base recovery has been elusive.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
PENSION REFORM: Maintenance of the 'A-' rating requires implementation of an attainable plan to put all city pension
plans on a clear path towards adequate funding. Fitch believes a pension solution Ihat enhances funding levels while
preserving sustainable budgetary balance is necessary to stabilize the credit. Inaction, or affirmative steps to avoid
actuarial-based funding of pensions, will have a negative impact on the raiing.
ULTGO RATING SERVES AS A CAP TO SALES TAX AND CP (BANK BOND) RATINGS: The ULTGO rating serves as a
ceiling to the sales tax rating. The CP (bank bond) rating is capped one notch below the ULTGO rating. A downgrade ol
the ULTGO raiing, therefore, would result in a downgrade to bolh Ihe sales tax and CP (bank bond) ratings.
CREDIT PROFILE
PENSION RISKS OVERSHADOW RECENT FISCAL IMPROVEMENT
Filch recognizes the current administration's notably improved linancial and budgetary management which has brought Ihe
city closer to structural balance, lollowing the prior administration's long-term trend of reliance upon asset sales and olher
non-recurring items to fund operations. This improvement, however, is inllated by the making of statulorily-based pension
payments, which severely underfund the ARC. Fitch considers full ARC funding a necessary component of structural
balance.
MANAGEMENT'S PENSION OPTIONS ARE LIMITED
Management has presented a plan to address the pension problem but lacks the legal authority to implement it unilaterally.
Direct negotiations with labor groups have failed to yield a solution and attempts to lobby Ihe legislature lor benefit
changes which would reduce the unfunded actuarially accrued liability (UAAL) have been unsuccessful thus far.
Any changes to the benefit structure would require an act of the slate legislature, which recently passed legislation to
address the Chicago Park District as well as its own pension funding issues. The legislature has identilied local pension
reform as a high priority for the current legislative session. Even if the legislature were to pass comprehensive pension
reform for Ihe Chicago pension plans, Illinois law affords strong legal protection lo pension benefits and Fitch expects lhal
any such changes would face protracted legal challenges.
LONG-TERM PENSION RISKS
The combination of low funded ratios and a statutorily-based contribution requirement lhal funds approximately one-third of
the ARC is unsustainable. Each year of sub-ARC funding results in an increase in the ARC for the subsequent year, and a
widening distance between statutory and ARC payment.
The amount that would be required to amortize the unfunded liability grows larger as time passes, both in nominal terms
and as a percent ol governmental spending, threatening lo crowd out other city spending priorities. The combined reported
lunding ratio lor the lour plans has declined steadily, reaching a low 35.2% at Dec. 3 1 , 2012 and down Irom 57.3% five
years ago. Filch estimates the lunding ratio to be a weaker-still 32.9%, assuming a 7% rate of return.
NEAR-TERM PENSION RISKS
Management is focused on reducing the size ol the liability, but any meaninglul solution to the pension funding problem is
likely to require significantly higher annual contributions Irom the cily. Fiscal 2012 carrying costs for pension, OPEB and
debt service would have amounted to a very high 35.0% of governmental lund spending il the ARC were fully lunded, well
above Ihe 19.5% burden under the current statutorily-based payment structure.
State law requires dramatically increased annual funding requirements lor two ol the city's lour pension systems beginning
in 2016, which would need lo be addressed in the liscal 2015 budget. The new lormula requires a contribution that would
be sullicient to bring bolh Ihe police and lire systems lo 90% lunding level by 2040.
The city estimates the annual requirement will rise by $590 million as a result, an amounl that will raise carrying costs to

https://www.fitchialing.s.com/creditdcsk/press_rclca.se.s/dei;iil.cfm'?piiiit= 1 &pr_id=S21512

2/24/2014

 Fitch Ratings I Press Release

Page 3 of 5

above-average levels. Legislation to delay the implementation and to require properly lax increases to fund it has been
introduced, but the legislature has not acted on il. Fitch believes delerral of the increased actuarially based requiremeni
would exacerbate the problem absent a meaninglul reduction in the UAAL.
LONG-TERM LIABILITY PRESSURE HEIGHTENED BY OVERLAPPING STRESS
The city's weak long-term liability prolile is characterized by its underfunded pensions combined with its above-average
overall debt burden of 8.5% of market value. Payout is slow at 37% and annual 'scoop and loss' restructurings continue to
marginally weaken debt structure.
The widespread use of statutorily-based pension contributions lor single employer plans in Illinois results in multiple
underfunded Chicago area pension plans, placing stress on the city's residents and taxpayers. As a home rule entity, the
city has a variety of revenue-raising options available lo il; but typically, such plans are funded from the property lax levy. II
the cily were lo raise its properly lax sufficient lo lully fund the ARC (2012 level) with no offsetting revenue increase or
liability reduction, the tax levy/rate would rise a dramatic 136%.
The city's property tax comprises 20% ol the overall property tax bill, so the increase lo an individual property owner would
be materially less al approximately 15%. Fitch estimates that if each area government including Ihe city raised its property
tax rate lo cover the ARC (2012 level) wilh no corresponding reduction in the liability, the overall impact lo an individual
payer would be a 35% tax increase. Fitch believes such an increase could present stress to the local economy, which has
been slow to recover Irom Ihe recession. Both the city and the overall increase required under this scenario will rise each
year as funding levels fall and the ARC grows.
ECONOMIC HUB; SLUGGISH RECOVERY
Chicago's population totaled 2.7 million in 2012. down 7% from the 2000 census, bul still accounts for 2 1 % of the state's
population. The city's highly educated work force supports its status as a major linancial and business services center.
Educational attainment levels are strong, with nearly 33% achieving a bachelor's degree and 13% an advanced degree,
compared with the U.S. averages of 28.2% and 10.5%, respectively.
Employment contracted 0.1% in 2013 following a gain of over 20.000 jobs or 2.2% in 2012. Gains in professional and
business services and transportation and utilities ollset reductions in both manufacturing and government. The
unemployment rate remains elevated. The November 2013 rate of 9.6% was marginally lower than the 9.7% recorded a
year prior, reflecting stable employment and a slight contraction of Ihe labor lorce over that lime frame. The rale compares
unfavorably to the 8.3% rate recorded by the state and Ihe 6.6% by the U.S.
Overall income and wealth indices are mixed. Per capita income is at 95% ol Ihe state and 100% of the U.S. levels;
however, the poverty rate remains elevated at 21.4%, much higher than the U.S. average ol 14.3%. Economically sensitive
tax revenues have recovered to pre-recession levels. The tax base, down 30% over the past four years, has not yet shown
signs of recovery, due in part to the lagging assessment cycle.
NON-PENSION FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE IMPROVING
Management has made significant progress toward matching ongoing revenues with non-pension annual expenditures.
Fitch views positively the city's stated commitment to ending the practice of using Ihe corpus ol its long-term reserves to
balance the operating budget. Other recurring improvements over the past two years include a hiring freeze for nonessential positions. Ihe elimination of 2,000 vacant positions and a marked reduction in retiree health care costs, although
the latter is subject lo litigation.
REVENUE FLEXIBILITY A STRENGTH
Fitch views Ihe city's home rule status as a credit positive, fostering revenue independence and llexibilily. The general fund
derives support from utility taxes, state sales taxes, transaction taxes, and recreation taxes among others. The general
lund does not rely upon property taxes lor operations, as they are earmarked for pensions, library expenses and debt
service.
The city's home rule status also exempts it Irom the state's Property Tax Extension Limitation Act. A sell-imposed limit
matches that of the slate, limiting increases in Ihe levy to the lesser ol 5% or the CPI. In recent years, Ihe city has kept its
levy flat, without accessing the allowable growth Fitch believes Ihe sell-imposed levy limit is relatively Hexible and Ihat
increased property taxes may provide an important source ol funding lor potential luture increases in pension paymenls.

liltps://wvvw.ntchratiiig.s.coin/cieditdc,sk7pies.s_releases/deiail.crm?prini=l&pr_id=821.512

2/24/2014

 Fitch Ratings I Press Release

Page 4 of 5

FY2012 AUDITED DEFICIT; FY2013 ESTIMATES FAVORABLE
The general lund recorded a $101 million operating deficit after transfers reflecting -3.3% of spending in fiscal 2012, the
lirsi lull year under the current mayor. This compares favorably to the budgeted appropriation of $143 million of general
lund balance, supported by some recurring solutions and the use of reserves from other funds.
Fiscal 2012 unrestricted general lund balance dropped to 6.8% from 10.2% of spending a year prior. Fitch views the
approximately $625 million, or 20.1% ol liscal 2012 general fund spending, in the service concession and resen/e fund as
an important element ol financial flexibility. The sum includes the remaining amounl of the Skyway lease proceeds.
Published preliminary liscal 2013 results show revenues outperforming budget by a larger margin than expenditures
exceeded budget. Detail is not yet available, but early projeclions indicate a net positive budgetary variance of $45 million
which if realized, may decrease lurther the amount of reliance on non-recurring sources. The preliminary fiscal 2014
budget seeks to appropriate $50 million of identified surplus from fiscal 2013. to be used toward increased police overtime
expenses.
FY2014 BUDGET BALANCED WITH RECURRING AND ONE-TIME ITEMS
The $3.3 billion fiscal 2014 budget closed Ihe previously identified budget gap of $338.7 million through a variety of
recurring and one-time measures. Revenue measures include an assumed $101 million growth in economically sensitive
revenues, $53 million of general fund and $35 million other fund balances, and $34 million of increased taxes, fees and
fines. Expenditure measures include $66 million ol savings, including $24 million of savings from the elimination of retiree
health care for certain retirees, which is subject to litigation.
Fitch believes that these identified measures are achievable given the city's recent history ol budgetary adherence;
however. Fitch will not consider the city's financial operations to be structurally balanced until recurring revenues support
recurring expenditures, including actuarially based pension costs.
Contact:
Primary Analyst
Arlene Bohner
Director
-I-1-212-908-0554
Fitch Ratings. Inc.
One Stale Street Plaza
New York, NY 10004
Secondary Analyst
Eric Friedman
Director
-t-1-212-908-9181
Tertiary Analyst
Richard Raphael
Managing Director
+ 1-212-908-0506
Committee Chairperson
Jessalynn Moro
Managing Director
-I-1-212-908-0608

Media Relations: Elizabeth Fogerty, New York, Tel: +1 (212) 908 0526, Email elizabeth.fogerty@litchratings.com.
Additional information is available al 'www.lilchratings.com'.
In addition to the sources ol information identified in Fitch's Tax-Supported Rating Criteria, this action was additionally
inlormed by information from Creditscope, University Financial Associates, S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Index, IHS
Global Insight, National Association ol Realtors.

htlps;//wvvw.fitchialing.s.com/creditdesk/press_rclcasc.s/dciail.cfm''prinl=l&pi_id=821512

2/24/2014

 Filch Ratings 1 Press Relea.se

P'lge 5 of 5

Applicable Criteria and Related Research:
-'Tax-Supported Rating Criteria' (Aug. 14, 2012);
-'U.S. Local Government Tax-Supported Rating Criteria' (Aug. 14, 2012).
Applicable Criteria and Relaled Research:
Tax-Supported Raiing Criteria
U.S. Local Government Tax-Supported Rating Criteria
Additional Disclosure
Solicitation Status
ALL FITCH CREDIT RATINGS ARE SUBJECT TO CERTAIN LIMITATIONS AND DISCLAIMERS. PLEASE READ
THESE LIMITATIONS AND DISCLAIMERS BY FOLLOWING THIS LINK:
H T T P : / / F I T C H R A T I N G S . C O M / U N D E R S T A N D I N G C R E D I T R A T I N G S . IN ADDITION, RATING DEFINITIONS AND THE
TERMS OF USE OF SUCH RATINGS ARE AVAILABLE ON THE AGENCY'S PUBLIC WEBSITE
'WWW FITCHRATINGS.COM'. PUBLISHED RATINGS, CRITERIA AND METHODOLOGIES ARE AVAILABLE FROM
THIS SITE AT ALL TIMES. FITCH'S CODE OF CONDUCT, CONFIDENTIALITY. CONFUCTS OF INTEREST. AFFILIATE
FIREWALL COMPLIANCE AND OTHER RELEVANT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES ARE ALSO AVAILABLE FROM
THE 'CODE OF CONDUCT' SECTION OF THIS SITE. FITCH MAY HAVE PROVIDED ANOTHER PERMISSIBLE
SERVICE TO THE RATED ENTITY OR ITS RELATED THIRD PARTIES. DETAILS OF THIS SERVICE FOR RATINGS
FOR WHICH THE LEAD ANALYST IS BASED IN AN EU-REGISTERED ENTITY CAN BE FOUND ON THE ENTITY
SUMMARY PAGE FOR THIS ISSUER ON THE FITCH WEBSITE.
Copyright © 2014 by Fitch Ratings. Inc., Fitch Ratings Ltd. and its subsidiaries.

https://wwvv.fitchratings.com/creditdcbkypress_telea.scs/deuiil.cl m"?priiii= 1 &pr_id=821512

2/24/2014

 (55% STANDARD SPOOR'S
^?dr RATINGS SERVICES
McGRAW HILL FINANCIAL

Summary:

Chicago; General Obligation; Joint
Criteria
Primary Credit Analyst:
Helen Samuelson, Chicago (I) 312-233-7011; helen.samuelson@standardandpoors.com
Secondary Contact:
John A Kenward, Chicago (1) 312-233-7003; john.kenward(Sstandardandpoors.com

Table Of Contents
Rationale
Outlook
Related Criteria And Research

WWW.STANDARDANDP00RS.COM/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014 1
1263288 I J0OOO2l;'7

 Summary:

Chicago; General Obligation; Joint Criteria
-US$127.0 mil GO'Bnds taxable rfdg ser20l4D due 01/01/2044
lon^-Tem Rating : ••
'A+ZNegative
^.'

''

t

.

'

.

* • : • ' " ' ' "**'•' ' , ! '

VSSlOg'o mil GO bnds project ser 2014A,due 01/01/203?' ' '" '"
^" 'Long:Term Rating.-r^ '^.n^i' ': •
' A+/Negative

New
'•'ri^rti'- •
liUS$108.0 mil GO bnds rfdg ser 2014B due'01/0)/2033 -^^W^<>^--'•'
>"\\tongtTennRating,^i;fftii:!.,
•.•.<,'^i-ff.\.:-:.>-.-•
* "'A+VNegative •.•»/(•<'.>••--• •• ...
Nev/
bV!^j*^v->"'' •• "
••
: .•
'' - . '
'••US$44.0 mil GO bnds taxable proj ser 2014C due 01/01/2044
•
""•'Long Term-Rating...:;
,\.>
A+/Negative
^*••i5'••
New
. gijicago GO

'"

•'•^Cong Term Rating

.

-••>i<<rr;?;"

"^^r.-^-A*;^::?^ •
^-'t'viff*

A+/Negative 5^

Affirmed

Rationale
Standard & Poor's Ratings Services assigned its 'k+' rating to Chicago's series 2014A, 2014B. 2014C. and 2014D
general obligation (GO) bonds and affirmed its 'A+' rating on Chicago's (GO) bonds outstanding under our local GO
criteria, released Sept. 12, 2013. The negative outlook reflects our view of the risks involved in how the city will
address its upcoming, large pension payments.
A pledge of the city's full faith credit and resources, as well as ad valorem property taxes v/ithout limitation as to rate
or amount, secures its GO bonds.
The rating reflects our assessment of the following factors for the city, specifically its:
• Strong, broad, and diverse economy given its status as a major regional economic center;
• Adequate budgetary flexibility, which indicates that, although the city has home rule status, which provides
increased taxing and borrowing capacity, its flexibility is limited by the city's historical reluctance to adjust property
taxes;
• Very weak budgetary performance, reflecting recent deficits and reliance on reserves to balance operations and an
outlook of continued budget challenges; however, we note that the city has no plans to utilize its long-term reserves
in the service concession reserve fund;
• Very strong liquidity providing very strong cash levels to cover both debt service and expenditures;
• Strong management conditions with good financial practices and policies in place;
• Very weak debt and contingent liabilities position, driven mostly by the city's high net direct debt; and
• Weak Institutional Framework score.

Strong economy
We consider Chicago's economy to be strong, broad, and diverse, with employment opportunities spanning all the
major industries. Furthermore, the city is home to the headquarters of several large corporations, has a large tourism

WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS.COM/RATINGSDlRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

2

1263.'89 I 300002327

 Summary: Chicago; General Obligation; joint Criteria

base, and is a transportation hub. Cook County's unemployment rate historically tracks higher than the state and
peaked at 10.8% in 2010, but has since fallen to 9.3% in 2012. Chicago's per capita effective buying income (EBl) was
96% ofthe national average in 2012, which we consider adequate. The city's per capita EBl as a percent ofthe U.S. is
projected to remain the same, at 96% by 2017. Per capita market value for the city was adequate at $82,088 in fiscal
2013. Equalized assessed value peaked at $84.7 billion in levy year 2009, and has fallen since then to $65 billion for
levy year 2012, reflecting a decline in city home prices and the impact of a recent revaluation. However, the trend in
equalized assessed value does not affect the city's year-over-year property tax revenues since the city extends taxes
based on amount, rather than on rate.
Adequate budget

flexibility

In our opinion, the city's budgetary flexibility is helped by its reserves in the service concessions and reserve funds. At
the close of fiscal 2012 (Dec. 31), the general fund unassigned balance was thin at $33.4 million, or 1.1% of
expenditures. With respect to revenues, fiscal 2013 ended on a positive note due to an estimated $75 million positive
revenue varicince although we expect the overall total general fund balance will likely decline due to the planned use of
the $177 million assigned fund balance. The fiscal 2014 general fund budget calls for a $53.4 million use of reserves,
reflecting the appropriation of $30 million ofthe unassigned fiscal 2012 general fund balance and $20 million of 2013
positive revenue budget variance. The long-term Skyway and parking meter reserves stood at $624.8 million, or 20%
of expenditures. The city has adopted ordinances that discourage spending dovm the reserves in the service
concessions and reserve funds, indicating to us that those reserves, specifically, will not be drawn down going forward.
The city budgeted to add $15 million to the service concession and reserve'funds in budget year 2013 and $5 million in
2014; this would follow $20 million deposited during fiscal 2012.
Although the city has taxing flexibility owing to its home-rule status, it has not historically availed itself of that
flexibility. Hindering budget flexibility is a political unwillingness historically to raise property taxes to meet budgetary
challenges, particularly with respect to looming pension payment increases. In our view, the city also has a limited
capacity to cut spending given that nearly two-thirds of 2012 general fund expenses were in the area of public safety.
Very weak budgetary performance
The city's budgetary performance, in our view, has been very weak overall for the past four fiscal years and it
continues to faces significant challenges. In fiscal years 2009 through 2011, the general fund ended with surpluses but
relied heavily on one-shot budget balancing maneuvers, including large transfers in from the service concession
reserve fijnd. The service concession reserve fund had been pumped up with cash from the sale of leased assets,
including the Skyway and parking meters. The service concession reserve fund now holds $625 million, and city
ordinances only allow interest generated in the fund to be fransferred out. In fiscal 2012, the city balanced its budget
with minimal transfers in from other funds but ended the year with a $101 million general fund shortfall. The city's $2.9
billion of general fund revenue consists of a diverse array of revenues, the largest being sales taxes ($572 million, or
20%). Although the general fund revenue stream is diverse, expenditures are strongly concentrated in public safety,
which accounted for 63% of expenses in 2012 The city is taking steps to manage these costs, and year-over-year they
rose only 1.3% in 2012. In 2013. the city budgeted to use its $177 million as.signed general fund balance, which
represents carryover of unbudgeted revenue growth from fiscal 2012. Fiscal 2013 positive budget variances in
property, sales, and income taxes contnbuted to actual but unaudited overall revenues exceeding budgeted revenues

WWW.STANDARDANDP00RS.COM/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

3

1263208 I 300002327

 Summary: Chicago; General Obligation; joint Criteria

by $75 million (about 2.5% of the budget). Fiscal 2013 actual expenditures were on track with the $3 billion budget.
The $3.2 billion 2014 budget was balanced with the use of $53 million of general fund reserves. The budget increases
4% year-over-year, assumes tax revenue growth, and relies upon $97.1 million in nonrecurring revenue sources. The
economic recovery suggests that revenues could improve in the near term. However, the city faces significant
challenges with respect to managing its costs, most notably with respect to its pensions. Should the city fail to obtain
state legislative relief to phase in the contributions or to reduce the liabilities, it will face more than a $600 million
increase in annual pension contributions to its police and fire plans in fiscal 2016. However, decisions about how to
fund the increased contributions must be made in late calendar 2014 if the revenues are to be realized in time to make
the payments in 2016. At this time, the city's position is that it will continue to seek legislative support and labor
concessions. Even if the city is able to smooth out the contributions, the increased costs will likely be an impediment
to significant future budget surpluses.
Very strong liquidity
Supporting the city'sfinancesis liquidity we consider to be very strong, writh total government available cash of more
than 100% of debt service. We believe the city has exceptional access to external liquidity. The city has issued bonds
frequently during the past 15 years, including GO bonds, enterprise fund revenue bonds, and sales tax bonds.

Strong management
We view the city's management conditions as strong, supported by "good" financial management practices under our
financial management assessment (FMA). The cily produces long-term financial and capital plans, which officials
update annually. The city has a formal debt management policy and has adopted ordinances that limit the use of
nongeneral fund reserves for budget-balancing purposes.
Very weak debt and contingent liability profile
In our opinion, the city's debt and contingent liabilities profile is very weak, with pension funding levels and upcoming
pension payments posing a significant challenge. The city has a combination offixed-rateand variable-rate debt, and
swaps are utilized to hedge risk. We do not view the city's debt portfolio as being vulnerable to interest rate risk or
speculative contingent liabilities. Direct debt is manageable in our view, with total govemmental fund debt service at
13% of total governmental fund expenditures in 2012. The city has a roughly $3 billion, five-year bond program, most
of it focused on water and sewer projects. We do not expect debt issuance writhin the next two years to lead to
significant increases in the GO debt burden. The city has used bonds to improve and modernize its infrastructure.
The city's debt profile is challenged by its pension obligations. The city contributes to four different pension plans. The
city's budgets include pension payments for the four defined benefit plans that fully meet the statutorily required
amounts. However, current state statutes in effect base contributions on a multiple of payroll and do not address
unfunded liabilities. The budgeted pension payment amount for 2013 is $479.5 million, based on the statutory formula.
This stops short of the $1.47 billion actuarially required contribution (ARC) determined in the Dec. 31, 2012 actuarial
report. If it was included in the 2013 corporate fund budget, the ARC payment of $1.5 billion would represent roughly
35% ofthe corporate fund budget, an amount we consider very high.
The overall unfunded liability ofthe four plans is $19 5 billion as of 2012, up from $11.9 billion in 2009, and the plans
altogether are 35% funded Funding levels for each ofthe plans are as follows:

WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS.com/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

4

i:(j3283 I 300002327

 Summary:

•
•
•
•

Chicago;

General

Obligation;

joint

Criteria

The municipal employees plan: 38% funded, with an $8.4 billion unfunded liability;
The laborers' plan: 56% funded, with a $ 1.02 billion unfunded liability;
The police officers' plan: 31% funded, with a $6.9 billion unfunded liability; and
The fire fighters' plan: 25% funded, with a $3.03 billion unfunded liability.

Legislation was enacted by the state in 2010 to reduce benefits in the four defined-benefit pension plans, which in the
long-term could ease budgetary pressure. However, the city's budget faces the more immediate pressure from
legislation that changed the statutory formula guiding the police and fire pension contributions, bringing those more in
line with an actuarial funding methodology and a 90% funding goal by 2040. The effect of the legislation causes
contributions to rise from the current $480 million to roughly $1.1 billion in 2016. We feel the legislation has positive
implications for the future health of the police and fire plans, but in the meantime it has the potential to become a
source of budget stress given that the city has indicated an unwillingness to rely on property tax increases to fund this
cost. The city's home rule status provides the city with the ability to raise virtually any tax without voter approval, but
if the city is to go this route, it will have to make a decision to adopt a tax increase in enough time to then set the rate
and begin collecting the revenue for the 2016 payment. If the city were to raise its property tax rate to fund the
pension payments, it would have to set the rate by the end of calendar 2014 in order for the tax to be on the fall 2015
tax bills. A sales tax increase would need a similar implementation date in order to ensure timely collections. These
examples serve to illustrate that the pension payment in 2016 is a more immediate priority than the payment date
suggests. The statutory formula guiding the city's other two pension systems ~ municipal employees and laborers ~
has not changed, and those contributions are based on a multiple of payroll. So while those contributions are not
expected to materially increase in the future, and thus are not a source of budget stress, the city does estimate that the
assets in those plans could be depleted at some point after 2020.
Thus, in our opinion, the status of the city's pension plans has significant rating implications both from a near-term and
long-term perspective. In our view, the city's lack of progress in making structural changes in pension funding is a
negative credit factor.
The city is currently party to an other postemployment benefit (OPEB) settlement agreement that capped its liability
until the agreement expired June 30, 2013. The city has obligated itself to provide OPEB benefits through the end of its
fiscal year, Dec. 31, 2013. As of Jan. 1, 2014, the city continues to contribute 55% of the cost to eligible employees
who retired prior to Aug. 23, 1989. For all other employees, the plan will be phased out entirely by Jan. 1, 2017, when
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act will take its place. Under the current plan, the city's OPEB benefits
extend to police, municipal, fire, and laborer's pension fund retirees and eligible dependents. The city's net OPEB
expenses under the plan were $97.5 million in 2012. The city reported a $415.8 million unfunded actuarial accrued
liability (UAAL) on its police, municipal, fire, and laborer's plans as ofthe Dec. 31. 2012 valuation. The UAAL on other
city employees not covered under the aforementioned plans was $471 million as of the most recent valuation (Dec. 31,
2011).
Weak institutional framework
The institutional framework score for Chicago is weak, reflecting the lack of rigorous statutory requirements for
financial reporting and a large unfunded mandate wilh respect to pension contnbutions. See the Institutional
Framework score for Illinois

WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS.COM/RATINCSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

5

126128,8 I 300002327

 Summary: Chicago; General Obligation; joint Criteria

Outlook
The negative outlook reflects our view of the city's upcoming spike in pension costs, which could potentially become a
source of budget stress. We could lower the rating by the end of 2015 if the city substantially draws down its reserves
in an effort to increase its pension payments in line with state mandates, regardless of whatever relief the state
legislature may provide. In order for us to affirm the rating and return the outlook to stable, we would need to see the
city successfully absorb its higher pension costs while maintaining balanced budgetary performance and reserves at or
near their current level.

Related Criteria And Research
Related Criteria
USPF Criteria: Local Govemment GO Ratings Methodology And Assumptions, Sept. 12, 2013

Related Research
• S&P Public Finance Local GO Criteria; How We Adjust Data For Analytic Consistency Sept. 12, 2013
• Institutional Framework Overview: Illinois Local Governments

= iajj-gi'-v^'.' •
.Chicago GO bnds proj
Long..TefmRating

A+/Negative '

' • •;?i!;:«'.^-,.
Affirmed _ ..

Chicago GO bnds var rate.demand biT"ds;rfdg ser 2007GV"'= "•
Long Term Rating
;at..•:-<M>'
-;<AAA/A-1
Unenhanced Rating
A+(SPUR)/Negative •"-" w.;
-.'thicago GO pre-rfd ser 2007C (wrap of insured) (MBIA & Natibnal)"(AG,M) (SEC MKT)
'•^Unenhanced Rating
.-•
A+(SPUR)/Negative
Chicago GO variable rate dem bnds rfdg ser 2007F
• •Long Term-Rating
; ..^UnenhancedRating

• •,'" • "••.;»-;?•• • • '
AAA/A^lj ;
A+(SPUR)/Negative

AffirmedAffirmed
...•VI. ; Affirmed

•.Affirmed!...
Affirmed

•Chicago GO;VRDBs (Neighborhoods Alive 21 Prog) ser 2002B- 5
[Long Term Rating
AAA/A-1+'-,:^
Unenhanced Rating..'

V ; - .

' •.

•

Affirmed;

Affirmed \ . '

A+(SPUR)/Negatiye

Chicago CO VRDBs (Neighborhoods Alive 21 Prog) ser 2002B-3
'''''^'•••,
Long Term Rating
AAA/A-1 +
• Unenhanced Rating
A+(SPUR)/Negative

f
Affirmed
Affirmed

Chicago GO VRDBs (Neighborhoods Alive 21 Prog) ser 2002 B-4
Long Term Rating
• AAA/A-1 +
Unenhanced Rating
A+(SPUR)/Negative

Affirmed
Affirmed

Chicago GO VRDO ser 2005D-1
Long Term Rating
Unenhanced Rating

Affirmed
Affirmed

WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS.COM/RATINGSDlRECT

AAA/A-1
A+(SPUR)/Negative

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

6

1263288 I 300002327

 Summary:

Chicago;

General

Obligation;

joint

Criteria

1i tSiJb tair(A^^jg^^
. Chicago GOyRDO ser 2005D-2
AAA/A-1 +

Lohg'fTerm Rating'
':..,'^it'^iyS:}fl.:
•• Unenhanced Rating
.r^^r"'
•'-'••"•: S-.'i •• •
~•. w
'Ghicago(Gp,(wrap of insured) (AMBAC & AGM)

;>»'
"-V

A^(SPUR)/Negative

Affirmed •
Affirmed

Affirmed

Chicago GO (wrap of insured) (AMBAC & AGM) (SEC MKT)
Unenhanced Rating
A+(SPUR)/Negative

Affirmed

l/rienJianced Raiing

Chicago CO (wrap of;insured) (AMBAC & BHAC) SEC MKT)
Unenhanced Rating

•

i.^

•'

1-

?^i"-;i::
A+^SP'UR)/Negative

'

v ^.••^
Affirmed

' A+(SPUR)/Neplive

Chicago GO (wrap of insured) (F(3i6& BHAC) (SEi: MIOTjii!. •
~ Unenhoriced-Rqling.K'i::-^^'-

.V, .

•

.

, A+(SPUR)/Negative •.
>>>fr^. -, - •
° ••

.

Affirmedvj^^

••GHica"g6;Gp{(AGM)*:-:..".
• Unenhdnced'Rating

<••••''

. -.;.A+(SPUR)/Negaiive__

-ji^'ffiriTied

"Chicago GO (AGM) (SEC.MKT) •

-'

• •..Unenhanced Rating

-.•^•<-

-'?;=?A^4(SPUR)/Negative^

" '•

. -..•.r);-^--f

•^•.•.".iV'-jAi'C: ^''^'.'• •, ;*:-..^:<ii^*:{*^

V t M ^^"'

*

Affirmed - .' '-

Chicago GO (ASSURED GTY)
Un'enhaycea Rating

• A5?(SPVfi')/Negative

''"'^'.

-.-w-. -Affirmed"';

•::':u>»"iiii

Chicago'CO (BAM)
Unenhanced Rating

A+(SPUR)/Negative

Affirmed

A+(SPUR)/Negative

Affirmed

A+(SPyR)/Negative

• Affirmed

•.Chjcago GO (FGIC)... ,,
'Unenhanced Rating •

^.•'.t'^^'

Chicago-Gb (FGIC) (ivlBlAj.('National)Unenhanced Raiing

'l"*''^'

. Chicago GO (MBIA) (National)

•,~ J

J:-. Unenhanced Rating

-•A>,(SPUR)/Negative>-

Affirmed

- Chicago GO"
Unenhanced Rating -'
. ..^
Chicago GO VRDB scr 2003B-1 "
. Long.Term Rating

A+(SPUR)/Negative

^:^ ..Affirmed

••%

y
A+/A-l/Negative

' '' .-^i^

Affirmed-

Chicago GO VRDB ser 2007EFG •'
Unenhanced Rating
r'^Long Term Rating

'". •:

A+(SPUR)/Negative

Alfirrried

AAA/A-1

Affirmed

A+(SPUR)/Negative

Affirmed

Chicago GO (CIFG)
Unenhanced Rating
Many issues are enhanceti by bond insurance

Complete ratings information is available to subscribers of RatingsDirect at virww.globalcreditportal.com. All ratings

WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS.COM/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24. 2014

7

1253288 I 300002327

 Summary: Chicago; General Obligation; Joint Criteria

affected by this rating action can be found on Standard & Poor's public Web site at www.standardandpoors.com. Use
the Ratings search box located in the left: column.

WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS.COM/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24. 2014 B
1263288 I 300002327

 Copyright © 2014 Standard & Poor's Financial Services LLC. a part o f M c C r a w Hill Financial A l l rights reserved.
No content (including ratings, credit.related analyses and data, valuations, m o d e l , software or other application or output therefrom) or any part
thereof (Content) may be modified, reverse engineered, reproduced or distributed in any f o r m by any means, or stored i n a database o r retrieval
system, without the prior written pennission of Standard & Poor's Financial Services LLC or ils affiliates (collectively, S&P). T h e Content shall not be
used for any unlawftil or unauthorized purposes. S&P and any third-party providers, as w e l l as their directors, officeis. shareholders, employees or
agents (collectively S&P Parties) do not guarantee the accuracy, completeness, timeliness or availabihty o f the Content. S&P Parties are not
responsible for any errors or omissions (negligent or otherwise), regardless o f the cause, for the results obtained f r o m the use o f t h e Content, or for
the security or maintenance o f any data input by the user. The Content is provided o n an "as is" basis. S&P PARTIES D I S C L A I M A N Y A N D A L L
EXPRESS OR I M P L I E D W A R R A N T I E S . I N C L U D I N G , B U T N O T L I M I T E D T O . A N Y W A R R A N T I E S O F M E R C H A N T A B I L I T Y OR FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR USE. F R E E D O M F R O M BUGS, S O F T W A R E ERRORS OR DEFECTS, T H A T T H E C O N T E N T S F U N C T I O N I N G
W I L L BE U N I N T E R R U P T E D , OR T H A T T H E C O N T E N T W I L L O P E R A T E W I T H A N Y S O F T W A R E OR H A R D W A R E C O N F I G U R A T I O N . In n o
event shall S&P Parties be liable to any party for any direct, indirect, incidental, exemplary, compensatory, punitive, special or consequential
damages, costs, expenses, legal fees, or losses (including, without limitation, lost income or lost profits and o p p o r t u n i t y costs or losses caused by
negligence) in connection w i t h any use o f t h e Content even if advised of the possibility o f s u c h damages.

Credit-related and olher analyses, including ratings, and statements in the Content are statements of opinion as o f t h e date they are expressed and
not statements o f fact. S&P's opinions, analyses, and rating acknowledgment decisions (descnbed below) are not recommendations to purchase,
hold, or sell any securities or to make any investment decisions, and d o not address the suitability of any security. SSP assumes n o obligation l o
update the Content following publication in any f o r m or formal T h e C o n l e n i should not be relied on and is not a substilute for Ihe skill, j u d g m e n t
and experience o f t h e user, its management, employees, advisors a n d / o r clients w h e n making investment and other business decisions. S&P does
not act as a fiduciary or an investment advisor except where registered as such. W h i l e S&P has obtained i n f o r m a t i o n f r o m sources it believes to be
reliable, S&P does not p e r f o m i an audit and undertakes no duty o f due diligence or independent verification of any i n f o r m a t i o n it receives.
T o the extent that regulatory authorities allow a rating agency to acknowledge in one jurisdiction a raiing issued in another jurisdiction for certain
regulatory purposes. S&P reserves the right l o assign, withdraw, or suspend such acknowledgement at any time and i n its sole discretion. S&P
Parties disclaim any duty whatsoever arising out o f the assignment, withdrawal, or suspension of an acknowledgment as well as any liability for any
damage alleged lo have been sulfered o n account thereof.
S&P keeps certain activities of its busmess units separate from each other in order to preserve (he independence and objectivity of their respective
activiiies As a result, certain business units of S&P may have information that is not available l o other S&P business uniis S&P has established
policies and procedures lo maintain Ihc confidentiality o f certain nonpublic informaiion received in connection w i l h each analytical process
S&P may receive compensation for us ratings and certain analyses, normally f r o m issuers or underwriters ol securities or f r o m obligois S&P
reserves ihe nghi lo disseminate iis opinions and analyses S&P's public ralings and analyses are made available on its Web sites,
w w w standardandpoors com (free of charge), and virww.ratingsdircci c o m and w w w globalcredilportal c o m (subscnplion) and w w w spcapitnliq c o m
(subscnpiion) and may be disinbuted through olher means, including via S&P publications and Ihird-parly rcdisinbulors Additional i n f o r m a t i o n
about our ratings fees is avail.ible al w w w slanriardandpoors com/usralingsfces

WWW.STANDARDANDPOORS-COM/RATINGSDIRECT

FEBRUARY 24, 2014

9

I2h3288 I 300002327

 MOODY'S
INVESTORS SERVICE
New Issue: Moody's downgrades Chicago, IL to Baa1 from A3, affecting $8.3
billion of GO and sales tax debt
Global Credit Research - 04 Mar 2014
Also downgrades water and sewer senior lien revenue bonds to A2 from A l and second lien revenue
bonds to A3 from A2, affecting $3.3 billion of debt; outlook negative for all ratings
CHICAGO (CITY OF) IL
Cities (including Towns, Villages and Townships)
IL
Mood/s Rating
ISSUE
General Obligation Bonds, Project Series 2014A
Sale Amount

$109,000,000

Expected Sale Date

03/06/14

Rating Description

General Obligation

General Obligalion Bonds, Refunding Series 2014B
Sale Amount

03/06/14

Rating Description

General Obligation

General Obligation Bonds. Taxable Project Series 2014C

Baal

$44,000,000

Expected Sale Date

03/06/14

Rating Description

General Obligalion

General Obligation Bonds, Taxable Refunding Series 2014D
Sale Amount

Baa1

S108.000,000

Expected Sale Date

Sale Amount

RATING
Baa1

Baal

$127,000,000

Expected Sale Date

03/06/14

Rating Description

General Obligation

MootVs Outlook NEG
Opinion
NEW YORK, March 04, 2014 -Moody's Investors Service has downgraded the City of Chicago's (IL) general
obligation (GO) and sales tax ratings to Baal from A3; water and sewer senior lien revenue ratings to A2 from A 1 ;
and water and sewer second lien revenue ralings to A3 from A2. The outlook on all ralings is negative.
Concurrently, Moody's has assigned a Baal rating lo the following new issuances: $109 million GO Bonds.
Project Series 2014A, which will fund various capital projects; $108 million GO Bonds, Refunding Series 2014B.
which wiW refund certain outstanding debl maturities for expected interest savings; $44 million GO Bonds. Taxable
Project Series 2014C, which will fund Ihe payment of legal judgments; and $127 million GO Bonds, Taxable
Refunding Senes 2014D, which will restructure certain outstanding debt maturities for near-term budget relief. The
rating actions affect $7.8 billion of GO debt, including the current bonds; $556 million of sales lax debt; $1-9 billion
of water revenue debl, and $1.3 billion of sewer revenue debt-

 SUMMARY RATING RATIONALE
The Baa1 rating on Chicago's GO debl reflects the city's massive and growing unfunded pension liabilities, which
threaten the city's fiscal solvency absent major revenue and other budgetary adjustments adopted in the near term
and sustained for years lo come. The size of Chicago's unfunded pension liabilities makes it an extreme outlier, as
indicated by the city's fiscal 2012 adjusted net pension liability (ANPL) of 8.0 times operating revenue, which is the
highest of any rated US local governmenL While the Illinois General Assembly's recent passage of pension
reforms for the State of Illinois (A3 negative) and the Chicago Park District (CPD) (A1 negative) suggests lhal
reforms may soon be forthcoming for Chicago, we expect that any cost savings of such reforms will not alleviate
the need for substantial new revenue and fiscal adjustments in order to meet the city's long-deferred pension
funding needs. We expect that the city's pension contributions will continue to fall below those based on actuarial
standards. The city's slowly-amortizing debt levels are also large and growing. The Baal rating also incorporates
credit strengths including Chicago's large lax base lhal sils at the center of one of the nation's most diverse
regional economies and the city's broad legal authority to raise revenue.
The Baal raiing on Chicago's sales tax revenue bonds reflects the lack of legal segregation of pledged sales tax
revenue from general operations, which caps the rating al the city's GO rating despite strong coverage of
maximum annual debt service (MADS). The A2 and A3 ratings on the water and sewer senior and second lien
revenue debt reflect the interconnecledness of the two enterprises wilh the city's general operations. Bolh
systems are departments of the cily, governed by the mayor and city council. Ratings on the water and sewer
bonds remain above those of the city's GO and sales lax debt due lo healthy credit fundamentals and the
expectation that any potential increase in the utilities' share of annual pension payments would have a modest
impact on Ihe systems' overall financial operations. The difference in Ihe ralings of the senior and second lien
revenue debt reflects the stronger legal security and debt service coverage of bolh systems' senior liens.
The negative outlook reflects our expectation that, absent a commitment lo significantly increase revenue and/or
materially restructure accrued pension liabilities to reduce costs, the city's credit qualify will likely weaken. The
formidable legal and political barriers lo these actions are incorporated in Ihe outlook. The State of lllinois's
constitutional protection of pension benefits raises the possibility that any attempt to reduce accrued benefits will
be litigated by plan members. Ongoing unwillingness lo sufficiently increase revenue ensures that annual pension
fjaymenls will remain a considerable operating stress while continuing lo fall well below actuarially sound
contributions. As such, the city's financial operations will remain structurally imbalanced and the long-term
solvency of the city's pension funds will be exposed to a significant degree of asset return risk.
LEGAL SECURITY
Debl service on Chicago's GO tx)nds, including the current offerings, is secured by the city's pledge to levy a tax
unlimited as to rate or amounl. Debt service on the sales lax revenue bonds is secured by the city's pledge of its
home rule sales lax revenue and ils allocation of slate sales lax revenue. Debl service on the water revenue
bonds is secured by net revenues of the city's water enterprise. Debt service on the city's sewer revenue bonds
is secured by net revenues of the city's sewer enterprise.
STRENGTHS
- Chicago's revenue-generating capacity is substantial as evidenced by a very large property tax base and a
sound socio-economic profile that reflects the city's role as the center of one of the nation's largest and most
diverse economies
- Broad legal authority lo increase properly and sales taxes as an Illinois home rule unit of government
- Recent pension reform legislation passed by the Slate of Illinois for pension plans of the stale and CPD suggests
that pension reform legislation is forthcoming for the city
CHALLENGES
- Substantially underfunded pension plans carried a Moody's ANPL of $32 billion (net of enterprise support),
equivalent to 8.0 times operating revenue (revenue in the General Fund, Debl Service Funds, and Pension Funds)
in fiscal 2012; although actuarial valuations for the city's four pension plans are not yet available for fiscals 2013
and 2014, the city's continued underfunding in the past two years suggests that the plans' unfunded liabilities
remain large
- Cumulative underfunding of pension paymenls relative to actuarially annual required contributions (ARCs)

 exceeded $7 billion in the period of fiscal 2003 through fiscal 2014; continued underfunding provides the city wilh
near lerm operating flexibility but hastens the plans' trajectory toward insolvency, which in turn could present
extreme budgetary crises for the city
- Despite the prospect for pension cost reductions brought about through stale legislation, unfunded liabilities will
likely remain large; furthermore, the Illinois Constitution explicitly protects pension benefits, raising the possibility
that an attempt to reduce accrued benefits of existing members would face litigation
- Cily management's legal ability lo increase revenue to fund pensions al actuarially sound levels is offset by
practical and political limitations to immediately raising taxes so as lo support actuarially sound contributions to
pension plans
- Operating budget is constrained by fixed costs, namely debl service and pension contributions, which comprise
a growing percentage of the city's operating budget; annual pension costs are set to increase by $600 million in
budget year 2015
- Direct and overall debt and pension burdens are well above average and growing; the substantial funding needs
of overiapping governments exacerbate the practical limilations of generating new revenue from a shared lax base
DETAILED CREDIT DISCUSSION
YEARS OF INSUFFICIENT PENSION FUNDING DRIVE SUBSTANTIAL AND CONTINUED GROWTH IN
UNFUNDED LIABILITIES
Chicago's four pension funds are in extremely poor condition following years of insufficient contributions from the
city. From fiscal 2003 through fiscal 2012, Chicago underfunded its actuarially-determined ARC by a cumulative
$5.1 billion, as annual underfunding grew from $108 million in fiscal 2003 to over $1 billion in fiscal 2012. As a
consequence, the city's four-plan combined unfunded actuarial accrued liability (UAAL) ballooned from $5.4 billion
in fiscal 2003 lo $19.4 billion in fiscal 2012. Net of proportional shares allocated lo business enterprises (water and
sewer systems; O'Hare and Midway airports) based on actual contributions from those entities, the city's fiscal
2012 adjusted net pension liability is $32 billion. In the three years through fiscal 2012, the ANPL has averaged a
very elevated 6.7 times annual operating revenue and 12.6% of full valuation.
While audited information is not yet available for fiscal 2013, the city's budget for that year Included a payment of
. $480 million to the four pension funds. The budgeted payment was $1.2 billion less than the ARC calculated for
2013. The city's adopted fiscal 2014 budget included a similar $480 million payment lo the pension funds, which
likely falls well below the ARC for the current year. Because the city has continued to contribute far below actuarial
standards, we expect fiscal 2013 and 2014 actual valuations of the pension plans lo show lhal unfunded liabilities
remain substantial.
STATE PENSION REFORM MAY MAKE POSSIBLE RESTRUCTURING OF ACCRUED BENEFITS BUT
LIABILITIES WILL REMAIN LARGE
In December 2013, the Illinois General Assembly passed reform legislation for pension plans ofthe state and
CPD. These developments are positive with respect lo Chicago's credit profile as they suggest the slate
legislature may soon turn its attenfion to crafting a similar reform package for the city. However, while restructuring
of accrued pension liabilities is possible, the city's exposure to unfunded liabilities will remain very high going
forward. To achieve matenal savings, slate legislation would have to significantly reduce accrued liabilities of the
city's four pension plans. To achieve a significant reduction in accrued liabilities, the legislation would have to
impact current plan participants. For example, the slate and CPD pension reforms included reductions lo cost of
living adjustments (COLAs). We anticipate such changes, if enacted for the city's pension plans, could be
vociferously fought by labor union representatives. Pension reform legislation for the city's plans could also include
increases to employee contnbutions to its pension plans. However, growth in employee paymenls could also be
challenged by the city's unions. Affected parties have challenged the state pension reforms in court on grounds
that Ihe changes violate the state's constitution. To date, no challenges to the CPD reforms have been filed.
In the highly unlikely event that anticipated reform legislation faces no legal challenges from organized labor
groups, the financial impact of reforms to the city's pension plans would, lo a large extent, be offset by the city's
further underfunding in 2013 and 2014. Since any adopted reforms would, optimistically, reduce the city's total
actuarial accrued liability to a level similar lo that reported in fiscal 2012, Chicago's unfunded pension liability will
likely remain an extreme outlier among US local governments for years to come.
UNDERFUNDING OF PENSIONS PROVIDES SHORT-TERM BUDGETARY RELIEF WHILE RAISING

 LONGER TERM RISKS OF PLAN INSOLVENCY AND BUDGET CRISIS
Actuaries of the city's pension funds have indicated that, based on current funding practices and assumed rates of
return of between 7.5% and 8%, one or more of the four plans could be insolvent by 2022. Underperformance of
plan assets relative to actuarial assumptions could drive the funds lo insolvency even sooner. In 2010. the stale
adopted Public Act 96-1495. which requires Illinois municipalities lo increase contributions lo police and fire
pension plans such that plan assets are projected lo reach 90% of the value of actuarial accrued liabilities by
2040. The city's compliance with current state law would likely stave off insolvency of the police and fire pension
plans. However, the law requires a $600 million, or 125%, increase in the city's total pension contribution in fiscal
2016 (levy year 2015). Deferral of all or part of the increased funding requirements called for in PA 96-1495 may
ultimately be part of any reforms that the stale adopts on the city's behalf. While this delay would provide Chicago
with short lerm budgetary relief, it would permit the cily to further underfund pension contributions relative to an
actuarially sound basis and would allow the funds to continue on their current trajectory toward insolvency wilhin a
foreseeable timeframe.
At the close of fiscal 2012. the city's General Fund balance was $231.3 million, or an adequate 7.8% of fund
revenue. An additional $625 million in the city's asset leasing reserve resulted in a total available fund balance of
$856 million, or 2 1 % of operating revenue. The cily has maintained a similar level of satisfactory reserves for a
number years, but has done so only by vaslly underfunding ils actuarially-determined annual pension
requirements. While the city's $478 million contribution to its pension funds in fiscal 2012 comprised 10% of
operating revenue, contributing the full ARC of $1.5 billion would have consumed 32% of the city's annual
operating revenue. Had the city made its full ARC in fiscal 2012. available reserves would have been completely
depleted. As such, the city is operating with a structural deficit as management has sustained financial reserves
by not fulfilling annual operating obligations as calculated by pension plan actuaries.
Going forward, contributing lo pension plans according to actuarial standards will require substantial expenditure
reductions, revenue growth, or a combination of the two. Unwillingness to utilize the city's full taxing authority lo
fund pension ARCs is a clear credit negative. Moody's estimates thai full funding of the fiscal 2012 ARC would
have required a near doubling of the city's property tax rate. As the city's own property tax rate comprises only
20% of the total rate levied wilhin its boundaries, we believe that a doubling of cily taxes may be absorbed by the
lax base without placing too much negative pressure on the local economy. However, needs of the city essentially
compete with those of overiapping entities, most notably Chicago Public Schools (CPS) (A3 negative). CPS faces
Its own operating pressures and sizeable unfunded pension liabilities, bolh of which may ultimately require new
revenue to address. We anticipate that concern for overlapping entities and maintenance of positive economic
trends will likely cause the city lo phase in any revenue growth over several years, contributing to continued
underfunding of pensions relative lo actuarially-based ARCs.
DIRECT AND OVERALL LONG-TERM LIABILITIES ARE ELEVATED AND GROWING, PLACING
INCREASED PRESSURE ON CHICAGO'S TAX BASE AND TAXPAYERS
The city's direct debt burden, excluding unfunded pension liabilifies, is a high 5% of full valuation and 2.4 times
operating revenue, up from 3.2% of full valuation and 2.0 limes operating revenue in 2009. The current direct debt
burden calculations include the current offerings as well as the recent increase in the city's commercial paper (CP)
authorization to $1 billion from $500 million. The city anticipates taking greater advantage of its CP program to
provide short-term financing of capital projects at lower interest cost prior to the issuance of long-term GO bonds.
A low 29% of the city's direct obligations are scheduled to be repaid within ten years. Debl service comprised 18%
of operating expenditures in fiscal 2012.
The city's overall debl burden is a very high 10.3% of full valuation, with over 60% of outstanding overlapping debt
having been issued by CPS. The overall debt burden has steadily increased from 6.6% of full valuation in 2009
due lo a combination of lax base depreciation and new borrowing on the part of the cily and overlapping entities.
Combined overall debt and overall adjusted net pension liabilities associated with CPS, CPD. Cook County (Al
negative). Cook County Forest Preserve District (A1 negative), and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of
Greater Chicago (Aal negative) are equivalent to a very elevated 37% of full valuation and $27,000 per capita in
Ihe city.
NARROW DISTANCE FROM LOC AND SWAP TERMINATION RATING TRIGGERS, BUT AVAILABLE
LIQUIDITY SUFFICIENT TO COVER TERMINATION EVENTS
The city has one letter of credit (LOC) agreemeni that includes a downgrade to Baa2 or the equivalent by any
rating agency as an event of default. Rating triggers on all other LOCs and SBPAs consist of a downgrade to
Baa3 or below. The city has 19 inlerest rate swap agreements tied to outstanding GO bonds. All but two of the

 swaps include a downgrade below Baal as an evenl of default, which would provide the counterparty the option lo
terminate. The total mark-to-market valuation of the 17 swaps is currently estimated at $139 million. A downgrade
t)elow Baa2 constitutes an event of default for the remaining two swaps, which currently carry an estimated mari<to-market valuation of $33 million. The city's existing liquidity is more than sufficient lo cover current mark-lomarket valuations on ihe swaps associated with the city's GO debl.
DIVERSE AND LARGE TAX BASE REMAINS CITY'S KEY CREDIT STRENGTH THOUGH REGIONAL
ECONOMY NOT FREE OF PRESSURE
Chicago's position as the nation's Ihird largest city and center of one of the largest and most diverse economies in
the US is by far the strongest attribute of an otherwise weak credit profile. The regional economy is supported by a
mix of industries, including financial services, health care, higher education, transportation, and tourism. Despite
the economic support bestowed by the diversity of employment opportunities and institutions, the city has not been
spared the challenges brought on by and partly sustained since the recent recession. The city realized a 6.9%
decline in population in the 2010 US Census and the unemployment rate in November 2013 remained high al
9.6%. Total employment in the cily throughout 2013 was 8% below the prerecession peak recorded in 2007. While
full valuation remains an immense $196 billion, it has fallen 23% from ils peak of $254 billion in 2009. Median family
income in the city is estimated at 85% of the national figure.
RATING ON SALES TAX BONDS CAPPED AT GO RATING GIVEN LACK OF LEGAL SEPARATION
BETWEEN PLEDGED REVENUE AND GENERAL OPERATIONS
The city's outstanding sales tax revenue bonds are secured by a senior lien on both the city's 1.25% home rule
sales lax and 1 % allocation of the stale's 6.25% sales lax. Because the city temporarily pools pledged sales tax
revenue with general operating revenue prior to making debt service sinking fund payments lo the trustee, we do
not consider the pledged revenue to be effectively segregated from the city. Therefore, the rating on outstanding
sales tax revenue bonds is capped at the city's GO rating. Fiscal 2012 pledged revenue provided 14.4 limes
maximum annual debl service (MADS) on sales tax revenue bonds. The security includes a 5.0 times MADS
additional bonds tesL
CITY COUNCIL HAS ULTIMATE AUTHORITY OVER WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS AND HAS RECENTLY
ADOPTED NOTABLE RATE INCREASES; PENSION CONTRIBUTIONS COMPRISE MODEST SHARE OF
OPERATIONS
Chicago's water and sewer systems are business enterprises of the city and ultimately governed by the mayor
and city council. This organizational structure is Ihe basis of the downgrades of the revenue ratings as well as the
maintenance of the negative outlooks. The difference between the A2 ratings on senior lien water and sewer
revenue debl and the Baa1 rating on the GO debt reflects the utilities' more limited exposure to the pension
pressures weighing on the city's general operations. Both enterprises reimburse the city's General Fund for costs
associated with utility employees' participation in the Municipal and Laborer pension plans. Recorded as operating
expenses of the utilities, these reimbursements totaled $12.7 million, or 2.2% of operating revenue, in the water
enterprise and $4.7 million, or 1.9% operating revenue, in the sewer enterprise during fiscal 2012. As contributions
currently comprise a small share of both systems' operating budgets, we expect lhal an increase in charges, if
adopted by the city, would result in modest financial impact on utility operations.
The city's water and sewer utilities otherwise exhibit healthy credit fundamentals. The water system's service area
extends well beyond city boundaries, providing treatment and distribution for a population of 5.3 million, or 4 1 % of
the entire stale. The sewer system is neariy coterminous wilh the city and is responsible for wastewater colleclion
and transmission, but not treatment. Following years of inconsistent rate gtovAh, city council approved a series of
rate increases through 2015, with rates further rising along with inflation thereafter. Water and sewer rates grew by
25% and 30%, respectively, in fiscal 2012, and are scheduled to increase 15% per year through 2015. The city
intends lo combine the new revenue wilh a lesser dependence on debt to finance projected capital improvements
of $1.9 billion and $1.3 billion in Ihe water and sewer enterprises, respectively, through 2017. Bolh the water and
sewer systems are heavily leveraged, reporting debt ratios of 70% and 83%, respectively, in fiscal 2012.
Fiscal 2012 net revenues provided 20.7 times and 2.2 times coverage, respectively, of senior lien and total debl
service of Ihe water enterprise. This was up from 8.4 times and 1.4 times coverage in fiscal 2011 following Ihe
25% rate increase. Fiscal 2012 MADS coverage was 13.4 limes and 1.8 times. The water enterprise closed the
year with an unrestnctcd cash balance of $128.5 million, or 44% of operating expenses.
Fiscal 2012 net revenues provided 9.5 times and 1.7 times coverage, respectively, of senior hen and total debl
service of the sewer enterprise. This was up from 6.2 times and 1.1 times coverage in fiscal 2011 following the

 30% rate increase. Fiscal 2012 MADS coverage was 5.7 times and 1.4 times. The sewer enterprise closed the
year with an unrestricted cash balance of $34.6 million, or 3 1 % of operating expenses.
OUTLOOK
The negative outlook reflects the expectation that, absent a commitment lo significantly increase revenue and/or
materially restructure accrued pension liabilities to reduce costs, the city's credii quality will likely weaken. The
formidable legal and political barriers to these actions are incorporated in the outlook. The Stale of lllinois's
constitutional protection of pension benefits raises the possibility that any attempt to reduce accrued benefits will
be litigated by plan members. Ongoing unwillingness lo sufficiently increase revenue ensures that annual pension
payments will remain a considerable operating stress while continuing to fall well below actuarially sound
contributions. As such, the city's financial operations will remain structurally imbalanced and the long-term
solvency of the city's pension funds will be exposed to a significant degree of asset relum risk.
WHAT COULD MOVE THE GO RATING UP
- State passage of pension reform legislation lhal survives near-certain litigation to materially lower the city's
pension obligations lo a level that allows the city to make annual contributions on an actuarially sound basis
- Demonstrated commitment to increase lax revenue so as to fund pension obligations on an actuarially sound
basis
- Substantial expansion of the tax base and/or growth in financial reserves that more adequately compensates for
the city's exposure lo unfunded liabilities
WHAT COULD MOVE THE GO RATING DOWN
- Lack of action by the city and state lo arrest the growth of unfunded pension liabilities
- Continued unwillingness on the part of the city to raise lax revenue in amounts sufficient to fund annual pension
contributions in line wilh actuarial standards
- Further growrlh in direct and overall debl burdens
- Court decision that recently adopted pension reforms by the Slate of Illinois violate the slate constitution
WHAT COULD MOVE THE SALES TAX, WATER, AND SEWER REVENUE RATINGS UP
- Upward movement in the city's GO raiing
WHAT COULD MOVE THE SALES TAX, WATER, AND SEWER REVENUE RATINGS DOWN
- Downward movement in the city's GO raiing
- Weakening of debt service coverage provided by respective sales lax, water and sewer revenue
KEY STATISTICS
Estimated full valuation: $196 billion
Estimated full valuation per capita: $72,600
Estimated median family income as % of the US: 85%
Fiscal 2012 available fund balance / operating revenue; 2 1 %
5-year change in available fund balance / operating revenue: 3%
Fiscal 2012 net cash / operating revenue: 17%
5-year change in net cash / operating revenue: 1%
Institutional framework score Aa
5-year average operating revenue / operating expenditures: 0.97

 Net direct debt burden: 5% of full valuation; 2.4 times operating revenue
3-year average Moody's adjusted net pension liability: 12.6% of full valuation; 6.7 limes operafing revenue
RATING METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in raiing the general obligation debl was US Local Government General Obligation
Debt published in January 2014. The principal methodology used in rating the special tax debt was US Public
Finance Special Tax Methodology published in March 2012. The principal methodology used in rating the Water
and Sewer debt was Analytical Framework For Water And Sewer System Ratings in August 1999. Please see the
Credit Policy page on www.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
REGULATORY DISCLOSURES
For ratings issued on a program, series or category/class of debt, this announcement provides certain regulatory
disclosures in relation to each rating of a subsequently issued bond or nole of the same series or category/class
of debl or pursuant to a program for which the ratings are derived exclusively from existing ralings in accordance
with Moody's raiing practices. For ratings issued on a support provider, this announcement provides certain
regulatory disclosures in relation to the rating action on the support provider and in relation to each particular rating
action for securities that derive their credit ratings from the support provider's credit rating. For provisional ratings,
this announcement provides certain regulatory disclosures in relation to the provisional rating assigned, and in
relation to a definitive rating that may be assigned subsequent to the final issuance of the debl, in each case where
the transaction structure and lerms have not changed prior to the assignment of the definitive rating in a manner
that would have affected the rating. For further information please see the rafings tab on the issuer/entity page for
the respective issuer on www.moodys.com.
Regulatory disclosures contained in this press release apply to the credii rating and. if applicable, the related rating
outlook or rating review.
Please see www.moodys.com for any updates on changes to the lead raiing analyst and to the Moody's legal
entity that has issued the rating.
Please see the ratings tab on the issuer/entity page on wwAv.moodys.com for additional regulatory disclosures for
each credit raiing.
Analysts
Matthew Butler
Lead Analyst
Public Finance Group
Moody's Investors Service
Jack Dorer
Backup Analyst
Public Finance Group
Moody's Investors Service
Rachel Cortez
Additional Contact
Public Finance Group
Moody's Investors Service
Contacts
Journalists: (212) 553-0376
Research Clients: (212) 553-1653

Moody's Investors Service, Inc.
250 Greenwich Street
New York, NY 10007
USA

 MOODY'S
INVESTORS SERVICE
© 2014 Moody's Corporation. Moody's Investors Service. Inc., Moody's Analytics, Inc. and/or their licensors and
affiliates (collectively. "MOODY'S"). All rights reserved.

CREDIT RATINGS ISSUED BY MOODYS INVESTORS SERVICE, INC. ("MIS") AND ITS AFFIUATES ARE
MOODYS CURRENT OPINIONS OF THE RELATIVE FUTURE CREDIT RISK OF ENTITIES, CREDIT
COMMITMENTS, OR DEBT OR DEBT-UKE SECURITIES, AND CREDIT RATINGS AND RESEARCH
PUBUCATIONS PUBLISHED BY MOODYS ("MOODYS PUBUCATION") MAY INCLUDE MOODYS
CURFIENT OPINIONS OF THE RELATIVE FUTURE CREDIT RISK OF ENTITIES, CREDIT COMMITMENTS,
OR DEBT OR DEBT-UKE SECURITIES. MOODYS DEFINES CREDIT RISK AS THE RISK THAT AN
ENTTTY MAY NOT MEET ITS CONTRACTUAL, FINANCIAL OBUGATIONS AS THEY COME DUE AND ANY
ESTIMATED FINANCIAL LOSS IN THE EVENT OF DEFAULT. CREDIT RATINGS DO NOT ADDRESS ANY
OTHER RISK, INCLUDING BUT NOT UMITED TO: UQUIDITY RISK, MARKET VALUE RISK, OR PRICE
VOLATIUTY. CREDIT RATINGS AND MOODYS OPINIONS INCLUDED IN MOODYS PUBUCATIONS ARE
NOT STATEMENTS OF CURRENT OR HISTORICAL FACT. MOODYS PUBUCATIONS MAY ALSO
INCLUDE QUANTITATIVE MODEL-BASED ESTIMATES OF CREDIT RISK AND RELATED OPINIONS OR
COMMENTARY PUBUSHED BY MOODYS ANALYTICS, INC. CREDIT RATINGS AND MOODYS
PUBUCATIONS DO NOT CONSTTTUTE OR PROVIDE INVESTMENT OR FINANCIAL ADVICE, AND
CREDIT RATINGS AND MOODYS PUBUCATIONS ARE NOT AND DO NOT PROVIDE
RECOMMENDATIONS TO PURCHASE, SELL, OR HOLD PARTICULAR SECURITIES. NEITHER CREDIT
RATINGS NOR MOODYS PUBUCATIONS COMMENT ON THE SUITABILITY OF AN INVESTMENT FOR
ANY PARTICULAR INVESTOR. MOODYS ISSUES ITS CREDIT RATINGS AND PUBUSHES MOODYS
PUBUCATIONS WITH THE EXPECTATION AND UNDERSTANDING THAT EACH INVESTOR WILL, WITH
DUE CARE, MAKE ITS OWN STUDY AND EVALUATION OF EACH SECURITY THAT IS UNDER
CONSIDERATION FOR PURCHASE, HOLDING, OR SALE.

MOODYS CREDIT RATINGS AND MOODY'S PUBLICATIONS ARE NOT INTENDED FOR USE BY RETAIL
INVESTORS AND IT WOULD BE RECKLESS FOR RETAIL INVESTORS TO CONSIDER MOODY'S CREDIT
RATINGS OR MOODY'S PUBLICATIONS IN MAKING ANY INVESTMENT DECISION. IF IN DOUBT YOU
SHOULD CONTACT YOUR FINANCIAL OR OTHER PROFESSIONAL ADVISER.

ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED HEREIN IS PROTECTED BY LAW. INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
COPYRIGHT LAW. AND NONE OF SUCH INFORMATION MAY BE COPIED OR OTHERWISE
REPRODUCED. REPACKAGED, FURTHER TRANSMITTED, TRANSFERRED, DISSEMINATED,
REDISTRIBUTED OR RESOLD, OR STORED FOR SUBSEQUENT USE FOR ANY SUCH PURPOSE, IN
WHOLE OR IN PART, IN ANY FORM OR MANNER OR BY ANY MEANS WHATSOEVER, BY ANY PERSON
WITHOUT MOODY'S PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT.

All information contained herein is obtained by MOODY'S from sources believed by it to be accurate and reliable.
Because of the possibility of human or mechanical error as well as other factors, however, all informaiion contained
herein is provided "AS IS" without warranty of any kind. MOODY'S adopts all necessary measures so that the

 informaiion il uses in assigning a credit rating is of sufficient quality and from sources MOODY'S considers lo be
reliable including, when appropriate, independent third-party sources. However. MOODY'S is not an auditor and
cannot in every instance independently verify or validate information received in the raiing process or in preparing
the Moody's Publications.

To the extent permiited by law, MOODY'S and its directors, officers, employees, agents, representatives, licensors
and suppliers disclaim liability to any person or entity for any indirect, special, consequential, or incidental losses or
damages whatsoever arising from or in connection with the information conlained herein or the use of or inability to
use any such informaiion. even if MOODY'S or any of its directors, officers, employees, agents, representatives,
licensors or suppliers is advised in advance of the possibility of such losses or damages, including but not limiied
to: (a) any loss of present or prospective profits or (b) any loss or damage arising where the relevant financial
instrument is not the subject of a particular credit rating assigned by MOODY'S.

To the extent permitted by law, MOODY'S and its directors, officers, employees, agents, representatives, licensors
and suppliers disclaim liability for any direct or compensatory losses or damages caused to any person or entity,
including but not limited lo by any negligence (bul excluding fraud, willful misconduct or any other type of liability
that, for the avoidance ot doubt, by law cannot be excluded) on Ihe part of, or any contingency within or beyond the
conlrol of, MOODY'S or any of its directors, officers, employees, agents, representatives, licensors or suppliers,
arising from or in connection wilh the information contained herein or the use of or inability to use any such
informaiion.

NO WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AS TO THE ACCURACY, TIMELINESS. COMPLETENESS,
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OF ANY SUCH RATING OR OTHER
OPINION OR INFORMATION IS GIVEN OR MADE BY MOODY'S IN ANY FORM OR MANNER
WHATSOEVER.

MIS, a wholly-owned credit rating agency subsidiary of Moody's Corporation ("MCO"), hereby discloses that most
issuers of debt securities (including corporate and municipal bonds, debentures, notes and commercial paper) and
preferred slock rated by MIS have, prior to assignment of any raiing. agreed to pay lo MIS for appraisal and rating
services rendered by it fees ranging from $1,500 to approximately $2,500,000. MCO and MIS also maintain policies
and procedures to address the independence of MlS's rafings and raiing processes. Information regarding certain
affiliations that may exist between directors of MCO and rated entifies, and between entities who hold ratings from
MIS and have also publicly reported to the SEC an ownership interesl in MCO of more than 5%, is posted annually
at vww.moodvs .com under the heading "Shareholder Relations — Corporate Governance — Director and
Shareholder Affiliation Policy."

For Australia only: Any publication into Australia of this document is pursuant lo the Australian Financial Services
License of MOODY'S affiliate, Moody's Investors Sen/ice Ply Limited ABN 61 003 399 657AFSL 336969 and/or
Moody's Analytics Australia Pty Ltd ABN 94 105 136 972 AFSL 383569 (as applicable). This document is intended
to be provided only to "wholesale clients" wilhin the meaning of section 761G of the Corporations Act 2001. By
continuing lo access this document from within Australia, you represent to MOODY'S that you are, or are
accessing the document as a representative of, a "wholesale client" and that neither you nor the entity you
represent will directly or indirectly disseminate this document or its contents to "retail clients" within the meaning of

 section 761G of the Corporations Act 2001. MOODY'S credit rating is an opinion as to the creditworthiness of a
debl obligalion of the issuer, not on the equity securities of the issuer or any form of security that is available to
retail clients. It would be dangerous for "retail clients" to make any investment decision based on MOODY'S credii
rating. If in doubt you should contact yourfinancialor other professional adviser.

 